URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gabriel, Henry Deeb --- "An American Perspective on the United Nations Convention on the International Sale of Goods" [2004] IntTBLawRw 1; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 1
An American Perspective on the United Nations Convention of the International Sale of Goods
The Internationalisation of American Commercial Law
American Commercial Law
The internationalisation of American commercial law
Selected Problems in the CISG from an American perspective
Software Transfers
Retention of security rights in the goods
Choice of Law
Unavoidability of the application of domestic law to CISG Cases
The problem of vertical uniformity
Inconsistent case law
Incorrect case law
Reluctance to apply the CISG
The revision of the Uniform Commercial Code Article 2: Sales- the question of harmonization with the CISG
Given the mandate to the drafting committee, the drafting process is inward looking, making a focus on international law difficult
The CISG, or other international sales regimes, are not appropriate models for the revision of Article 2
Different legal traditions
American sales law as part of a broader Unified Commercial Code
The scope of the American Sales Code and the CISG are different
The primary goal of the revision was not met by the CISG
Incompatible structural differences
Incompatible substantive differences
Conscious decision to adopt the CISG
An American Perspective on the United Nations
Convention of the International Sale of Goods
Henry Deeb Gabriel
The Internationalisation of American Commercial
American Commercial Law
Commercial law in America is primarily state, not federal law, and it is
independently promulgated in 51 separate jurisdictions. Until
the late 19th
century, American commercial law was based on English common law and the law of
merchants, and each state’s law
evolved independent of the other
states’ law.
Today, although commercial law is still the law of the individual states,
commercial law is primarily uniform throughout the US because
of the existence
of the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC). The UCC has been adopted in some form by
all jurisdictions
The UCC is the product of two organisations which developed and continue to
revise it – the National Conference of Commissioners
for Uniform State
Laws American Law Institute.
Unlike the American Law Institute, the
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws is a government
organisation, but
neither organisation, nor the combination of the two, has the
power to create positive law. The UCC, and the subsequent revisions
presented to the various state legislatures for adoption and the Code only
becomes the law of a respective state when
it is adopted by that state’s
legislature.
The internationalisation of American commercial law
In the last 20 years, there has been great interest in the United States to
conform American commercial law in accordance with developed
and developing
standards of international commercial law. Lawmakers in the US are quite aware
of the necessity of tailoring commercial
law to be compatible with international
commerce and business practices. For this reason, the various revised sections
have adopted the existing and emerging international commercial
standards as possible models and influences. The increased use of
technology and
new means of transport have effectively changed our market structures from
domestic to global economies and American
commercial lawyers no longer see
themselves limited to the domestic arena.
Concomitant with the recent revisions of the American domestic commercial
law, there has been a great deal of activity in the drafting
international commercial law conventions. These conventions and uniform rules
have set out international standards in such
areas as in the financing of goods,
payments systems, and transport.
One of the most important developments in international commercial law is the
widespread adoption of the United Nations Convention
on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods (CISG).
The United States is a party to
the CISG, and in this article I examine two aspects of the CISG from the
American perspective. First,
I look at how American courts and lawyers have
reacted to the CISG and the problems that have emerged. Secondly, I examine the
made to redraft the American domestic sales law to conform to the CISG.
I propose that due to the inward-looking redrafting process
incompatibility of the UCC and the CISG, these attempts have not been very
successful.
In an ideal world, the draftsmen of both international and domestic laws
would take the best features which both bodies of law have
to offer and meld
them together into a comprehensive legislative scheme. The CISG made many
improvements over the older provisions
of Article 2 of the UCC and these
improvements should have influenced the revision of the UCC provisions on
However, the world is not ideal and attempts to harmonise
– although successful in many cases – have run into obstacles
as differences in commercial practices in the US and elsewhere throughout the
world, as well as differences in legal theory
and perception of the appropriate
Selected Problems in the CISG from an American
perspective
There are several problems the CISG has raised from an American legal
perspective. As there have only been 29 reported CISG cases
by the United States
the numbers of problems that have arisen are rather few and
confined. However, this low number of reported cases should not be seen
lack of acceptance of the CISG in the United States. It is more a realisation of
the fact that international commercial disputes
are usually resolved in private
arbitration, and therefore do not result in published opinions.
The CISG defines neither a ‘sale’ nor a
These omissions are intentional, as there are no
universally agreed upon definitions that would accommodate the variety of
laws. To some extent the question of what constitutes a sale would
implicate the differences between civil law and common law traditions.
there are other differences as well, and these differences have raised several
questions in the co-ordination of the CISG
with American law.
Software Transfers
The issue of software transfers in one area of importance when looking at the
operation of the CISG in the US. The issue relates to
not only what constitutes
goods, but also what constitutes a sale. The law is not consistent in the US as
to whether software constitutes
a ‘good’ for the purposes of a
transfer. Although there is some case law that suggests that it is, the current
of the Uniform Commercial Code presupposes that software is
information and not goods per se.
However, this is inconsistent with
many of the non-American CISG cases
that have determined that
software is a ‘good’ under the CISG.
Software also raises another issue under the CISG because of the common
American practice not to ‘sell’ software but to
‘license’ a limited right of use. Whether all transfers of software
constitute a ‘licence’ and not a ‘sale’,
it is likely
the American law will differ from the law in this area which is emerging from
other jurisdictionsVirtually all American
sellers would characterise the
transaction as a licence, but certainly the law outside the US has been much
less willing to accept
the characterisation of the transfer as anything other
than a sale. This is being done to
the extent that the American case law is developing an acceptance of the
‘licensing’ model, and therefore excluding the
transfers of software
from the CISG.
Retention of security rights in the goods
Another issue as to the question of what constitutes a ‘sale’ is
the retention of a security interest in the financing
of the sale of the goods.
An example of where this has been a problem and is likely to continue to cause
confusion can be seen in
the cases involving the financing of the sale of goods
by the seller. For example, in
Roder Zelt-und Hallenkonstruktionen GmbH v
Rosedown Park Pty Ltd
the contract for sale had a retention of
title clause.
In this case, the Federal Court of Australia stated
that whether the clause had been validly agreed upon in the sales contract and
whether the retention of title constitutes a breach of contract had to be
determined according to the rules of the Convention, although
the question of
whether there had been a valid retention of title at all was a question of local
This seemingly straightforward division between the contract
for sale and the question of the transfer of property rights brought
of the retention of title clause within the remedial structure of the CISG.
This result would make no sense in the US or the common law provinces of
Canada where there is a wholly separate statutory framework
for security rights
in personal property which has its own internal remedial structure separate from
the law governing the sale of
goods. Moreover, it is not clear that this result
would not create problems in other jurisdictions which, although they treat the
retention of property rights as a financing method for the credit sale of goods
as part of the contract of sale and not as a wholly
separate legal regime, would
still consider the rights retained in the goods a question to be resolved by the
law of property and
not the law of contract. Thus, for example, in
Industeel v Leeco Steel Products Inc
a French seller brought
an action against an Illinois buyer to recover possession of unpaid shipments of
goods located in Illinois.
On the seller’s claim to take
possession of the goods and to avoid the contract under the CISG, the court held
that the CISG
did not apply to the security right of the seller, and the court
applied the law of Illinois on this issue.
If the transaction was
wholly governed by domestic law, the court would have come to the same
conclusion under American domestic
law: the law governing the property right
retained would not have been governed by the law of the sale of goods.
Choice of Law
BP Oil International Ltd v Empresa Estatal Petoleos de
the United States Court of Appeals determined that the
CISG applied to a contract between an American and an Ecuadorian party when
agreement called for the application of the law of Ecuador.
Although this is consistent with the majority of cases that have had to
decide whether the CISG applies to a contract that refers
to the domestic
of a country which has adopted the CISG
important to note that the lower court had determined that Ecuadorian law
applied because of the direct reference to it in
the agreement.
That result certainly has some merit because had the parties not mentioned
any choice of law, the CISG would have applied, as both
the Untied States and
Ecuador are parties to the CISG. Therefore one could logically assume that the
parties may have intended something
other than the default application of the
CISG by specifically mentioning the domestic law of Ecuador. At a minimum, we
can see from
this case that in the absence of a specific reference to the
domestic law of a given jurisdiction, the courts will continue to muddle
the question of whether the parties intended something other than the
application of the CISG.
The application of the CISG by default is clearly an easy decision when the
parties are both from states which are parties to the
CISG, but the blind
application can sometimes bring anomalous results and the American courts have
also been willing to make the
application without much thought. Thus, for
example when the buyer’s form said the ‘Law of California’
should apply, and the seller’s form said ‘the Law of
British Columbia’ (Canadian) should apply, the court in
Technologies Inc v PMC-Sierra Inc
applied the CISG because
both countries were parties to the Convention.
Although this is
probably the correct result, it is probably based on flawed assumption, for
certainly if the parties specified different
laws, they probably did not intend
the same thing. It is probably correct to say, as a matter of contract
formation, the conflicting
terms cancel each other out and therefore by default
the CISG applies as neither party’s terms prevail on this issue. However,
to conclude as the court did that the parties intended the same thing is
probably making too great an assumption of party intent.
Unavoidability of the application of domestic law to
Article 7(1) sets forth the basic principle that the CISG should be
interpreted in light of its international character.
Thus, to the
extent possible, one is eschewed from interpreting the Convention based on
domestic, as opposed to international standards.
However, this aspiration rule
is unattainable when there is neither an international nor a universal rule to
apply in a given case.
Thus, for example, in the recent American case Zapata
Hermanos v Hearthside Baking,
a federal appellate court had to
decide whether the award of attorney’s fees constitutes part of the
damages recoverable under
Article 74 or whether the question of attorney’s
fees is a procedural question outside the CISG and one subject to the local
of the court.
In this case, the court determined the issue as a
procedural question and not a substantive question of damages.
However, the result in the case (which would not be the result under the
domestic laws of many jurisdictions, and which has been the
subject of much
), is not as great a concern as the fact that this case
emphasises that courts, both in America as well as other jurisdictions, will
inevitably have to apply domestic legal rules to some of the questions raised by
The problem of vertical uniformity
As discussed below, there are many substantive differences between the CISG
and the domestic American law. These differences create
what I term the problem
of vertical uniformity. This arises when the goods at issue move through the
chain of distribution and are
thereby subject to both the CISG and the local
domestic law.
One area of substantial concern with vertical uniformity is the ability of
third parties to pursue remedies against manufacturers
or other upstream sellers
under the domestic American law. For example, in certain circumstances under the
current version of the
American Uniform Commercial Code, a buyer has a direct
action against a manufacturer or distributor to whom the buyer is not in
Thus, if there were a New York manufacturer who sold goods
to a New Jersey dealer, who subsequently sold the goods to an Ohio consumer,
consumer may have a direct
breach of contract claim against the New York manufacturer. This would not be
an unknown risk to the manufacturer who would be bound
by the New York law
imposing this obligation. On the other hand, if the manufacturer were a Canadian
company selling the goods to
the New Jersey distributor, it is not clear that
the consumer buyer would have any right against the manufacturer. The obvious
by the manufacturer would be that the contract between it and the
distributor was governed by the CISG, and this contract therefore
did not impose
any third party rights.
Inconsistent case law
In the United States, there are 51 independent state court systems. Because
of the small number of cases that are successfully appealed
to the United States
Supreme Court, there are also 13 independent federal appellate courts. All of
these courts have independent
As with American domestic law, in this system there will inevitably develop
inconsistent
interpretations of the CISG.
Thus, for example, the long standing debate on the proper reading of Article
14 of the CISG as requiring or not requiring a definite
price term has already
resulted in inconsistent cases concerning the question of whether an agreement
for the distribution of goods
comes within the scope of the CISG.
Helen Kaminski Pty Ltd v Marketing Australian Products
the court noted that although the distributor agreement
required the purchase of a minimum quantity of goods, the agreement did not
identify the goods to be sold by type, date or price, whereas the CISG requires
an enforceable contract to have definite terms regarding
quantity and
For this reason, the court concluded that the CISG does not
apply to distributor contracts because whether or not the CISG applies
whether the distributor agreement can be characterised as a contract for the
sale of goods – that is, that it contained
definite terms for specified
Conversely, in
Geneva Pharmaceuticals Technology Corporation v Barr
Laboratories Inc
the court came to the opposite conclusion by
reading Article 14 as allowing a distribution agreement as governed by the CISG
Article 14 only requires some reasonable basis for determining what the
future quantity of goods will be.
Incorrect case law
In addition to inconsistent interpretations of the CISG, because of both the
novelty of the CISG as well as international law as a
whole, some courts will
inevitably simply misapply the law. Due to of the number of courts in the United
States, the possibility
of the development of a body of case law that misapplies
the law is always of concern, and there are certainly incidents of this
American case law. Thus, for example, in
BP Oil International
the parties used standard International Commercial Terms (INCOTERMS) to
define the shipping obligations of the parties. In that case,
although the court
properly applied the relevant INCOTERM, the court reasoned that the term was
applicable by implication of trade
usage under Article 9(2).37 However, the
validity of the INCOTERMS can hardly by implication when the parties have
expressly used
it in their agreement. It was applicable to the agreement because
the parties expressly agreed to it. The court simply missed the
distinction
between parties expressly including a term, which then becomes valid by the
general principle of freedom of contract,
and terms which the CISG allows to be
incorporated by implication.
Mistakes in interpretation, once made, are often difficult to correct in the
American law. Thus, for example, in the notorious American
Metals & Mineral Import/Export Corporation v American Business Center
a federal appellate court, in what is generally regarded
as a clear misinterpretation of Article 8(3)
of the CISG, imported
the common law parol evidence rule into the CISG. By doing so, the court allowed
the party to avoid evidence
of contemporary discussions during the contract
negotiations in order to explain the parties’ understanding of the written
In a subsequent case,
MCC Marble Ceramic Center Inc v Ceramica Nuova
d’Agostini SpA
another federal appellate court
addressing the same issue properly concluded that the CISG does not contain the
common law parol
evidence rule. However, since the courts have jurisdiction over
separate states, the initial decision is still precedent in the states
to the court’s jurisdiction.
Reluctance to apply the CISG
Consistent with many cases throughout the world, there has been some
reluctance on the part of American courts to apply to CISG. Thus,
for example,
one court was confronted with the novel and interesting question of whether the
American declaration of CISG Article
95 that the US would not be bound by the
CISG under Article 1(b): in other words, the CISG does not apply unless both
parties are
from contracting states but does apply where one of the contracting
parties is from a state which is not bound by the formation provisions
CISG when the issue is one of
contract formation.
Instead of addressing the issue, the court
simply concluded that: ‘[b]ecause the parties have not raised the
CISG’s applicability
to the dispute, we decline to address it
In addition, as is all too common in CISG cases worldwide, in at least one
American case, the court, having determined that the CISG
applied, simply stated
without any analysis that the law of the CISG was the same as the domestic law
and then applied the local
law to the case.
The revision of the Uniform Commercial Code
Article 2: Sales- the question of harmonization with the CISG
Article 2, the sale of goods provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, which
has been in existence since 1958, has recently been
revised and was approved in
August 2003. The prior Article 2 replaced the Uniform Sales Act of 1906, which
itself was based on the
Sale of Goods Act
these earlier statutes attempted to codify the common law of sales and, as such,
retained much of the formalism of the late
19th century law of contract.
However, Article 2 represents a distinctly different approach to the law of
sales. Eschewing traditional
contract formalism, Article 2 sets out rules that
are designed to weave the particular sale into its specific business
The CISG was likewise drafted with practical business
implications in mind.
The Drafting Committee to Revise Article 2
continued to work in this tradition.
As previously mentioned, in an ideal world the draftsmen of both
international and domestic laws would take the best features of several
of law and meld them together into a comprehensive legislative scheme. However,
the revision of the sales articles proved
that this is a difficult task, and
below I will give my analysis of why this was so. It is fair to conclude that
the attempt to harmonise
American domestic sales law with the CISG was not very
successful.
Given the mandate to the drafting committee, the
drafting process is inward looking, making a focus on international law
To understand the process and direction of the Article 2 revision project,
one must first understand the mandate given to the drafting
committee. The
mandate was to revise the sales provisions, not to draft a new commercial
The revision process was based on the idea that the Code was
not reflective of current business practices, particularly in areas
consumer protection, warranty and products liability, third party rights in
sales contracts and emerging electronic modes
of contracting.
Therefore, the focus was on the existing Code and how it could be changed
to reflect modern business practices and the better reasoned
cases. This focus
tended to be inward-looking – always focused on the existing Code itself
– and therefore the comparisons
with other codes such as the CISG or
similar international standards such as the International Institute for the
Unification of Private
Law (UNIDROIT) Principles on International Contracts
tended to be incidental as opposed to deliberate.
In addition, the process of open NCCUSL drafting,
with its heavy
influence of interest groups familiar with the Code and its problems (or simply
the desires of specific interest groups),
kept the focus on the existing
By allowing the full participation of all of the attendees,
the NCCUSL process ensured that the conversation rarely moved beyond
the text of
the existing statute or the language of a proposed revision. This is what the
participants engaged in the process were
concerned with and, therefore, this is
where the discussion and drafting were centred.
Moreover, beyond the actual mandate of the drafting committee to revise the
existing code, there is also the question of familiarity.
The members of the
drafting committee and the advisers and observers involved in the process were
all very familiar with the UCC,
and therefore this common language
and familiarity kept the focus on the UCC rather than the CISG.
The CISG, or other international sales regimes, are
not appropriate models for the revision of Article 2
Even to the extent that the drafting committee looked outward to other legal
systems for guidance, the CISG did not prove to be an
appropriate model for the
revision. From the beginning of the revision process, the drafting committee
studied the extent to which
the revised Article 2 should be consistent with the
However, a perusal through the comments to the final draft
shows virtually no examples of the CISG being the source of the changes.
Although the drafting committee did not consistently follow the CISG, there
are strong arguments for uniformity between the two sales
regimes. In
international commercial transactions, ‘uniform international sales law
avoids disputes over which domestic law
applies’ and thereby enhances the
efficiency of international trade.
This facilitates transaction
planning and dispute settlement, as well as promotes consistent interpretations
by courts and arbitrators.
In the domestic context the same argument has
justified the UCC since its inception. However, despite the similar rationales,
drafting committee did not choose to adopt the CISG as the model for the
revision of Article 2 for several reasons.
Different legal traditions
The former Article 2 was drafted and operated within a context of established
principles of the common law of contracts.
To the extent that
Article 2 does not displace the common law of contract, the common law is a part
of the operative principles that
govern domestic sales law.
Unlike the UCC, the CISG is not based on any particular set of underlying
established domestic legal principles. Instead, it was drafted
to be independent
of, rather than to work in conjunction with, any particular domestic law.
Without a common legal framework for both the UCC and the CISG as
background, and because the drafting committee never considered
jettisoning the
common law background of the UCC, the CISG did not fit neatly as a model for a
revised Article
To the degree that one can attach a specific legal tradition to the CISG, an
analysis shows that it is a blend of both common law
and civil law
traditions.
One sees this clash of civil law and common law legal
cultures in areas such as specific performance, where the CISG liberally allows
and the doctrine of impossibility, where the CISG also
takes a more liberal civil law approach.
American sales law as part of a broader Unified
Commercial Code
Another significant difference between Article 2 and the CISG is the fact
that Article 2 is an integral part of the Uniform Commercial
Code and its logic,
terminology, and substantive rules have to conform to the other articles of the
Code such as those on leases
of goods, commercial paper, electronic funds
transfers, letters of credit, documents of title, and secured transactions.
Unlike Article
2 of the UCC, the CISG is an independent statute that does not
fit within the broader framework of a larger code.
The scope of the American Sales Code and the CISG are
The difference in the scope of coverage between the two acts t serve as a
full model for the UCC. For example, the CISG does not cover
nor does it cover questions of non-economic losses in
products liability, whereas the UCC covers both.
In addition, the UCC not only deals with both commercial and consumer
contracts but in many contractual contexts, it also sets out
different rules
based on whether one or both parties are a merchant.
The CISG makes
no such distinctions. Within Article 2, there is a constant and delicate balance
between commercial and consumer contracts
– co-ordination
unnecessary in the CISG.
Also missing in the provisions of the CISG are the broad protections included
in Article 2 against unconscionable contracts,
as well as the
provisions that provide claims against remote sellers without privity of
In addition to adopting the common law principles of good
faith purchasers within the sales provisions, Article 2 governs the effect
contract for sale on certain interests in the goods claimed by third
To the extent that the revisions of Article 2 promote
stronger consumer protection and lessen the privity requirements, the
differences
in scope between the CISG and the UCC have expanded.
There are other important differences between the CISG and Article 2. For
example, the CISG has no statute of frauds.
Although there was much
debate on whether the revised Article 2 should retain the statute of
its absence in the CISG was one of the arguments for its
However, the statute of frauds was retained.
There are other areas of concern in the Article 2 revision that were also
outside the scope of the CISG. For example, the CISG also
does not have a parol
evidence rule.
As for Article 2, although the revision committee
has constantly tinkered with the parol evidence rule, there was no suggestion
by the committee or any interested groups to abolish it.
It should also be noted that the revision committee did not discuss the issue
of Article 2’s scope in a consistent manner, nor
did the committee always
assume that the scope of the revised Article 2 would remain the same. In fact,
the contours of Article 2
expanded and contracted greatly during the revision
process and this examination and re-examination of scope has taken up much of
the energy of the drafting committee. In doing so, this discussion led the
process further afield from considerations of external
legal rules, such as the
CISG, by focusing the attention of the revision to the narrow question of what
Article 2 should cover.
The primary goal of the revision was not met by the
Another reason why the CISG did not prove to be an appropriate model for the
revision of Article 2 is because the primary goal of
the revision was not
addressed in the CISG. One of the major reasons for the revision of Article 2
was the need to conform the Code
to the changes in business practices that had
occurred in the last 50 years since the original Article 2 was drafted. While it
true that Article 2 in its original version did not respond to modern
electronic and computer-based business transactions,
neither does
the CISG, and therefore the CISG could not serve as a model to revise Article 2
in light of electronic commerce.
Incompatible structural differences
Another fundamental reason why the CISG was not an appropriate model for the
revision on Article 2 was because of several incompatible
structural differences
in the way in which the two regimes treat basic legal concepts. For example, an
important structural difference
between the CISG and Article 2 involves the
buyer’s rights when the seller tenders non-conforming goods. Under the
delivery of non-conforming goods, the buyer can choose between
acceptance and rejection of the goods.
Unlike Article 2, the CISG
does not provide for rejection or acceptance. Instead, under the CISG, the buyer
can require the seller
to repair or replace the goods only in the case of a
fundamental breach.
It is important to note that this difference in
standards in the ability to avoid a seller’s performance transcends many
of sales law, particularly the right to cure
as well as the
entire damages scheme.
The law of warranty is another good example of where the basic structure of
Article 2 is fundamentally different from the CISG and
therefore kept the CISG
from being an appropriate model for the reform of Article 2.
the CISG and Article 2 have the basic presumption that the seller must tender
goods that conform to the contract.
Under Article 2, this
proposition is resolved under a theory of warranty.
The American
law of warranty is an outgrowth of a long history of common law responsibility
that has its roots in both contract and
The UCC rules are
very much grounded in this history and there has been no suggestion to depart
In contrast, the CISG, not being common law based, does not have a general
theory of warranty. Instead, the CISG simply provides a
series of mandates, such
as that the seller ‘must deliver goods which are of the quantity, quality
and description required
by the contract and which are contained or packaged in
the manner required by the contract’.
Interpretations of
these terms are not set out in the articles on the seller’s responsibility
concerning the goods, but are
instead covered by the general article on
interpretation of agreements.
I have suggested elsewhere that the standards of conformity under the CISG
are virtually the same as those imposed under Article 2
of the UCC and that the
difference is only one of terminology.
Therefore, there is no
practical difference in the result obtained under each regime. However, for the
purposes of drafting, whether
the difference is actually substantive or only one
of terminology, is significant. Under the UCC, a revision will always be looking
to the language of warranties and the well-established rules based on this
language. As the CISG does not work in terms of ‘warranty’,
not serve as a model for the Article 2 revision in this area.
This point is emphasised in terms of modification and disclaimers of
warranties. Because the term ‘warranty’ is not used,
the CISG has no
provision dealing with the ‘exclusion or modification’ of
warranties. Rather, disputes over quality turn
on what the contract
‘required’ under Article 35(1) and whether the parties have
‘otherwise agreed’ under
Article 35(2). Unlike Article 2, no special
rules for interpretation are provided in these cases; nor are there special
for exclusions or modifications.
Incompatible substantive differences
Another reason why the CISG did not prove to be an effective model for the
Article 2 revision was because of several major substantive
differences between
the UCC and the CISG: differences that were not changed by the revisions. Two
areas of importance are the standards
for rejecting goods under a contract and
the question of third-party non-privity rights.
Under the UCC, a buyer can reject the goods ‘if the goods or the tender
of delivery fail in any respect to conform to the contract’.
This rule, known as the ‘perfect tender rule’, effectively
negates the common law contract rule requiring a ‘material
as a basis for the rejection of goods.
The purpose of this UCC rule
is to give buyers certainty as to their right to reject goods and to relieve
them of the need to guess
whether the non-conformity in the goods or the tender
of the goods resulted in the amorphous notion of a ‘material
Although sometimes criticised as not reflecting actual business
practices and party expectations,
the drafting committee considered
the rule in light of possible alternatives, including the CISG, and decided to
keep the present
rule in the revision.
Under the CISG however, generally a buyer may only refuse delivery of
nonconforming goods or a non-conforming tender of the goods
non-conformity amounts to a ‘fundamental breach’, as defined by
Article 25 of the CISG.
This requirement for avoidance of the
contract makes sense in the prototypical international sales agreement in which
goods are to
be shipped transnationally. In this context, considerably more than
a minor defect should be required to void a contract between
parties who may be
several thousand miles away.
This difference between the UCC and the CISG in the standards for avoiding
agreements not only sets up a basic dissimilarity in the
performance of
contracts, but it also affects the remedial structure of the two regimes. For
this reason, it is difficult to make
meaningful comparisons between the two
systems for the purposes of drafting one code based upon the other. For example,
the alternative
remedies of ‘cover’
for an aggrieved buyer depend upon a proper avoidance of
the contract. These damages would not be available were the buyer to retain
non-conforming goods and, under the CISG, in the absence of a fundamental
breach. The buyer would be retaining the non-conforming
goods. If one adds the
additional civil law preference for specific performance found in the CISG to
this difference in the standards
by which a party is entitled to these remedial
rights under the UCC and the CISG, one finds levels of complexity in the
of the UCC and the CISG that makes reliance on the CISG less than
Another area of significant concern in the Article 2 revision was the
question of the extent to which parties not in privity have
rights in sales
contracts. The original version of Article 2, having come at the time of the
emergence of modern product liability
law, shows the confusion and indecision
that questions of privity brought to the drafting process at the time it was
The questions of privity, and how far responsibility will
be extended to parties who are not in privity, was one of the most contentious
areas of debate in the revision process. The debate concerned the scope of
seller liability to third parties either through traditional
third-party liability
or the possibility of new direct warranty
rights either through advertising or pass-through warranties
AQ explain what
these are???
It must be remembered that these arguments
regarding the scope of sellers’ responsibility go beyond the abstract
question of
the purpose of the doctrine of privity in contract and are
intertwined with the question of how much consumer protection will be
the structure of Article 2.
Even prior to the revision of Article
2, the privity requirement has been eroded by the courts,
as greatly extended in the various alternative versions of Article 2 itself.
However, this question of privity is an area in which the CISG provided no
guidance. CISG Article 35(1), by limiting quality disputes
to what the contract
requires, applies only to the two-person sale between commercial parties. No
Article of the CISG extends a seller’s
responsibility to a remote buyer,
either directly or through a third-party beneficiary concept.
the protection of consumer interests is deeply embedded in the UCC, these
interests are simply not incorporated in the CISG.
Conscious decision to adopt the CISG
There is one place in the revised Article 2 where the drafting committee
consciously followed the lead of the CISG. This is the elimination
definitions and meanings of specific shipping terms within the Code. The former
Article 2 defined and gave consequences to
certain shipping terms.
The drafting committee, acknowledging – as the draftsmen of the CISG
did – that there are no clear universal delivery
terms, and because usages
and customs change over time, decided that it was best to rely on custom or
external legal rules for the
meaning of delivery terms.
The CISG is becoming increasingly well known in the US and it is now a
standard staple in American commercial law courses. Moreover,
American lawyers
and courts are becoming increasingly more aware of the need to have a global
outlook on the law, particularly with
the CISG. However, the US has not
developed a large body of CISG case law and the timing of and the external
forces working with
the recent revision of the domestic American sales law were
such that the CISG was of little influence in the development of domestic
American law.
* DeVan Daggett Professor of Law, Loyola University, New Orleans. This paper
was originally presented to the International Symposium
on United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). Conventions sponsored by the
Korean International Trade Law Association,
the Korean Ministry of Justice and
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law in Seoul, Korea in
September 2003.
Louisiana, which is primarily a civil law and not a common law
has adopted
the rest of the UCC.
The purpose of the NCCUSL is to determine what areas of private state law
might benefit from uniformity among the states, to prepare
statutes or
‘uniform Acts’ to carry that object forward, and then to have those
statutes enacted in each jurisdiction
represented in NCCUSL. The ALI was
established ‘to promote the clarification and simplification of the law
and its better adaptation
to social needs, to secure the better administration
of justice, and to encourage and carry on scholarly and scientific legal
See, eg, United Nations Convention on International Bills of Exchange and
International Promissory Notes (1988); UNCITRAL Legal
Guide on Electronic Funds
Transfers (1987); UNCITRAL Model Law on International Credit Transfers (1992);
United Nations Convention
on Independent Guarantees and Stand-by Letters of
Credit (1995); Convention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale of
Goods (1974); United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale
of Goods (1980); International Countertrade Transactions
(1992); United Nations
Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea (1978, the Hamburg Rules); United
Nations Convention on the Liability
of Operators of Transport Terminals in
International Trade (1992). Also influential in the realm of contracts for the
sale of goods
is the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law
(UNIDROIT) Principles on International Commercial Contracts (1994).
This Convention was drafted by UNCITRAL and issued for signature in 1980.
Currently, the CISG has been ratified and entered into
force in 47 nations.
Similarly, Article Four A of the UCC on Electronic Funds Transfers was a
definite influence on the development of UNCITRAL Model
Law on International
Credit Transfers.
As at 23 August 2003.
In the average case, the courts have not been troubled by the omission.
Thus, for example, in a dispute over the transport documents
covering the goods,
the court properly noted that the dispute was not within the scope of the CISG.
Thypin Steel Co v Certain Bills of Lading Issued for Cargo of 3017 Metric
Tons, More or Less of Hot Rolled Steel Plate Laden on Board
the M/V Geroi
Panfillovsky
, 48 UCC Rep Serv 2d 1443 (SDNY, 2002).
The question of whether mixed goods and software transaction comes within
the law of the law of goods, such as when a good contains
software, is wholly
unresolved and developing in the American commercial law. The newly approved
revisions of the UCC specifically
leaves open the question for judicial development.
There are no American CISG cases that deal with the classification of
The CISG applies to ‘standard software’. See Honnold, J,
Uniform Law for International Sales,
3rd edn, , 1999, New York: Kluwer
Law International, citing case lae on UNCITRAL Texts (CLOUT), Case No 131
(Landgericht München
I, Germany: 1995).
[1995] 57 FCR 216
Rosedown Park
). For a full discussion and
analysis of this case, see Zeigel, JS, ‘Comment on
Roder Zelt-und
Hallenkonstruktionen GmbH v Rosedown Park Pty Ltd
International Law Journal
Review of the Convention for the International
Sale of Goods,
1998, New York: Kluwer Law International.
What North American law would refer to as a ‘conditional sales
Rosedown Park
[1995] 57 FCR 216.
209 F Supp 2d 880
(ND Ill, 2002) (
Usinor Industeel
[2003] USCA5 258
332 F 3d 333
(5th Cir, 2003) (
BP Oil International
Frequently, in the case where the parties are from different countries,
the CISG is applied as
the domestic law of the forum states if that state is a party to the CISG.
See, eg, CLOUT, Case No 103 (International Chamber of Commerce:
1993)(‘applied the CISG on the grounds that the parties had chosen French
law as applicable law and the Convention was in force
in France at the time the
contract was concluded’); CLOUT, Case No 104 (International Chamber of
Commerce: 1993) (‘CISG
had been incorporated into the Austrian legal
system’); CLOUT, Case No 125 (Oberlandesgericht Hamm, Germany: 1995)
‘CISG is an essential part of German law’); abstracts are
available online, CLOUT, United Nations Commission on International
www.uncitral.org/english/clout/ abstract/index.htm at 1 April 2004.
Despite Article 7 of the CISG requiring an international character, the US
judiciary has failed to embrace completely this concept,
as demonstrated by the
courts’ unwillingness to utilise international law to assist in the
analysis of the Convention to cases.
For an interesting discussion, see Victoria
M Genys, ‘Blazing a trail in the new frontier of the CISG:
Kaminski v Marketing Australian Products Pty Ltd Inc
’ (1998) 17
Journal of Law and Commerce 415–26.
BP Oil International
[2003] USCA5 258
332 F 3d 333
(5th Cir, 2003).,
164 F Supp 2d 1142
(ND Cal, 27 July 2001) (
Asante Technologies
See Article 7(1) of the CISG.
[2003] USCA7 14
313 F 3d 385
(7th Cir, 2002) (
Zapata Hermanos
See, eg, Flechtner, HM, ‘Recovering attorneys’ fees as damages
under the UN Sales
Convention (CISG): the role of case law in the new international commercial
practice, with comments on
Zapata Hermanos v Hearthside Baking
(2002) 22 Northwestern Journal of International Law and Business 121.
§2–318 of the UCC.
For a discussion of the contract formation and the interaction between
Articles 14 and 55 of the CISG, see generally Murray, JE,
‘An essay on the
formation of contracts and related matters under the United Nations Convention
on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods’ (1998) 8 Journal of Law
and Commerce 11–51; Leete, BA, ‘Contract formation under the United
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods and the
Uniform Commercial Code: pitfalls for the unwary’ (1992)
International and Comparative Law Journal 193–215; Flechtner, HM (ed),
‘Transcript of a workshop on the Sales
Convention: leading CISG scholars
discuss contract formation, validity, excuse for hardship, avoidance, Nachfrist,
contract interpretation,
parol evidence, analogical application, and much
more’ (1999) 18 Journal of Law and Commerce 191; Ronald A Brand and
HM, ‘Arbitration and contract formation in international trade:
first interpretations of the UN Sales Convention’ (1993)
12 Journal of Law
and Commerce 239.
1997 WL 414137 (SDNY, 1997) (
Helen Kaminski
201 F Supp 2d 236
(SDNY, 10 May 2002) (
Geneva Pharmaceuticals
[2003] USCA5 258
332 F 3d 333
(5th Cir, 2003).
[1993] USCA5 1354
993 F 2d 1178
(5th Cir, 1993).
Article 8(3) provides: ‘determining the intent of a party or the
understanding a reasonable
person would have had, due consideration is to be given to all relevant
circumstances of the case including the negotiations, any
practices which the
parties have established between themselves, usages and any subsequent conduct
of the parties.’
[1998] USCA11 1817
144 F 3d 1384
(11th Cir, 1998).
Standard Bent Glass Corp v Glassrobots Oy
[2003] USCA3 142
333 F 3d 440
, 444, fn 7.
Schmitz-Werke GMBH N Co v Rockland Industries Inc
37 Fed Appx 687
(4th Cir, 2002).
See Braucher, R, ‘The legislative history of the Uniform Commercial
Code’ (1958) 58
Columbia Law Review 798, 798–99; Teevan, KM, ‘A history of
legislative reform of the common law of contract’ (1994)
26 University of
Toledo Law Review 35, 71.
See Hillinger, IM, ‘The Article 2 Merchant Rules: Karl
Llewellen’s attempt to achieve the good, the true, the beautiful
commercial law’
(1985) 73 Georgia Law Review 1141
See Sono, K, ‘UNCITRAL and the Vienna Sales Convention’ (1984)
18 Int’l Law 7, 13.
See PEB Study Group, ‘Uniform Commercial Code, Article 2 Executive
(1991) 46 Bus Law 1869.
Despite this statement, ‘The Study Group further recommends that the
Drafting Committee, in its deliberations, constantly
monitor, assess, and
integrate, where appropriate, developments in the following areas external to
Article 2: ... [t]he ratification
and implementation of the Convention on the
International Sales of Goods…’ See
For an excellent discussion of the process of NCCUSL drafting committee
meetings by its executive director, see Miller, FH, ‘The
Commercial Code: will the experiment continue?’
(1992) 43 Mercer Law
See Patchel, K, ‘Interest group politics, federalism, and the
uniform laws process: some lessons from the Uniform Commercial
(1993) 78 Minnesota Law Review 83
, 120–23. Part of the impetus for
revision came from the fact that a lot of litigation could be prevented if holes
in the current
Code that have spawned litigation were addressed. See Leary Jr, F
and Frisch, D, ‘Is revision due for Article 2?’
(1986) 31 Villanova
Law Review 405.
The reporter and chair of the drafting committee were both commercial law
professors with strong backgrounds in the UCC, as were
five of the six other
members of the drafting committee.
That revised laws tend to replicate what the revisors already know will be
of no surprise to students of comparative law. See Watson,
Transplants
95–96 (1974); Watson, A,
Sources of Law, Legal Change,
and Ambiguity,
1984, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
PEB Study Group, ‘Uniform Commercial Code, Article 2 Executive
(1991) 46 Bus Law 1869
Speidel, RE, ‘The revision of UCC Article 2, Sales in light of the
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International
Goods’ (1995) 16 Northwestern Journal of International Law and Business
An understanding of the common law is certainly necessary to understand
the UCC, as one commentator has recently noted: ‘While
it is obviously a
statute, and may even claim to be a code, it relies heavily upon the common-law
models. Sometimes it follows these
models slavishly, and sometimes it modifies
them creatively, but common law has remained at the foundation of the vast
majority of
the Code’s provisions.’ See Rubin, EL, ‘The Code,
the consumer, and the institutional structure of the common law’
Washington University Law Quarterly 11
See § 1–103 of the UCC.
See Garro, AM, ‘Reconciliation of legal traditions in the UN
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods’
Int’l Law 443, 480–83.
Unlike the UCC, where the common law is the basis for resolving questions
not directly answered by the Code itself, under the CISG,
questions for which
there are no clear answers ‘are to be settled in conformity with the
general principles on which it is
based or, in the absence of such principles,
in conformity with the law applicable by virtue of the rules of private
international
law’. See Article 7(2) of the CISG.
A review of the Working Group’s deliberations show numerous examples
of compromise and ‘blending’ of legal approaches.
See Honnold, J,
Documentary History of the Uniform Law for International Sales, First
Session, Doc A(1) Part II Consideration of Substantive Issues,
New York: Kluwer Law and Taxation Publishers.
For an excellent discussion on the broader right of specific performance
under the CISG than under American domestic law, see Walt,
specific performance under the United Nations Sales Convention’
Texas International Law Journal 211.
See Article 2(a) of the CISA.
The scope of Article 2 is extremely broad. As §2–102 of the UCC
states, ‘this Article applies to transactions in
goods’. Article 2
has always overlapped with the law of torts to provide for non-economic losses.
See § 2–715(2)(b)
of the UCC.
See, eg, § 2–314 of the UCC (imposing warranty of
merchantability on sellers who are ‘merchants with respect to
that kind’).
Consumer protection was one of the major flash points in the recent
revision. For examples of the debate, see Miller, FH, ‘Symposium:
revision of Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code: consumer issues and the
revision of UCC Article 2’ (1994) 35 William
and Mary Law Review 1565;
Rosmarin, YW, ‘Symposium: The revision of Article 2 of the Uniform
Commercial Code: consumers-R-us:
a reality in the UCC Article 2 revision
process’ (1994) 35 William and Mary Law Review 1593; ‘Symposium:
consumer protection
and the Uniform
Commercial Code’
75 Washington University Law Quarterly 1
See § 2–302 of the UCC.
As with most generalisations about the law, this one is not exactly
accurate. The counterpart to § 2–201 of the UCC under
the CISG is
Article 11. Where the UCC requires that all contracts for sale of goods in
excess of $500.00 be in writing (see UCC §
2–201), the CISG
eliminates the requirement of writing to evidence the agreement: ‘A
contract of sale need not be concluded
in or evidenced by writing
….’ See Article 11 of the CISG. Article 11 also eliminates any
mandatory requirement for enforcement
based on any domestic requirement of form.
However, Article 11 does not prevent the parties from imposing their own
contractual requirements.
For example, under Article 29, parties by a contract
in writing may require ‘any modifications or termination by agreement
be in writing’. Article 11 must be read in conjunction with Article 12
which allows contracting states to opt out of Article
11, and thus require
writing to evidence the agreement. Therefore, Article 11 does not apply where
any party has his place of business
in a state that has decided under Article 12
to require writing as a necessary element of a valid contract. The UCC does not
a counterpart to Article 12 because under its terms writing is mandatory.
The July 1996 draft abolished the statute of frauds for Article 2. This
result was strongly recommended by the PEB Study Group and
was approved by the
drafting committee on 6 March 1993. A motion to restore the statute of frauds
was rejected by an oral vote of
the Commissioners at the 1995 and 1996 annual
meetings of NCCUSL. However, at the great insistence of many industry groups, at
November 1996 drafting committee meeting, the drafting committee decided to
restore ‘some version’ of the statute of
frauds. At the May 1997
meeting of the American Law Institute, a motion to retain the statute of frauds
passed by a two-to-one margin.
The reconstituted drafting committee of 1999
never considered the question again, and the statute of frauds has been
See PEB Study Group, ‘Uniform Commercial Code, Article 2 Executive
(1991) 46 Bus Law 1869
In fact, the CISG basically invites the introduction of parol evidence.
According to its terms, ‘[i]n determining the intent
of a party or the
understanding a reasonable person would have had, due consideration is to be
given to all relevant circumstances
of the case including the negotiations, any
practices which the parties have established between themselves, usages and any
conduct of the parties’. See Article 8(3) of the CISG.
Emerging forms of electronic contracting, and the present Article
2’s structural inability to handle this, was a major reason
justifying the
revision of Article 2. See PEB Study Group, ‘Uniform Commercial Code,
Article 2 Executive Summary’
(1991) 46 Bus Law 1869
For example, neither the definition of a writing under the UCC (§
1–201(46)) nor the CISG (Article 13) is broad enough
to encompass
e-commerce non-paper transactions.
See § 2–601 of the UCC.
See Article 46(2) of the CISG.
See § 2–508 of the UCC.
For a discussion of the differences between the CISG and the UCC for
damages, see Gabriel, HD, ‘A primer on the United Nations
Convention on
the International Sale of Goods: from the perspective of the Uniform Commercial
Code’ (1997) 7 Indiana International
and Comparative Law Review 279,
Compare §§ 2–313 to 2–316 of the UCC with Articles
35 and 36 of the CISG.
See Article 35(1) of the CISG and § 2–313 of the UCC.
Under Article 35(1) of the CISG, goods must conform to the contract with
respect to quantity, quality, description and packaging.
Likewise, under the
UCC, goods must conform to the contract description: see § 2–313 of
The seller may make an express warranty, an implied warranty of
merchantability, or an implied warranty of fitness for particular
purpose or all
three in a particular transaction. These warranties are terms of the contract to
which the goods must conform. See
§§ 2–313, 2–315 of the
Article 35(1) of the CISG.
, Article 8.
See, eg, Gabriel, HD, ‘A primer on the United Nations Convention on
the International Sale of Goods: from the perspective
of the Uniform Commercial
Code’ (1997) 7 Indiana International and Comparative Law Review 279.
§ 2–601 of the UCC.
See Honnold, J, ‘Buyer’s right of rejection’ (1949) 97
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
Article 49(1) of the CISG. A breach is a ‘fundamental breach’
‘if it results in such detriment to the other party
as substantially to
deprive him of what he is entitled to expect under the contract’. See
Article 25 of the CISG. There is
one other situation apart from a fundamental
breach which allows a buyer to avoid the contract. Under Article 49, the buyer
the contract if, in the case of non-delivery, the seller does not or
will not deliver the goods within
the additional time fixed by the buyer under Article 47.
See § 2–712 of the UCC; Article 75 of the CISG.
, Article 76.
The disagreement both of what the state of the law was, as well as where
it was headed, resulted in the official version of Article
2’s provision
on third-party beneficiaries having three alternatives. See § 2–318
of the UCC.
The revised Article 2 retains the traditional derivative third-party
non-privity rights. See
See revised UCC. §§ 2–313A, 2–313B.
See, eg, Clifford, DF, ‘Express warranty liability of remote
sellers: one purchase, two relationships’
(1997) 75 Washington University
Law Quarterly 413
; Reitz, CR, ‘Manufacturers’ warranties of consumer
(1997) 75 Washington University Law Quarterly 357.
See Stallworth, WL, ‘An analysis of warranty claims instituted by
non-privity plaintiffs in jurisdictions that have adopted
Uniform Commercial
Code section 2–318 (Alternative A)’
(1993) 20 Pepp L Rev 1215
, 1128–33; Stallworth, WL, ‘An analysis of warranty
claims instituted by non-privity plaintiffs in jurisdictions that
have adopted
Uniform Commercial Code section 2–318 (Alternative A)’
Akron L Rev 197
At least one American commercial law scholar has found this to be a
failure in the CISG. See Rosett, A, ‘Critical reflections
on the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods’
(1984) 45 Ohio State Law Journal 265
See §§ 2–319 to 2–321 of the UCC.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (135 KB)
PDF format (111 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter