URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kirby, Michael --- "Let No One Be Left Behind" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 3; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 1
LET NO ONE BE LEFT BEHIND
The Hon Michael Kirby AC
I Introduction
It is a great honour for me to deliver this Oration, named in my honour, for
the Australasian Association of Bioethics and Health
Law (‘AABHL’).
Since my early days in the Australian Law Reform Commission (1975–83), I
have been involved in the
exploration of many subjects that fit within the broad
domain served by AABHL and its
I recollect earlier
orations given by me on associated topics, including for the Australian
Bioethics Association (as it then was).
In Brisbane in 1995, I was encouraged by
my then recent appointment as a member of the Ethical, Legal and Social Issues
Working Group
of the International Council of the Human Genome Organisation. My
lecture was on ‘Bioethics, the Human Genome Project and Our
That was delivered
at a time shortly before my appointment to the High Court of Australia, where I
met many relevant issues and challenges.
In the 1990s, the world was grappling with the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Although important drugs have been produced in that decade that
significantly
reduced the number of deaths occasioned by infection with HIV, it is still the
case that we have not developed a pharmaceutical
cure that rids the body of the
causative agent of AIDS. Nor have we developed a safe and reliable vaccine
to prevent the spread of
HIV to others. Thirty years later, Australia and
the world were grappling with a new pandemic caused by a virus designated by the
World Health Organisation (‘WHO’) as ‘COVID-19’. In
the case of this pandemic, highly effective antiretroviral
therapy was speedily
discovered and manufactured. As well, effective vaccines were quickly
developed. These, together, reduced the
impact of COVID-19, which would
otherwise have been much more serious. More recently, it has been observed
that healthcare is still
subject to many vexed issues in law and policy.
Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, systemic failings in how Australia cares
older people, and for people with disabilities in residential care
facilities, the gradual introduction throughout the nation of
legislation on
voluntary assisted dying, and the growing significance of developments in
artificial intelligence, are topics of great
importance for the future of
healthcare, diagnosis, treatment and public policy.
A common theme in my talk in 1995, as in my successive introductory words for
the new editions of
Health Law in Australia,
has been the growing
importance of international law and international institutions for the shaping
of Australasian developments
in this field of discourse. That process had
already begun when I delivered my 1995 lecture. I hope to demonstrate the way in
the predicted impact of international law, policy and institutions have
enlarged in the intervening period.
II Rise Of Health Threats And Necessary Responses
Events of recent times have shown the global impact of new and unexpected
pandemics as well as the legal and bioethical features of
successive occasions
involving the Ebola pandemics, the SARS epidemic, the COVID-19 pandemic, and,
most recently, the Monkey Pox
epidemic of 2022. In an age of pandemics, it is
not possible to confine legal and policy reflections to purely municipal
developments.
The very nature of epidemics, and especially the broader-based
pandemics of recent years, requires a global outlook and transborder
These, in turn, take reflection from the wider context of international human
rights law and its local applications.
History of the UDHR and Relevant Health
In the coming year, starting on 10 December 2023, it will be impossible to
escape consideration of the 75
anniversary of the
Declaration of Human Rights
(‘UDHR’). Knowing about this
important development helps to explain why global perspectives and principles
have emerged
to defend fundamental human rights in the context of healthcare as
According to WHO and the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights:
A human rights-based approach to health specifically aims at realising the
right to health and other health related human rights.
Health policy making and
programming are to be guided by human rights standards and principles and aim at
developing capacity of
duty bearers to meet their obligations and empowering
rights-holders to effectively claim their health rights. Elimination of all
forms of discrimination is at the core.
This is only one (but an important example) of the impacts of the UDHR on the
field of health law, bioethics and human rights.
The modern global human rights developments arose, in part, as a consequence
of the terrible losses and suffering before, during and
after the Second World
War. As a consequence of those events, the international community resolved, in
1945, to establish a new
global institution (the United Nations Organisation)
and to include in its objectives the attainment of universal human rights. It
was immediately perceived that, without respect for universal human rights, it
was likely that the international community would
continue to revert to war and
Initially, it was intended that the
of the United Nations
’) would include an International Bill of Rights.
However, as in the development of the United States
Constitution
, the drafters
ran out of time to complete the preparation of that compilation. They therefore
postponed the task to a later time.
They established a committee to initiate
the drafting and to seek consensus between the relevant international experts.
that committee, the General Assembly appointed Mrs Eleanor Roosevelt,
widow of the late President of the United States of America,
F.D. Roosevelt.
Her challenge was to secure the consensus. It was an inspired choice.
The draft for the UDHR was completed in 1948, three years after the end of
the War and the adoption of the UN
. At about this time, one of
the first new agencies of the United Nations, the WHO, was created in Geneva on
the site of the former
League of Nations. It was evident to the members of the
Roosevelt committee that health rights were amongst those that should be
as important for all human beings.
Eventually, Article 25 of the UDHR declared:
25.1 Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the
health and well-being of himself and his family, including food,
housing and medical care and necessary social services and the right to security
in the event of unemployment, sickness,
disability, widowhood, old age or other
lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond control
There were disagreements within the Roosevelt Committee as to the inclusion
of such ‘economic, social and cultural rights’
in the UDHR. Western
countries tended to think in terms only of ‘civil and political
rights’, as expressing the ambit
of universal human rights. However, to
secure consensus in the nascent UN institutions, the broader ambit was adopted.
health, in the language expressed in Article 25 of the UDHR, became
part of the instrument. It has been elaborated since in many
later documents,
most importantly in Article 12 of the
International Covenant on Economic
Social and Cultural Rights
which says:
12.1 The States Parties to the present covenant recognised the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard
of physical and
mental health.
12.2 The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present covenant to
achieve the realisation of this right shall include
those necessary for:
(c) The prevention, treatment and control of epidemic, endemic,
occupational and other diseases;
(d) The creation of conditions which would assure to all medical services
and medical attention in the event of sickness.
I am a link between this 2023 conference of AABHL in Brisbane and the
adoption of the UDHR 75 years ago. I had encounters in my early
life with each
of three great primary contributors to the task of drafting the UDHR:
● Eleanor Roosevelt in 1943 drove past my primary school in Sydney
Australia on her way to open a new hospital built nearby
with American aid for
soldiers injured in the War in the Pacific. I remember that visit. I claim,
that as her motorcade passed by,
my eyes locked with those of this great lady
and humanitarian;
● Dr HV Evatt was the Australian third President of the General
Assembly of the United Nations, meeting in December 1948 in
Paris when the UDHR
was adopted. Evatt had attended the same public school in Sydney as I had done.
I encountered him there several
times. He was a great champion of human rights;
● Mr John Humphrey, a Canadian academic, took part in the drafting of
the UDHR for the Roosevelt committee. Later we would both
serve together on the
executive committee of the International Commission of Jurists in Geneva.
Between meetings, we would discuss
the drafting and adoption of the UDHR. His
had been the pen that wrote the initial drafts of provisions in the UDHR. Even
great projects
like the UDHR must begin with a first draft. It was John Humphrey
who wrote the immortal words of the opening provisions of Article
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are
endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards
one another in a
spirit of brotherhood
Each of these three champions of universal human rights is still alive in my
recollections which I now share. We are all the inheritors
of their work and
legacy. However imperfect (being the product of human endeavour), the UDHR is a
great step forward, towards universal
basic human rights and their achievement.
Later in my career, I was to see the progeny of the UDHR emerging. Relevantly to
remarks, in the field of health law and related subjects, a major testing
ground arrived with the advent of the HIV/AIDS pandemic,
effectively from the
early 1980s.
The AIDS Pandemic
Initial Responses to AIDS
Decades in my life passed between the adoption of the UDHR and the advent of
HIV/AIDS. However, in the early 1980s, the first reports
began to emerge of a
new and dangerous pandemic, apparently originating in Africa. By chance, in
Congo, a talented epidemiologist,
Dr Jonathan Mann, was alerted to a new and
frightening condition coming out of the jungle. This was described by locals as
disease’, because of the emaciation of the victims. On the
occasion of a visit to Brazzaville in neighbouring French Congo,
Dr Mann alerted
the Director-General of WHO, Dr Halfdan Mahler, to this new, apparently
contagious condition. Mahler, upon his return
to Geneva, summoned Dr Mann to
(‘GPA’). He also established
a WHO Global Commission on AIDS (as the
disease had by then been renamed). He appointed me to be a member of that
commission. It
included brilliant scientists and ethicists. One of them was Dr
Luc Montagnier, a French expert who had first isolated the virus
causing AIDS
(‘HIV’). He was later to receive the Nobel Prize for his
At the time, the formal response of nation states, and of the international
community, to such a condition was to isolate those who
were infected.
Quarantine was the standard legal initiative. However, so fast was the spread of
HIV that it became clear that isolation
would not work in this case. The puzzle
was to find an effective response in circumstances where there was no known
medication to
treat the condition, and no vaccine to prevent infection. It was
in these circumstances that Dr Mann and the Global Commission turned
paradoxical solution. This was to reach out to defined groups who appeared to be
amongst the main targets of HIV. These were
men who have sex with men
(‘MSM’), injecting drug users (‘IJU’), commercial sex
workers (‘CSW’),
and prisoners and detainees. GPA and WHO
recommended that health officials should reach out to these groups to reduce
legal stigma
against them and, by explaining the nature and risks of infection,
to help to reduce the rapid escalation of the infected. This strategy
opponents at the time. They urged that detention rather than engagement was the
correct policy. However, many epidemiologists
and politicians embraced the
Australia’s Responses to AIDS
Fortunately, in Australia two political leaders emerged at this time. One, in
the Hawke Government, was Minister Neal Blewett (Minister
for Health). His
counterpart in the Opposition was Professor Peter Baume. They embraced the AIDS
paradox. They urged law reform to
remove the legal penalties that stigmatised
and isolated the main groups who were becoming infected. This was a very unusual
in bipartisan politics. It involved considerable courage on the part of
Dr Blewett and Dr Baume. However, it worked. The rate of
infections in Australia
and New Zealand fell rapidly although they continued to grow in many other
countries. Especially effective
were the campaigns to promote the use of condoms
for all sexual activity, provision of freely acceptable sterile equipment for
injection, and steps to reduce the criminalisation of sex workers. By the
mid-1990s, although no medical cure or vaccine was developed,
the paradox had
brought relief for the burgeoning numbers of infected. It also stimulated the
development of a combination of therapies
which was found to be effective in
reducing the levels of HIV and the capacity of those under treatment to infect
others with the
International Responses to AIDS
Following these developments, further strategies were adopted by WHO. They
included the creation of UNAIDS, a joint program of United
Nations agencies to
combine the response to HIV within the UN. As treatment became more effective,
demands were made in the international
community for the provision of free or
cheap therapies in least developed countries otherwise unable to afford
treatment for those
most in need. It also led to the establishment of
initiatives in developed countries and regions (including the United States of
America, Europe and Australasia) to help fund the worldwide cost of the
antiretroviral drugs.
AIDS Pandemic and the Decriminalisation of Homosexuality
By the end of the 1990s, international cooperation had begun to make a mark
on infection with HIV. Although by this stage (DSM-III
R 1987), the previous
position of WHO that homosexuality was a medical (mental) illness had been
abandoned as erroneous, the outreach
to LGBT groups for reasons of HIV
containment led WHO and UNAIDS to affirmatively promote the removal of criminal
laws against LGBT
individuals. This was not popular in the countries in greatest
need. But it had to be done in order to reduce the scale of HIV infections.
was in this indirect way that WHO first became involved in the strategies to
remove criminal laws against gay people. At the time,
such laws existed in a
majority of member states of the United Nations. Successive executive directors
of UNAIDS took up the leadership
in the endeavours to get rid of criminal laws
against MSM. And also, to change criminal laws against injecting drug users and
workers. Even prisoners and detainees were found to have basic rights to be
protected against infection and to receive the best available
medical treatment,
open to distribution in the community.
International bodies beyond UNAIDS and WHO also became involved in the
efforts to protect and treat people in the ‘vulnerable
groups’. The
result has been a significant drop in the number of countries which imposed
criminal sanctions, particularly against
gay men. The United Nations repeatedly
drew attention to the morally unjustifiable nature of such laws. But for those
who remained
hostile, the initiatives were justified by reference to their
effectiveness in bringing down the spread of the AIDS pandemic.
By reason of a number of relevant appointments in the Commonwealth of
Nations, UNAIDS, United Nations Development Programme, and elsewhere,
myself promoting both the moral case for reform of such criminal laws, but also
the epidemiological case in circumstances
(which still obtain) that no cure or
vaccine was available to respond to AIDS in a purely medical way.
When COVID-19 (2019) and Monkeypox (2022) emerged, just as the AIDS pandemic
appeared to be gradually subsiding, lessons were learned
from the way in which
the international community had responded to the earlier pandemic. Especially
vulnerable groups were engaged
in the global response. Politicians explained
often through daily briefings on public media, the importance of the principle
from the response to HIV/AIDS: ‘Nothing about us without
us’. This is indeed a bioethical principle that those who are
affected by
serious medical conditions must be engaged in discussions of public health and
medical responses. When later pandemics
came along, public health experts and
health professionals reverted to the lessons that had been learned when
responding to AIDS.
Challenge to Resolving the AIDS Pandemic: Intellectual Property
In 2011–12, I was invited to participate in a new global commission
concerned with AIDS. This time it was created by the United
Nations Development
Programme (‘UNDP’) which works closely with WHO, UNAIDS and other UN
bodies. In 2012, the UNDP Global
Commission on HIV and the Law delivered its
Risks, Rights and
This report returned to
many of the themes that had earlier been explored. It reverted to a
consideration of the especially vulnerable
groups and the ways to support them
so as to afford to reduce infections.
Amongst the recommendations of this second global commission was one directed
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations (at the
time, Ban Ki-Moon
(UNSG)). This urged that the UN should establish:
A neutral high-level body to review and assess proposals and recommend a new
intellectual property regime for pharmaceutical products.
Such a regime should
be consistent with international human rights law and public health
requirements, whilst safeguarding the justifiable
In response to this recommendation the UNSG created a High-Level Panel on
Access to Essential Healthcare. The concern was to ensure
that intellectual
property law (patents) was not adding unfairly to the cost of antiretroviral
therapy and impeding the moves to
protect people (especially vulnerable people)
from infection or debilitating illness because of the cost.
The SG appointed me to serve on this High-Level Panel. Its report, and a
later report by a further commission (the UNAIDS-Lancet Commission
Defeating AIDS – Advancing Global Health
) made many
recommendations.
opportunity on the part of the organised international community to reconsider
and re-express the law on intellectual property
as affecting life-saving health
drugs was missed.
Whilst acknowledging very great gains, a later report of the UNSG in mid-2023
noted that these gains ‘have stalled and the overall
pace of progress in
ending the AIDS pandemic is slowing, owing to faltering political will, funding
constraints and fragile public
health systems and a failure to confront the
injustices and inequalities that fuel the
What can be said is that much was achieved by a remarkable combination of
science, political compromise, and engagement with civil
society. However, the
burdens of intellectual property law and the cost of therapies, and the
unwillingness of many states most at
risk to take initiatives suggested by UN
bodies and national governments with experience, had slowed down the prospects
of foreseeing
a world without AIDS by 2030, the year identified in the UN
Sustainable Development
Challenge to Resolving the AIDS Pandemic: Trade Sanctions
More UN reports demonstrated that AIDS could be ended by 2030 and outlined
the path to get there. International demands to improve
entitlements to
universal health coverage have often led to criticism of the promulgation and
application of unilateral economic,
financial and trade measures that impede the
full achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing
As seen when the United States Government joined with the United
Kingdom and the European Union in blocking acknowledgement, ‘unilateral
coercive measures (sanctions) can have negative impacts on the achievement of
universal health coverage’. Yet in 2019, the
then Australian government
voted against the adoption of the UN Human Rights Council resolution, calling
for restrictions on such
measures that the Australian spokesman said: ‘we
believe that sanctions can be an appropriate, effective and legitimate measure
that is fully compliant with international law and the United Nations
Australia’s explanation avoided any reference to the unilateral character
of the sanctions being considered or the negative
impact of such sanctions on
the individual human rights of people in need of healthcare. In voting on the
resolution, which was passed
40:3, Australia joined with the European Union, the
United Kingdom and Japan against adoption of the resolution. This showed once
again that unjust intellectual property laws, impeding human rights advancements
in the healthcare sector, are often hard to achieve
because of perceived
economic advantages of enforcing the economic benefits of intellectual property
law to the advantage of wealthy
Global Responses to Serious Health Threats
Moving beyond giving attention to particular pandemics and establishing a
more united conceptual approach for global responses to
such serious health
threats has been slow in coming. However, on 20 September 2023, the United
Nations General Assembly convened
a High-Level Meeting dedicated to Pandemic
Prevention, Preparedness and Response. The timing was important because WHO was
then concurrently
negotiating major revisions to the International Health
Regulations (2005). It was striving to prepare a new Pandemic
The desirability of
such a treaty is clear. It was demonstrated in the loss of valuable early
warning possibilities when the first
instances of COVID-19 were detected in
Wuhan, China. Those medicos in China who expressed concern over the possibility
of a new pandemic
were criticised. Some were threatened with criminal sanctions.
Valuable months were lost in initiating a global reaction to COVID-19.
came months later, early in 2020.
The global response to the idea of a political declaration has exhibited many
weaknesses:
1. The adoption of seriously diluted language in addressing the urgency of
the opportunity;
2. The failure to provide effective accountability for each of the UN
declarations;
3. The lack of funding provisions to ensure that the proposed declaration
would be followed up effectively; and
4. The omission to recommend enforceable international obligations to address
the challenge when a new pandemic comes
Whilst the political declaration was approved by the UNGA in New York on 20
September 2023, its provisions arguably represent a missed
opportunity to put in
place a more effective global mechanism for confronting future pandemics in a
united way.
II Continued Stigma Toward Non-Majoritarian Sexual
Orientation & Gender Identity Groups
Exclusion of Attainment of SOGI Rights in the
Regional Conference on Populations
From 15 to 17 November 2023 in Bangkok, Thailand, the 7
and Pacific Population Conference was convened by the United Nations Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(‘ESCAP’). Such
conferences have been held at 10 yearly intervals in the past. This was the
such meeting. Participants in the meeting included
representatives of governments in the Asia Pacific Region, technical experts,
and participants from civil society. I was invited by three United Nations
agencies: UNAIDS, ESCAP and Asia-Pacific Regional Office
The participating countries at this conference were mostly represented by
senior ministers and officials in the region. The focus
was on stating the
action in the region to confront inequalities, social exclusion and impediments
to the attainment of rights. A
major focus was upon the ‘gender
consideration’. The format included a number of panels. I was a
participant in the round
table panel on ‘Inequalities and Social Exclusion
and Rights’. Each panel member was allowed a short interval to express
initiatives that they considered urgent. In doing so, I drew on my earlier
international activities on HIV/AIDS, but also, on
my engagement with global
response, in that context, to discrimination and exclusion affecting LGBTIQ+
populations.
Throughout the ESCAP conference, but especially in the session in which I was
engaged, there was a noticeable unwillingness of representatives
to address the
situation in their respective countries in relation to the non-majoritarian
sexual orientation and gender identity
(‘SOGI’) minority. Asia and
the Pacific has no regional human rights court or commission to stimulate or
sanction egregious
departures from universal standards affecting the SOGI
minority. In most of the ESCAP member states in the region, there has been
concerted movement towards the decriminalisation of adult, consensual, private
same-sex conduct. It still remains a criminal offence,
carrying serious
penalties and huge stigma. The result, during the session in which I was
engaged, was that whilst many commendable
advances were mentioned (particularly
in relation to gender (women) and disabilities) almost no reference was made to
advancements
in the position of SOGI minorities.
The inescapable conclusion based on this silence was there had not been many
such advances. The etiquette of the meeting was to avoid
‘pointing the
finger’ at member countries or national delegations. Criticisms, if any,
had to be stated quietly and obliquely.
However, I concluded that my
participation had been supported because of my willingness to speak openly and
honestly about my own
minority sexual orientation (homosexual). If this was my
expected task, I certainly fulfilled it. Almost every national report made
the ESCAP conference contained reference to a phrase common in UN human rights
documentation: ‘No one should be left behind’.
This affirmation was repeatedly included in virtually all of the national
reports until it became almost rote learning. The repeated
use of the phrase
appeared as an embrace of meaningless incantation of unthinking generalities.
In the three-minute reply that was allowed to me in which to respond to the
national statements, I mentioned the repeated invocation
‘to leave no one
behind’. However, I indicated that, certainly in my earlier life, I had
felt ‘left behind’
and positively unwelcome on many occasions. The
only way these feelings could be overcome, or navigated, was becoming a
pretender’. I drew the inference that SOGI status was
alright, so long as those affected pretended not to be. However, such
encouraged the policy stance that there was no problem about SOGI and that it
could be ignored throughout the ESCAP region.
I tried, within the etiquette, to
change the ESCAP participants to listen to minority voices and to address the
legal and policy
response that needed to be heard. The criminal law of England
included penal offences for persons proved to have engaged in same-sex
conduct. Repealing those offences have proved extremely difficult, although it
began in 1967 in England. A decade later the
repeal of laws in Canada, New
Zealand and some parts of Australia were under
consideration. Unfortunately, in a number of countries
of the former
British Empire (now the Commonwealth of Nations) legislative attempts to repeal
the old crimes often failed. This was
particularly so in countries of
Africa, the Caribbean and Asia. In the 1990s, the persistence of the penal
provisions had become
an impediment to inventive and educative attempts to
impede or slow the spread of HIV, causing AIDS. One of the main regions
opposition was most strong was the Caribbean states. Although in some
such states the legislatures had invalidated the criminal provisions
as contrary
to the local constitution's Bill of Rights, in other states, the judiciary
proved slow to act. In October 2023, the Supreme
Court of Jamaica unanimously
dismissed the application for
It held that, despite
the drastic consequences for the gay minority in Jamaica, like the applicant,
they were well and truly ‘left
behind’ by the law courts, the
legislature, and society at large in of Jamaica. In part, the reason given by
the Jamaican judges
was that the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in
London, last year, had enforced the alleged exclusion and denied relief under
the otherwise universal protections of the UN
On my return to Australia from the conference I have described above for the
ESCAP region, a letter was awaiting me containing an
’, written by a human rights lawyer from Jamaica, Maurice
Tomlinson. He reported the dismissal, in September 2023, of a challenge
raised against the criminal laws of Jamaica that criminalised him and reduced
his rights and dignity on the grounds of SOGI,
despite the provisions of the
local human rights Charter, upholding equality under the law of all.
Realities of the SOGI Minority
As a measure of the silence evidenced from many country reports at the ESCAP
conference, it is worth quoting from the letter written
by Mr Tomlinson to his
fellow citizens in Jamaica:
The Supreme Court upheld our country’s archaic anti-sodomy law and
claimed that only parliament could repeal this discriminatory
edict. This
British colonially imposed statute condemns consenting gay men to 10 years in
prison with hard labour for any acts of
indecency, even holding hands in the
register as sex offenders
and always carry a “pass” or face a nearly
$US 7,000 fine, plus spend a year behind bars every time police catch them
without said pass.
The judge rejected the public defender’s application to join and assist
me. ... Despite this shameful start, as an attorney,
I still believed that our
courts would protect vulnerable LGBT+ people like me... Yet, time and time
again our judges have hidden
behind politics and public opinion to rule against
LGBT inclusion...
I am a Jamaican by accident of birth. But like the victim of an abusive
relationship, I have struggled to remain faithful to my country
suffering multiple attacks. I naively kept hope that my own land would one day
live up to its motto: “Out of Many One
People”. However, it is now
painfully clear that my dream of inclusion has been a nightmare, and I am
unabashedly unwanted.
I see little hope of justice for LGBT people from the Jamaican courts... May
those who choose to continue the Island’s LGBT
liberation struggle
eventually have success. Meanwhile, I will remain where I am wanted in Canada.
Here I now work as a nurse, caring
for other bruised and battered people. I try
to ease their pain, while I hope to end my own.
III Conclusion
Too many people, including in the Asia Pacific Region, have been rebuffed by
lawmakers in courts and by the legislature. At an occasion
for reflection on
populations and development (as well as the relevance of the 75th anniversary of
the UDHR), sexual minorities may
have been rebuffed. Too often this has been the
reality of countries in the region and of SOGI people in the minority. This is a
serious affront to universal human rights principles. It is a rejection of
justice and human dignity. Yet justice and human dignity
are the foundations for
health law and practice everywhere. Mr Thomlinson has terminated his engagement
with the law, being now convinced
that it offers him no redress. Unsurprisingly,
he has turned to a healthcare profession, nursing, where stigma and hatred are
by legal and bioethical requirements. He dreams of an ethical society
where he is not excluded and is not left behind. We must all
recommit ourselves
to that objective. It is set for us by the UDHR and by the principles of human
rights, medical law, and human
This oration was delivered at
the Queensland University of Technology on 20 November 2023 by the Honourable
Michael Kirby, former
Justice of the High Court of Australia (1996–2009);
Commissioner of the UNDP Global Commission on HIV and the Law (2011–12);
Ambassador (Patron) of APCOM, Bangkok (2017–2023). It has been modified
for publication in this Journal and the form of an
oration has been kept.
This started with the
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Human Tissue Transplants
(Report No 7,
Justice Michael Kirby,
‘Bioethics, the Human Genome Project and Our Future’ (Speech,
Australian Bioethics Association,
25 September 1995).
World Health Organisation and
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Rights-Based Approach to Health
, UN Doc OHCHR/WHO (Report, 18 August 2008) 1
https://www.ohchr.org/en/documents/tools-and-resources/human-rights-based-approach-health-ohchrwho-2008
Cf. Ronli Sifris and Paula Gerber, ‘Sexual and Reproductive Health Care
for Trans and Gender Diverse People: Imagining
a Human Rights-based
Approach’ (2023) 48(3)
Alternative Law Journal
United Nations Development
Global Commission on HIV and the Law: Risks, Rights and Health
(Final Report, July 2012).
Ibid 86 [6.1].
United Nations Development
High Level Panel on Access to Medicines
(Final Report,
September 2016).
Political Declaration on
HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities and Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030
GA Res 75/284, UN Doc A/77/877 (8 May 2023, adopted 8 June 2021) 1 [3].
United Nations Development
Progress and Peril in Global Laws on Same-Sex Criminalisation
(Report, 14 November 2023) 7, 16.
Human Rights Council,
‘Resolution: Human Rights and Unilateral Coercive Measures Statement at
action: Explanation of Vote’
(Australian Statement, 21 March 2019).
United Nations Human Rights
Annual Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
(17 January 2019).
Lawrence Gostin et al,
‘The UN Declaration on Pandemics: What Should Happen Next?’,
Health Affairs
(online, 23 October 2023)
<https://www.healthaffairs.org/content/forefront/assessing-un-s-political-declaration-pandemics-should-happen-next>.
Lawrence Gostin et al (n
Tomlinson, Maurice Arnold
v The Attorney General of Jamaica, the Churches, Jamaica Coalition for a Healthy
Society et al
[2023] JMFC Full 5
State (No.2) (Trinidad and Tobago)
[2022] UKPC 19
Maurice Arnold v The Attorney General of Jamaica, the Churches, Jamaica
Coalition for a Healthy Society et al
[2023] JMFC Full 5
Maurice Tomlinson,
‘Jamaican court again rejects LGBT rights; Jamaican activist bows
Erasing 76 Crimes
(online, 30 October 2023) <
https://76crimes.com/2023/10/30/jamaican-court-again-rejects-lgbt-rights-jamaican-activist-bows-out/
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (62.5 KB)
PDF format (394 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter