URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2004/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Torsen, Molly A --- "Fine Art Online: Digital Imagery and Current International Interpretations of Ethical Considerations in Copyright Law" [2004] DigTechLawJl 4; (2004) 5(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 4
Online: Digital Imagery and Current International Interpretations of
Ethical Considerations in Copyright Law
J.D. Candidate, University of
Introduction
The Internet has radically transformed the way in which
images of fine art can be viewed by much of the world. One of Amedeo
Modigliani’s
rarely seen portraits of Jeanne Hébuterne, an
oil-on-canvas painting done in 1919, can be seen on the website
Artnet.com.
It can also be seen in a photograph of a
Christie’s porter handling the original painting on the Getty
Images’ website.
The image of Edgar Degas’
Dancers in Blue
, a pastel work done in the late
1890s, can be seen on the Corbis website,
as well as on a poster sales website
that is advertising the image. Or, to view this work in person, one could
visit the Pushkin Museum in
2. New technology challenges traditional perceptions of the appropriate
mechanisms for undertaking such activity. Invariably, the
application of
the law to new technology is awkward and contentious. This article examines how
and whether various types of images
can be viewed and used in non-traditional
formats and addresses some of the issues for which domestic and international
needed to adjust their traditional tenets.
This topic requires a complex application of ‘fair use’
doctrine to the intersecting interests of the Internet, fine
generally. This article focuses on the rights and responsibilities the
of people involved
in online imagery;
those who are depicted, those who
create the image, those
who own the copyright, those who own the original
artwork itself, and those
who view it.
provide a framework in which
to understand these issues: Part I provides an outline of selected
international copyright
briefly touches on the importance of choice of law analyses, and looks
rights of privacy and rights of publicity in their
historic context and
discusses new challenges that confront current laws in these domains in
the Internet. Part III
analyzes moral rights as they are
understood by various nations, and how they are being adapted to the
paradigm. Part IV
discusses the opportunities and difficulties faced by
advances in digital rights management. Part V synthesizes the prior
by means of the example of a single artist. Part VI, the
conclusion, suggests that, while harmonization of international
, the most beneficial plan for
the future,
there may be alternative systems that are more realistic and more
beneficial. The ideal
system could provide clear rules to copyright
holders as to their bundle of rights in a given jurisdiction and how to
enforce them,
preserve the deep- seated ideological underpinnings of copyright law in
individual countries. If harmonization does occur at
some point, one
would recommend that artist’s rights be an important part of the
discussion.
International Copyright Regimes
5. Prior to the first international bilateral copyright
treaty’s implementation in the middle of the nineteenth century, France
called for a universal law of copyright.
case then, and still is today, that “[a]ll nations’ domestic laws
reflect internal values, mores, and social
conditions. Copyright laws are no
exception.”
Although international copyright protection
legislation still does not exist today, signatories to the Convention for the
of Literary and Artistic Works, signed in 1886 in Berne, Switzerland,
have increased steadily since the Convention’s inception.
original signatory countries
to the Convention comprised the Berne
an entity that exists apart from the treaty so that no Union member need adhere to any revisions of the Convention in order to
Berne Union members. There are currently 154
state members of the Berne
6. Essentially, the jurisdictional component of the Berne Convention, most recently revised in 1971, is
based on a principle of national
treatment, wherein
a copyrighted work from
any Berne Union country will be treated in any
other country
according to the latter’s
that is infringed in Germany will be protected in Germany at least to
the extent that
a German work would be protected there.
A tenet of the Berne Convention that has made it attractive to so many
countries is its relative leniency insofar as it allows member
to maintain much autonomy in implementing the Convention and
accommodates
diversity in national laws.
Another key element of the Berne
Convention, at least insofar as the United States’ recent implementation
of it is concerned,
is its requirement of moral rights protection. Article 6
the Convention necessitates that the rights of paternity and integrity
be guaranteed to copyright holders. Broadly, this means
that an artist, author, or other creator of a work, “shall have
to claim authorship of the work.”
The right of integrity
provides that the author
or artist has the right “to object to any distortion, mutilation or other modification
of, or other derogatory
action in relation to, the said work, which would be prejudicial to his honor or
reputation.”
7. There are two primary perspectives
economic and
As shall be discussed below, the
United States has fallen much more on the side of economic than moral
interests, despite its eventual
implementation of the Berne Convention
while France, a bastion of author’s
rights advocacy, falls on the moral side. In even broader terms of
socio-cultural generalization,
Western ideals are centered around the free
market, individual rights and the idea that profits are the appropriate reward
for creative
endeavors, while other systems are more
interested in the
welfare of the community and equal distribution of
Wide discrepancies in points of view about this
aspect of copyright law explain the movement to harmonize copyright law
on an international
scale. Harmonization through reduction of national
disparities would ostensibly
reduce the cost, time and incertitude involved
in determining rights, thereby reducing obstacles to innovation and
8. Short of harmonization, these discrepancies demonstrate an acute need to implement a clear structure whereby States with
views about moral rights can trust that their interests in protecting
the intellectual property rights
of their nationals are being
satisfied. Indeed, harmonization may be both
impractical and undesirable. An emphasis on harmonization may actually prevent individual
countries from pursuing their own domestic policy
Furthermore, copyright law “goes to the heart of a nation’s
information and
cultural policy because [it] influences the
creation and distribution
of knowledge and culture…. [I]t is no surprise that nations
would resist giving up autonomy over
their copyright
Choice of Law
United States, “[c]hoice of law issues have largely been ignored
assuming without
analysis that U.S. law applies to determine ownership and infringement
for foreign nationals.”
Insofar as choice of law is an
issue, Berne Union States must agree that the national law of
infringement
will be applied uniformly
to foreign and domestic authors and artists,
as described above. Both procedural and substantive differences in
make choice of laws questions determinative of the outcome in
case. For example, as a default rule, copyright for Berne Union
for 50 years after the death of the author or artist,
but individual countries have an option to provide longer protection. In
European Community countries, artists rights societies and
pay- per-view lobbies
have succeeded in raising this duration to 70 years after the artist’s death.
The determination of the length of a work’s copyright protection is a different number of years in different countries,
illustrating
how choice of law is of paramount importance.
10. Choice of
law in copyright disputes is, at best, “a work in progress.”
Any given copyright case will involve a number of
factors that determine whose law should be applied, including meanings
of originality
and ownership, and conceptual questions such as the
applicable subject matter. While an
in-depth discussion of choice of
issues is beyond the scope of this writing, it
is essential to note
that it is an extremely important but unclear area of law
boundaries and
parameters have not yet been defined by the courts.
and growing use of the world wide web as a platform on which to view, copy and
disseminate works of intellectual property
exacerbate the issue and has caused
much discussion and legislation,
but the interpretation of
these new treaties remains inconsistent. The Internet, in this context, is
unprecedented challenge;
its “global dimensions, which cut across territorial borders, are
creating significant legal questions…[it] is a legal
11. Two treaties promulgated by
the World Intellectual Property Organization
) clarify that
existing rights continue to apply in the digital environment. They also create
new online rights. “To maintain
a fair balance of interests
between the owners of rights and the general public, the treaties
further clarify that countries have
reasonable flexibility in establishing exceptions or limitations to rights in the digital
environment.”
Like the Berne Convention, then, these two
“Internet treaties”
do not mandate harmonization. The application of the laws of one
country’s system over another will, in most cases, lead to
different results.
One solution may be to select, based on certain criteria, from among the various potentially applicable systems, the
laws of one
system to govern the legal relationship. “This, in essence,
is the exercise of determining the applicable law under a private
international law approach.”
Whether and how the Internet treaties will function in an international
context insofar as
choice of law has yet to be seen, because
they bow to individual
implementing legislation. “This means that even if the
international norm-makers got
the balance right…, there remains
ample opportunity
for national legislators to get it
In response to the
existing nebulous choice of law schemes, and to attempt to deal with
intellectual property matters,
Professors Rochelle Dreyfuss and Jane Ginsburg have been working on a
convention adapted from
the test of the Draft Hague Convention. In
2001, the professors presented WIPO delegates with a Draft Convention
And Recognition Of Judgments In Intellectual Property
), providing suggestions for dealing with the regulation of online
The Draft Convention was intended to cover a gamut
of intellectual property matters such as copyrights, neighboring
trademarks,
and unfair competition, and was meant to cover disputes
regarding violations occurring not only on the Internet but also in the
13. A report was drafted in March of 2004 to
summarize the progress of the Draft Convention. The objective of the
Convention, upon
its completion, is “to make exclusive choice of court
agreements as effective as possible in the context
of international
The present form of the Draft Convention is
different from the original that Professors Dreyfuss and Ginsburg
drew up in the
late 90’s, however. This is because, as work proceeded on drafting, it
became apparent that it would not be possible to
up a satisfactory text for
a convention that deals with so many different jurisdictional models within a reasonable period of time.
reasons for this included the wide differences
in the existing rules of jurisdiction in different States and the unforeseeable
effects of technological developments, including the Internet, on the
Sections 29 and 30 of the revised Draft Convention deal specifically but cursorily with
intellectual property and the Draft
to be passed.
Choice of Law Difficulties: Rights of
Having briefly examined the landscape of international copyright law, I
will discuss an issue that
demonstrates the variances
in national copyright tenets which,
arguably, would
be difficult if not insurmountable differences in drafting
a potential international
law. The very philosophical foundations of
some intellectual
property laws are so different as to be diametrically opposed in some
instances. For example, if someone takes a clear photograph of a
strolling in a park and posts it to her weblog as one of
several places
she visited in town during vacation, the ramifications may be far
different in the United States than in a European
country. United
States law generally fails to be roused unless the photographer is
making a profit on the image, so the
is likely safe in posting
that photograph.
15. A European law, however,
may be interpreted so
as to be just as interested in protecting the privacy of the subject of
the photograph
as in protecting the monetary interest the subject has
his or her image. Under a European law, therefore, the weblogger may be
violating personality rights of the couple simply by dint of the fact
that their faces are recognizable. In a 1988 case heard by
Supreme Court, the magazine publication of a photograph
of a couple walking
in Amsterdam’s Vondelpark was found to
infringe on the
right of privacy; unbeknownst to the photographer, the couple were
affair and sued the magazine
for having publicized that
The United States
16. In the United
States, privacy law governs a host of issues ranging from public
of private facts to intrusion upon seclusion
to “false light,” which
is a tort that creates a cause of action when one publicly discloses a matter
that places a person
in a false light that is “highly offensive to a reasonable person.”
The right of publicity falls
into a subgroup of privacy issues called appropriation. “One who
appropriates to his own use or
benefit the name or likeness of another is subject to liability to the other for invasion of his
The right of publicity was first recognized in a
1953 Second Circuit case, wherein
the judge held that “many prominent persons
(especially actors
and ball-players), far from having their feelings bruised through
public exposure of their likenesses, would feel
sorely deprived if they
received money for authorizing advertisements, popularizing their
countenances, displayed in newspapers,
magazines, buses, trains and
17. Economic interests seem to drive the
U.S. law that protects the appropriation
of one’s likeness, at least when that person’s
likeness could potentially engender a
profit for the appropriating party. Other aspects of privacy law are aimed at protecting a
person’s sense of self, but
these laws are often not codified and the outcomes of case law are
inconsistent.
In his seminal work on the rights of publicity
and privacy, J. Thomas McCarthy stated succinctly that “while the
appropriation
branch of the right of privacy is invaded by an
injury to the psyche, the right of publicity is infringed by an injury to the pocketbook.”
European Civil Law
In contrast with common law jurisdictions, most civil law jurisdictions
specific codified provisions that protect an
individual's
image, personal data and other generally private
information. Exceptions have often been carved out of these general,
broad privacy
when dealing with news and public figures. Moreover, personality
somewhat akin to United States’ general privacy
rights, are
inheritable in European civil law jurisdictions.
19. In France,
personality rights are protected under Article 9 of the French Civil Code. In
essence, the article provides that all
persons have a right to a private life
and that a judge has discretion to ensure that privilege.
publicly known facts and images of public figures are not generally
use of someone's image or personal history has
been held actionable
under French law. In 2000, for example, it was held that placing a
person’s photograph on the Internet
without that person’s
acquiescence is a violation of that person’s personality rights.
In Germany, Article 2, Section 1 of the German Basic Law provides that
“every person shall have the right to free development
personality insofar as he does not violate the rights of
The German personality right is closely associated with human dignity and an idea that borders on a right to
As suggested above with the example of the
couple walking in the Vondelpark, not only do these different models of
law rest in
different philosophical foundations, they also have the
inherent capacity of producing opposite
outcomes. This dichotomy is further
exemplified in an analysis of moral
Moral Rights
21. The above discussion of
personality rights and rights of publicity are a tangent
as well as an
introduction to the broader doctrine
of moral rights. Moral rights encompass
various strains of the protection discussed above, namely, personal
in the creation
of one’s authorship. For example: a photograph may
include both the personality interest of the subject of the photograph and
moral rights interests of the photographer himself. For a painting, the
is usually simplified to the interests of the
painter, although
there have been cases that brought into question the rights of the painter’s subject and commissioner.
The principal
rationalization for the protection of moral rights
is the idea that the work
of art “is an extension of the artist’s
personality,
expression of his innermost being. To mistreat the work of art is to
mistreat the artist, to invade his area of privacy,
to impair his
personality.”
22. In modern history, this idea of
protecting the extension of oneself can be traced back to the German
philosopher Immanuel Kant,
among others. Kant believed that an author’s
vision can be encompassed by an action, which is an exertion of the
will, not an external, other thing.
author can “find Ideas for a given concept, and moreover…
those Ideas in such
a way that the subjective state of mind accompanying the concept can be communicated to
In an 1841 note addressed to the Members of a Parliamentary Committee
responsible for examining the revision
of the law on literary
property, French author Honoré de Balzac
question: ‘who on earth can prevent the recognition of the only
that human beings create without earth or stone, and which is
durable as earth and stone?’”
Balzac and fellow
writer Victor Hugo founded la Société des gens de lettres
(The Society of French Writers) in 1837,
which was expanded and
replaced in
1851 by the Société des Auteurs, Compositeurs et Editeurs
This was the first
collective administration or copyright collecting society for creators
publishers. SACEM’s function
and importance will be discussed
more below, but it is interesting to note here that struggles in
to authors, artists and their distributors do not constitute a new
friction; they are inherent in the law’s lack of specific
remuneration plan. European countries have dealt differently with the
concept of moral
rights, but
the differences amongst them are
small compared to the dissimilar
moral rights
underpinnings of United States law, which has only very recently
recognized their existence.
The divergent philosophical bases for
these models can
arguably be gleaned from their respective
definitions
of moral rights.
24. Moral rights are defined in the United States as rights “protecting a visual artist’s work beyond the ordinary
protections
of copyright.”
The United States’ Visual
Artists Rights Act of 1990, discussed below, defines moral rights
including “both integrity
rights, which protect the work from changes that
damage the artist’s or the work’s reputation, and attribution
which allow the artist to claim authorship of the work and to prevent
the unlawful use of the author’s name in reference to
a modified version
of the work.”
The Berne Convention’s
definition of moral rights includes more breadth and specificity:
“Independently of the author's
economic rights, and even after
transfer of the said rights, the author shall have the right to claim
of the work
and to object to any distortion, mutilation or other
modification of, or other derogatory action in relation to, the said
would be prejudicial to his honor or reputation. The rights
the author in accordance with the preceding paragraph shall,
death, be maintained, at least until the expiry of the economic rights,
and shall be exercisable by the persons or institutions
authorized by
the legislation of the country where protection is
26. As was discussed above, the Berne
Convention allows rather broad margins for compliance with its Articles. Article 6
, in fact, includes language that exempts
individual States from mandating that a post-mortem right remain in an
author’s rights,
an exemption the United States has taken
advantage of by limiting author’s rights to his or her lifetime.
Indeed, the Berne Convention’s broad margins are arguably so wide
to not filter out any deviance in national law whatsoever.
author puts it: “To truly comply with the Berne Convention, it
may be necessary for U.S. law to depart from its utilitarian,
market-driven
tradition, and to affirmatively provide protection to authors in a
consistent with that provided by other member
countries of the Berne
Convention.”
27. Copyright
protection in the United States stems from the
Constitution
the goal is the promotion of the progress of “Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and
inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries.”
intellectual
property protection, then, is related to the benefit of the community
by means of offering compensation
to those whose work advances
this progress. The purpose is not to reward the authors, but rather
they are rewarded as a means to
the end goal of promoting public
progress. When the United States implemented the Berne Convention in
over 100 years after the Convention’s inception, the consensus of
the consultants was that the United States should and could
adhere to it without
making major changes in United States law.
The United States had long resisted joining the Berne Union for multiple reasons, chief among
which was its aversion to moral rights
A classic example of United States law prior to its official –
albeit arguably inadequate -- adhesion to Berne’s moral
principles is the
1948 New York
Shostakovich
in which the plaintiffs,
musical composers of international renown from the Soviet Union, sued a
United States film company. The
composers sued for the erratic and
out-of-context use of their music compositions in one of the
company’s films, despite the
credit they were given
in connection with
the abridged music. The court stated that there were not any
well-founded reasons to believe
that the film company distorted the
compositions nor
reason to believe that the compositions had not been faithfully
reproduced.
In trying to come to terms with the concept of moral
rights, the court asked: “Is the standard to be good taste,
artistic worth,
political beliefs, moral concepts or what is it to be?
In the present
state of our law the very existence of the right is not clear,
relative position of the rights thereunder with reference to the rights
others is not defined nor has the nature of the proper
remedy been
determined.”
therefore held that, in the absence
of any clear showing of the infliction of a willful injury or of any
invasion of a
moral right, it should not consider granting the
plaintiff’s requested injunctive relief.
The Universal Copyright
Convention and the Berne Convention Implementation Act
29. Under the
auspices of the United Nations Educational, Social and Cultural
Organization (
), the Universal Copyright Convention of 1952 (
) was concluded with the key objective of
rapidly bringing the United States into multilateral copyright
arrangements.
The UCC was drafted so as to require as few changes
in United States domestic law as necessary for the United States
to sign on.
The UCC was therefore something of a watered-down version of the
Convention and, because several States are signatories to
Article XVII and the Appendix Declaration of the UCC establish that among states
party to both, the terms of the Berne Convention
govern. While the United
States’ eventual Berne Convention Implementation Act (
) was far from perfectly mapped onto Article
of the Convention, the United States’ former approach to moral
rights was not immediately construed as
inadequate. The Director
General of WIPO at that time stated that, in his view, “it is not
necessary for the United States…to
enact statutory provisions on moral
in order to comply with Article 6
of the Berne Convention. The requirements under this Article can be fulfilled not only by statutory
provisions in a copyright statute
but also by common law and other
Whether the United States’ treatment
of moral rights was truly seen as adequate is debated; it is possible that
various parties
were so interested in the United States’ adhesion
to the Convention as to disregard the moral rights discrepancy for the
The Visual Artists Rights
30. According to some, the United States’ adherence to the
Berne Convention did
not necessarily reflect a desire to embrace
rights, “but rather to combat copyright piracy.”
spite of the leniency with which the United States was allowed into the Berne
Union, an act was implemented two years after the
to codify certain
aspects of moral rights for works of visual arts; this was the
Artists Rights Act
went into effect on June 1, 1991. It grants artists a continuing right
restrict the use and disposition of artistic works
that they have sold
private citizens and codifies “the doctrine that artists retain
inherent moral rights in their creations
even after those works have
This provision shifts
certain property rights from
the person who possesses the work of art back to the person who created
unprecedented property law alteration in United States law. VARA was
and implemented because: “[a]n artist’s
professional and
personal identity is embodied in each work created by that artist. Each
work is a part of his or her reputation.
is a form of personal
expression (oftentimes painstakingly and earnestly
recorded). It is a
rebuke to the dignity of the
visual artist that our
distortion, modification and even outright permanent destruction of
32. Three specific rights are granted
to visual artists under VARA. They are the right of attribution, the right of
integrity and,
in the case of works of visual art
of “recognized stature,” the right to prevent destruction.
Although moral rights were not recognized in the United States prior to
the enactment
of VARA, some state legislatures had enacted
moral rights laws, and a
few judicial decisions accorded some moral rights protection under
various theories of copyright, defamation,
invasion of privacy, unfair
competition and breach of contract.
This last theory is
perhaps especially important in U.S. law because parties’ freedom
to contract to whatever terms they like
is a highly prized privilege.
Where VARA differs significantly from its counterpart European laws
alienability of moral
rights. Under VARA, there is a provision for the
of moral rights through a signed, written agreement specifying the work
precise uses to which the waiver applies.
Congress determined that an
artist’s rights “should not be absolute, but that they
tempered by commercial
realities, provided that provisions were enacted
to insulate authors from being unduly influenced to give away their
new-found rights.”
to some, VARA’s problem lies in its restrictiveness: it grants
protection only to those artists whose works are included
VARA’s narrow definition of
‘works of visual art.’
But ‘real’ moral
rights do much more than just safeguard the alteration of the original
physical object; ‘real’
moral rights also guard against distortion of representations of the art
French law epitomizes the
other end of the moral rights spectrum in terms of ideology.
“Moral rights arise from the French
concept that a creative work
contains the
personality of its creator or author. Copyright is a property right,
while the author's
moral right is an extension of the author's
character and
personality. Personality is not transferable,”
why moral rights are perpetual, inalienable, and descend to the heirs of the
author, even after the author transfers the
economic rights to another person or
Indeed, Art. L 111-1 of the French Code of Intellectual Property provides that the author of a work enjoys a property
right in that
work by dint of the fact that it came from his or her soul, and
that the right in that work is exclusively
built-in to the
Professor Pamela Samuelson, an
intellectual property
law specialist and scholar currently at the University
of California at Berkeley,
thinks that “the rights of the author to control the integrity of the work are
considered by several European
countries to
be the key rights, and the economic rights are
secondary.”
In addition to the Berne Convention’s stipulations
for the rights to integrity and attribution, French law provides for
the right of disclosure, the right to withdraw or retract and the right
to reply to criticism.
The right of disclosure
prevents a publisher from modifying an author’s work, except with
the author’s written permission. The right to withdraw
allows an author whose views have changed or who is unhappy with his or
work to purchase any remaining copies of that
work at wholesale price
and prevent future printing.
The right to reply to criticism gives
an author the right to reply to a critic and to have that reply
published in the same forum
as the critique, thereby promoting
discussion and debate. The same plaintiffs from the Soviet Union in the
Shostakovich
, sued under the same
premise in France; not surprisingly, perhaps, they won
Other Traditions
Between the
United States’ relative disregard for moral rights and
France’s great emphasis thereon, there are of course
that hover somewhere in between. One such example is Russia.
on an author the rights of
or her work taking into account legally adapted rights and interests of
persons. “He
may also prohibit third persons [from using] his
without his…permission.
It is obvious that [the] author may apply both
existing modes of use of
his work and those which will come
in [the] future. With some kind of reserve we
may say that the totality
of copyrights is divided into two parts:
personal property rights and
moral rights.”
Specifically, a Russian author is granted an
inalienable right of recognition as the creator of the product, a right to the
integrity, a right to use the work under the
author's name or a fictitious name, and a right to make the work public.
While Russia’s main concern during its transitional years from
communism may be to dampen ubiquitous pirating of intellectual
their laws reflect some of the ideological
underpinnings of European models.
Denmark, moral rights laws are in place but the perpetuity of the right
questionable. According to a Danish report in the
1990s, the perpetuity
moral right of integrity was not necessarily a good idea.
“’…European law would perhaps
be better off if the
Moral rights always ran out with copyright…modern society
obviously cannot be forced by law to respect
the integrity of
works only because they are called works of
In contrast, Spain expressly provides for
the perpetuity of moral rights.
Netherlands
“decidedly does not belong to the group of countries which
recognize an eternal moral right, with the State
acting as a watchdog over the
integrity of works, as well as with all the ensuing dangers for freedom of expression and information.”
Clearly, there
is no consistent adherence to any one moral rights scheme, even
throughout Europe, and despite the Berne Convention’s
emphasis on
moral rights as the primary justification for copyright
Digitization and Digital Rights
38. “The Internet holds out the promise of broad
electronic boulevards down which the creative output of our age will travel
effortlessly.”
This writing focuses on the situation of
visual art and imagery, as opposed to music and other audio content, as it
exists in tangible
form and on the Internet. The most prevalent – and
controversial – system by which intellectual property owners are trying
protect their visual work online is through digital rights management
“DRM covers the description, identification, trading,
protection, monitoring and tracking of all forms of rights usages over
tangible and intangible assets including management of rights
holders’ relationships. Additionally, it is important to
DRM is the ‘digital management of rights’ and not
‘management of digital rights,’”
important distinction to remember since digitization does not necessarily
require a new set of rules, just the application
old rules to new
technology. “The technologies for identifying and labeling
have been present for several years. Watermarking,
identifiers, and
fingerprinting are the names given to these technologies, which have multiple
functions and modes.”
It is also important to note
that the definition of DRM varies depending on its context and the
author; as a relatively new concept,
it has yet to be immortalized in
most law dictionaries.
DRM may describe a kind of rights
validation to ensure that content being created from existing content
includes the rights to do
so, or it might describe the management of permissions to
enable the usage environment to honor the rights associated
with the content.
For example, if a user only has the right to view the document, then DRM
technology could prevent that document
from being printed.
DRM may mean a whole host of other things as well, such as
digital signatures and encryption, which are interesting but tangential
to this writing.
40. For copyright owners, digital networks
represent both a great opportunity and a great threat.
traditional copyright system has endeavored to maintain
between protecting creators’ property rights and
the exclusive right
control use of copies of their work, and the public good in fair
access to and use
of such materials.”
balance is now more precarious because of digital technologies and the manner in
which they have changed how people access and
information.
The digital environment poses a unique threat to the rights of
that undermine copyright interests. In contrast to the analog
experience, digital technology
enables pirates to reproduce
and distribute perfect copies of works
– at virtually no cost at all to the pirate. As technology
advances, so must our laws.
“The key difference
between digital and analog identifiers lies in the ease of embedding any
digital information in digital
content. The information can be permanently,
invisibly and indelibly attached to a digital
Watermarking
42. Watermarking is
often cited when discussing copyright protection technologies.
A watermark is information embedded on an image
that is often, but not always,
imperceptible.
Generally, digital watermarking serves two primary
uses: first, to control use of the work by placing instructions in the
that limit the uses a device may make of the work; second, to identify
watermarks.
The embedded information can be extracted by
special software. For example, the first type of watermark, a
‘watermarking detector,’
can, when applied to content that
is suspected to have been pirated, check if the content bears the
and thereby prove or
disprove the suspicion.
The second type of
watermark, a ‘transaction watermark’ allows the establishment of a link
between an arbitrary user
with the content he or she ‘touched.’
This practice, also called ‘fingerprinting,’ is widely used
“by photo agencies, who place their name or logo on
a copy of a
photo for promotional purposes, and
then deliver the picture without the marking once payment has been
Corbis Corporation and DRM
43. Corbis Corporation, created by Bill Gates in the early
1990s, provides services for licensing images in advertising, books, newspapers,
magazines, on TV, on the Internet and in films.
It offers solutions that enable publishers, advertising and design
to enhance their products with photography, fine art,
illustrations and
by managing the intellectual property rights of the copyright holders
of these various forms of visual
content. “In a world where the
arrival of digital technology has brought serious challenges to
and film, Corbis is that rare thing: a
that believes copyright protection and commercial use of the Internet
Steve Davis, an attorney and
the chief executive officer of Corbis, notes that “in today’s online
market, you can’t
be in business without spending an enormous amount of
time thinking about how to protect intellectual property: how to restrict
to it, how to exploit and market it.”
For a large
percentage of its content, which is created expressly for licensing
its website, Corbis buys images on a contract
basis and licenses them
to organizations or individuals; photographers retain the copyright in
their work.
Fine Art at
44. A portion of Corbis’s website hosts an array of fine
art. “From masterpieces of
world art to the obscurities of well-known
artists, the Corbis collection brings together the most comprehensive selection
of art images in the world.”
The first licensing deal Corbis made was with a collection of classical paintings called Archivo
Iconografico; in fact, Mr. Gates
initially targeted museums and art galleries
based on his belief that there would soon be a market for digital images of
Mr. Davis recalls that, in 1993, “there
was no way that people could handle or pay for digital media from their
I remember a conference in Cannes when Phillipe de Montebello,
director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, said: ‘I
never, never, never,
have a digital
machine in my museum.’”
Now kiosks and interactive
displays are
commonplace.
Because of countries’
different copyright laws and the range of contractual relationships
between rights managers and rights
holders, any given “rights-
managed” image offered by Corbis will include a unique menu of
restrictions. A digitized
photograph by Brett Weston, a contemporary
photographer, for example, includes restrictions such as “Not
in clip art or clip photography product; Not available for fine
print use (limited editions of art value); and Image may not
any circumstances.”
Corbis’s image of Leonardo da
, on the other hand, stipulates that the image is
“Not available for display as artwork on plasma screens, LCD screens
electronic televisions or monitors; and not for use by or for
manufacturers or sellers of digital art products or digital display
Perhaps the rational here is that the plasma
screen would too closely replicate
the original artwork, although, in terms of other
reproductive media, poster replications of the
are widely available, begging the question
whether the
ban on digitization will endure.
Moral Rights and
Digitization
46. Inherent in this discussion of new technologies and
the ability to view, use, and disseminate cultural images in digital formats
the fact that these images are transformed from one media to another when they
are digitized and essentially changed.
a digital image’s
very existence is acceptable when discussed in the context of moral rights
is often skipped over when the
analysis involves when and
digital image may be used. Copyright owners of priceless works of art
who have traditionally been generous in allowing museums to
catalogues that include an image of their paintings have been hesitant
to allow museums to upload those same images
The digitization of works on media such as
CD-ROMs or computer memories and transmission of these works over
telecommunications
networks are revolutionizing the exploitation of
products. This explains the current trend to transfer protection to
a development that has definitely gathered speed with the
creative techniques and is tending to distort the function of the
as the eighteenth-century philosophers conceived
natural property at the service of the creative
Any image incorporated into a multimedia platform must, by definition,
be digitized. “The downside to digitization is that
the content
is reduced to a source code comprising a configuration of 1s and 0s. In
this state, the
information may be easily manipulated,
making it very simple for either
the developer or the end user to alter the original work.”
In addition to the
ease with which an
unprotected image may be altered, the digitization scenario begs
question whether the artist
is or should be at ease with the
transformation
of his work into “1s and 0s.” Other
aspects of an image will likely be
altered during digitization. Its size and
most likely its color tones will be altered. This could ostensibly amount to
treatment, although, even on an international scale,
“[t]here is a dearth of case law in this
Perhaps, though, there are new moral rights being inadvertently granted
by dint of digitization: “[C]opyright law grants
a new right of
authentication, a digital counterpart of the moral right, or a right of
attribution, akin to the continental moral
right, in countries, such as
the United States, where such
a right did not heretofore exist.”
Professor Ginsburg
made the point that the DMCA “may contain the seeds of a more
general attribution right: with sufficient
ingenuity and effort, these
seeds might be made to germinate…. Inclusion of the
name in protected copyright
management information suggest that the
law finally affords authors of all works…a right to recognition
authorial status.”
The right of attribution, discussed above, entitles an author to claim authorship in his or her work. In
the digital sphere, the
technological link between the digital document and the
author’s name could provide that right without accompanying legislation.
Ensuring that
it is the author’s name to which an image links instead
of the identity of the producer, however, could be a
50. The upside to the above predicament is
that, although “new forms of communication are a threat to the
exclusive copyrights…[they
are] also a big possibility for gaining more
markets, which could become a key to much more
compensation.”
The compensation issue begs the question: who is being compensated. If
it is the artist himself, then his
consent to digitization
is one set of issues; if it is an
artist’s agent,
heir or benefactor that is another. The issue has not been addressed
consistently
under the auspices of moral rights or author’s
rights. While nations like France deem these rights to be inalienable
agent could pressure an artist to give them up, the potential benefits
of digitization understandably prevent a “right against
digitization” from becoming part of a moral rights code. That
said, the potential harm of digitization in terms of a
and susceptibility to piracy has not
been directly addressed, but there are many interested parties who are
“alarmed about
the potential for fraud and artistic counterfeit in the wildwest world
digital commerce.”
authors, and not producers or distributors, have the same type of control with
DRM that they enjoy
with tangible
and DRM Options
51. Museums preserve cultural integrity and diversity and fulfil their mission of exhibiting their collections to
national and international
Whether part of that mission includes the usage of digital technology
to disseminate
information and imagery over the Internet is
uncertain. Many museums
collections include manuscripts, photographs, paintings, sculpture and
artifacts have digitized
images of these works and displayed them on
the Internet. While digitization can be expensive and technically
it also holds the
possibility of promoting economic
development, academic research and education. Furthermore, it could
to manage and exploit their collections and to make their
riches available to any person in the general community with access
a computer network, a result that is probably very compatible with the
mission statement of most museums.
many very laudable goals may
be reached by digitizing collections, there are intellectual property
that have not been fully addressed. “These
concerns have sometimes paralyzed those who would otherwise
enthusiastically embrace
the new technologies…with many museums, rights administration
are currently based on a physical, print model
publication and distribution, and do not envisage the possibility of
digital images of
the works.”
Digitizing a
collection ostensibly allows a
museum to reach a wider clientele, to obtain assistance in managing
rights and reproduction,
to gain national or international promotion
and marketing services, and to thereby increase
Possible disadvantages include the loss of control in
various important capacities, such as the selection of licensed content, the
quantity and quality of the image, and pricing
“The cultural embodiments of learning and entertainment are
already spinning inexorably across the Internet which knows no
boundaries.”
digitization projects clearly raise policy, technical and financial
issues that should be addressed before museum images
are displayed in a
environment.
Cultural heritage institutions are developing new
projects for online licensing of their collections. The Art Museum Image Consortium
), a not-for-profit organization of institutions
with collections of art, collaborates to enable educational use of museum
multimedia.
It provides a database documenting over 100,000 digitized artworks from
several North American museums, “highlighting the creative
of cultures around the
world, from prehistoric to contemporary times, and covering the
complete range
of expressive forms.
Cultures and time periods represented range
from contemporary
art, Native American and Inuit art, to ancient Greek, Roman,
works, along with Japanese and Chinese
Another model of a digital museum
collection is Russia’s Hermitage Museum. With the collaboration
Corp., The Hermitage
has a fully-searchable online catalog of its
collection. A visitor to the website can search or browse the entire
collection; once
an image is located, the viewer can select from a menu
screen resolutions and angles at which the painting or artwork was
photographed.
The usage policy, to which the website viewer must
navigate on
his own, is succinct: “The contents of this site, including
images and text, are for personal, educational, non-commercial use
only. The contents of this site may not be reproduced, in
whole or in
part, in any form without the written permission of the State Hermitage
Museum. Images on this web site have been invisibly
watermarked; any
attempt to remove the watermarks from these images is expressly
forbidden.”
The AMICO model uses the preemptive form of digital rights management,
wherein it allows access to the images only through a specific
agreement with an educational entity or institution. The Hermitage
model allows access to anyone who has access to the Internet.
Corbis website, the Hermitage Library transfers the onus of copyright
infringement
responsibility to the end user. For example,
it does not
technologically
prevent someone from right-clicking on an image and saving it to her
hard drive or using it as wallpaper,
which would probably be an
acceptable usage of the image, but it has the technological capacity to
out that kind of information
and thereby bring suit against any entity
that uses its images in a fashion inconsistent with its
56. Another model is demonstrated by an older system used by the
Getty Museum for its website.
In 2002, the Museum implemented a copyright scheme whereby all images on the J. Paul Getty
Museum website larger than a thumbnail
contained a watermark stating who
owns the image; a click would bring the user to the Getty copyright
“We protect what we need to protect;” other
than that, “we encourage you to rip, mix and burn. After all, it's
cultural heritage.”
The Getty’s website currently
operates similarly to that of the Hermitage.
Non-Museum Art and
57. Another possibility in licensing digital content is to
go through a collective rights organization. For example, the Media Image
Resource Alliance
based in New
Jersey, is a joint project of the Copyright Clearance Center and
the Association of Media Photographers. The VERDI
project (Very
Rights Data Information Project) is a European multimedia information
and licensing network between nationally-managed
clearance services designed to facilitate rights trading. By linking
together these existing rights clearance centers, “VERDI
simple and cost-effective Internet-based service for multimedia rights
clearance. VERDI will provide the producer the
services and information
for obtaining the right to use pre-existing content in his multimedia
production.”
Collecting societies are private societies established
by authors and proprietors
of neighboring rights with the objective of
protecting their rights collectively in areas of use where individual
collection is not possible. Most collecting societies perform
functions. They license works in which they hold the copyright or for
they act as agent on behalf of their members
for specific uses; they
use and collect revenues; they distribute revenues
as royalties to members; and they enter into reciprocal
arrangements
with foreign collecting societies to collect and distribute local
royalties to foreign
rightsholders and to receive
and distribute royalties earned overseas
to local rightsholders.
59. In the majority of
contexts in which it is defined and discussed, collecting societies are
more important to the music industry
than to that of visual arts. As mentioned
above, the first collecting society, SACEM, was formed in France
in the mid-1800s. It served
as a model for other societies such as the UK
Performing Rights Society (PRS), German Gesellschaft fur Musikalische
Auffuhrungs
and Australia's Australian Performing Right Association
The American
Society of Composers, Authors & Publishers (ASCAP)
was established
in 1914 and has flourished. Despite the number
of collecting societies,
“there is no single collective rights management body covering
countries or all of the web. As
with most commercial and intellectual
property law there is instead a patchwork: resplendent in places,
in others.”
Reciprocity is encouraged by the Confederation
Internationale des Societes Auteurs & Compositeurs (
International Federation of Reproduction Rights Organizations, the Bureau
International des Sociétés Gérant
les Droits D'Enregistrement et
les Reproduction Mecanique and other bodies. CISAC has been active in
encouraging international standards
for the identification of copyright works,
exchange of rights information between databases and the development of
electronic copyright
management and digital rights management
60. Founded in 1926, CISAC is a non-governmental, non-profit organization. Its headquarters are established in Paris, with
offices in Buenos Aires
and Singapore.
CISAC works towards increased recognition and protection of
creator's rights. As of January 2004,
it represents 209 authors' societies
countries. CISAC indirectly
represents more than 2 million creators, covering all the artistic
repertoires: music, drama,
literature, audio-visual works, graphic and
visual arts, although income from music currently represents well over
90% of all revenue.
Most of the international academic studies of the
state of collecting societies has focused on the music sector,
because of the interaction of bundles of rights and uses and
the size of the market.
Its activities are aimed at improving the position of authors and
composers, and at enhancing the quality of the collective
administration
of their rights throughout
the world. With the growing importance of the Internet and its
challenge to the
administration of authors'
rights, CISAC reinforces its role as a
service-driven
organization. Insofar as a conduit through which an artist’s
moral rights
might be enforced, collecting societies seem to play a very limited
role, even in France. There, courts have been extremely hesitant
accept commencement
of legal actions of persons other than family members
of an author or
In the United States, of course, moral rights, if they
exist at all, expire with the artist.
61. The Artists’ Rights Society (
), an American company, is an affiliate of
CISAC. ARS is the “preeminent copyright, licensing, and monitoring
organization for
visual artists in the United States. Founded in 1986,
ARS represents the intellectual property rights interests of over 30,000 visual
(painters, sculptors, photographers, architects and others) and
estates of visual artists from around the world.”
The current struggle regarding collecting societies revolves around the
the Internet and the new role of digital rights
management in a realm
the collecting societies have overseen for so long. An international
symposium is taking place in Switzerland
at the end of June of this
year to address the very topic; its title
is Digital Rights Management: The
End of Collecting Societies?
. The objective of this symposium is
to take “a critical look at the challenging and equally important issues
of content distribution
in the digital era. The focus is placed upon the
controversial relationship between DRM and Collecting
Societies.”
Photographs of Paintings and Digitization of Photographs of Paintings: The Bridgeman
Case and the Public Domain
62. As mentioned above in the discussion of the importance of moral rights for imagery on the Internet,
much of this discussion is
based on the interest of the author in his work,
assuming that there is one. In many cases, however, when
a work falls into
domain, or when there are no provisions for the
continuity of a
deceased artist’s moral rights, there is no moral rights law
with which an
entity must tangle. While French law passes some moral rights from the artist
onto his or her heirs, many countries
do not; the artist’s moral
rights interest in the work ends upon his or her death. For this reason, some museums
works do not need to grapple with the questions like
whether the painter of a 13
century icon painting would have been
horrified at the digitization of his work; he is not alive and possibly
anonymous. The vast
majority of museums, however, do need to deal with it to
some extent. The Louvre’s online image of Leonardo da Vinci’s
, for example, includes a copyright line that reads: “R.M.N./H. Lewandowski - Le Mage – Gattelet.”
R.M.N. stands for la Réunion des Musées Nationaux, a
institution that was founded in 1895 to raise and
administer the funds
required for the acquisition of works of art by national collections.
the 1930s, it took over the publication of postcards, guides and
catalogues for
the national museums’ permanent collections
and the temporary
exhibitions
organized by the R.M.N. This publishing activity — extended to
audiovisual publications, and,
1993, to multimedia — has flourished in recent years and the
R.M.N.’s structure has changed accordingly. Today,
also disseminates cultural material, striving to reconcile its mission
as a public service with market
forces. The three
names that follow the “R.M.N.” attached
of the Mona Lisa are photographers who are members of the Photographic
Agency of the R.M.N.
In this sense, the Louvre
website operates much like that of Corbis. The original artist is credited, of
course, but the copyright
in that image of the Mona Lisa is ascribed to the
R.M.N. and these photographers.
The reproduction of fine art in new media, such as digitized images on
the Internet, poses new problems for traditional rules.
States was given some
controversial guidance on the principle in the 1999 case
Bridgeman Art Library v. Corel Corporation.
The Bridgeman Art Library is a British company that acquires photographs of works of art in the public
domain and then licenses the
use and reproduction of these photographs.
Corel is a Canadian corporation that sells computer
software products, one of which was
a set of seven CD-ROMs containing seven hundred
photographic images of
public domain paintings by European
artists. Corel claimed to have obtained the images from a source other
than Bridgeman, but Bridgeman filed suit against Corel for the 120
images that looked identical to those in the Bridgeman collection,
for which Bridgeman claimed copyright. At issue was whether a
photograph of
a two-dimensional painting is copyrightable, and
the court ultimately
While this decision’s ramifications may
be quite broad, they will not necessarily be injurious to the image
houses that
currently license the photographs. The two most fertile corporations in
this domain are Getty Images and Corbis. Getty Images recently
the Bridgeman Library’s images and now offers them in digital
rights-managed licensing. While Getty Images
may not be able to claim
to own the copyright in these images, as per the
Art Library
it has the advantage of having access to
Bridgeman photographs, which are of very high quality. For an amateur
a similar photograph would be difficult at best; to locate the
painting and
gain permission to do so would likely be even more of
challenge. One of the
Bridgeman Art Library’s images was the
. A high-quality image of the
Mona Lisa is now
available on Getty Image’s website for licensing. The text below the image
“The Bridgeman Art Library (rights-managed).”
66. At the beginning of this writing, three possible
venues were presented at which
to view one of Amedeo Modigliani’s paintings
of Jeanne Hébuterne. The first was the website
www.artnet.com, a “place to buy, sell and research fine art
Its Online Gallery Network comprises images from over 1,300 galleries,
36,000 works and 13,000 artists from around the globe. “The
Network serves dealers and art buyers alike by providing a survey of
the market and its pricing trends, as well as the
means to communicate
instantly, inexpensively and globally.”
While the images at artnet do not have an
attached copyright line and generally seem to be downloadable, there is
Conditions policy on the website. Among its provisions,
artnet claims: “You may not modify, create derivative works from,
participate
in the transfer
or sale of, post on the World Wide Web, or in any
way exploit the Site or any portion thereof for any public or
without the express written
permission of artnet.com. You may download one
(1) copy of Content from the
Site for your personal
use, provided that you
maintain all copyright, attribution and other notices contained in such
Content, including without limitation
trademarks and service marks of
artnet and its affiliates or the copyright holder identified in the
individual Content's copyright
notice. You acknowledge that you do not
acquire any ownership rights by downloading copyrighted material.
responsible for
complying with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations
regarding your use of any such downloaded Content. In the event of any
permitted copying, redistribution or publication of material from the
Site, no changes in or deletion of author attribution, trademark,
legend or copyright
notice shall be
The next place suggested by the
writer in order to view the digitized image of this Modigliani painting
was through the Gettyimages
website. A Getty photographer, Odd
photographed the painting being hung on a wall
at Christie’s auction house on
January 29, 2004. The caption to
reads: “LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM: A Christie's auction house porter
adjusts Italian
painter Amedeo Modigliani's “Portrait de Jeanne
Hebuterne,” estimated value 5-
7 million pounds (7.3-10.2 million euros)
in London, 29 January 2004.
painting is part of Christie's 19th & 20th century art evening
sales week,
expected to fetch
a total of 75 million pounds (109.5 million
euros)…Restrictions: This image is only available in
Getty Images offices in the
United Kingdom, United States, Germany (Austria,
Switzerland via Germany), Hong Kong, Singapore, and
Australia.”
68. In addition to these specific restrictions for this
image, Gettyimages states in its Terms and Conditions section that:
elements of Getty Images websites, including, but not limited to, the
general design and the Content, are protected by
trade dress, copyright, moral rights, trademark and other laws relating
intellectual property rights. Except as explicitly permitted
another agreement with Getty Images or one of its subsidiaries or
content providers, no portion or element of this
website or its Content
copied or retransmitted via any means and this website, its Content and
related rights shall remain
the exclusive property of Getty Images or
its third party content providers unless otherwise expressly agreed.
Content (including
photographic images) purchased or otherwise acquired
by you via the Site may only be used by you for personal, non-
(i.e., not for re-sale or re-distribution) and may not be
duplicated or otherwise reproduced or altered by
As the painting did not sell for the
reserve price set by the auction house, it was probably returned to the
owner. Perhaps
it is hanging in his or her home. What would Amedeo
think of his paintings being digitized and exhibited in these various
fora? There is no text attached to the images that explains who his
subject is or why he painted her. He painted this particular
oil; would he
have condoned this work being uploaded onto the Internet at all? Is it
foregone conclusion that web dissemination
of an image of art is a
society? A benefit to the artist?
Modigliani was born in
Livorno, Italy, in July 1884. Both sides of his family were Sephardic
Jews. His father Flaminio
was an unsuccessful entrepreneur who had
a small money-changing business, and his mother, Eugenia, ran an
experimental school.
moved to Paris in 1906, at the
age of 22. He struggled for several years with periods of poverty,
depression,
and difficult relationships. In July of 1917, he met Jeanne
Hébuterne, who was then aged nineteen. The two lived together
between the
French Riviera and Paris and had a child together the following year.
became pregnant again in May of 1919. A
few months later, Amedeo became
ill. In mid-January of 1920, he was bedridden and comatose, suffering
from tubercular meningitis.
He died on January 24, 1920, without
consciousness. There was an elaborate funeral, attended by the whole of
neighborhood of Paris. Jeanne, who had been taken to her
parents’ house, threw herself out of a fifth floor window two
after Modigliani's death, killing both herself and her unborn
71. Amedeo and Jeanne’s surviving daughter, also named Jeanne, created the
“Archives Légales
Amedeo Modigliani”
(Legal Archives of Amedeo Modigliani)
in 1983, a cultural association registered with the Paris Police Prefecture. The
creation of
this organization, upon the decision of Jeanne
Modigliani, aimed to classify and protect the works of the artist. For 15
association has
been working along these lines, faithful to its
initial objective: to safeguard the
worldwide spread of the knowledge
artist's works and the historical and esthetic information regarding
The website has an image archive of thumbnails for possible licensing. Modigliani’s estate is not handled by the
United States’
Artists Rights Society, as are many other famous artists; however some of his works are available,
the Bridgeman Art Library collection, discussed above, as well as at various
museum websites,
and in printed
catalogues.
The reason one believes this detailed
promenade through the significance and reinvention of
Modigliani’s Portrait of Jeanne
Hébuterne is important to
writing is that it demonstrates the frenetic nature of current rights
management systems with
regard to copyright. Whether an artwork is in
public domain, whether the artist is alive, the nationality of the
artist, and
the country in which an artwork is infringed upon in some manner are
starting points to an analysis of the correct application
truly harmonize copyright protection for visual imagery would take more
loosely-worded international treaty since
deep-rooted cultural and
moral tenets
regarding the value of a creative work come into play and those values
vary dramatically, even
amongst parties to the Berne
Convention.
73. Before digital rights
management systems become more sophisticated, one would hope that WIPO
and other international
organizations
that are involved
in the regulation of the Internet consider
that there is no fast way to streamline copyright protection for images
Internet. The blessing and curse of the
Internet is its ubiquity. The
blessing and curse of advanced technology is the ease
imagery can be
transformed and manipulated. The challenge inherent in this situation
from a single worldwide platform
on which to
view digital imagery but a gamut
of different ideologies as to how and whether those images should be
available. Who,
then, should make the ultimate decisions? “The
parameters of the debate regarding copyright law have historically been
and continue to be shaped, by legislators and
lobbyists, with
little involvement by others. This trend persists in the debate
This, among many other issues, highlights that those who have an interest in the integrity and
distribution of their creative works
are not often the same people who have authority or
power of persuasion insofar as the law regarding this
issue is concerned.
74. Technology continues to reinvent itself. Bill
Gates, Corbis’s owner, has approximately 30 flat-screen monitors in
“generally shuffle the images displayed
monitors every week.
Nearly always they come from Corbis’s stock of
million pictures. He likes sunsets and pictures to do with the Second
War, golf, sailing and Nobel Prize winners.”
possibility of viewing beautifully digitized artwork in this fashion is
an amazing triumph for visual technologies. Indeed, “[t]he
commodification of images of public domain works
of art makes it possible for
us to adorn our every day lives with images of fine
Interestingly,
most ‘fine art’ images on the Corbis website, like the Mona
mentioned above, and such
as a Modigliani painting of his wife,
stipulate that
the image is not available for display on big screen media. One hopes
kind of restriction will remain intact.
The foundational contention woven throughout the whole of
this writing is that the copyright equation is not a horizontal one
rights holders and the public. There is also an inherent element of the
equation that should guarantee that artists retain
some measure of
control over their creations. Copyright has long provided rights
holders with the ability to prevent unauthorized
uses of their
content. The law alone cannot prevent illicit uses, regardless of
whether they
are undertaken unfairly or legitimately.
In other words, “the moral content and legitimacy of a digital
The ultimate aim of
employing technical
measures to manage delivery of intellectual property must be “to
the requirements
of rights owners to control and protect the
distribution of content with the interest of consumers to have access
content…unless
trading in intellectual property entirely, it will be essential to find
to this paradox.”
The scope of copyright
protection still varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
“Confronted with this legal diversity and
the technical ease for
infringement offered by digital media, copyright holders [and artists
themselves] may be
reluctant to make
protected material available on-line.”
76. In the writer’s view, international copyright law is fragmented
and will remain
so in the immediate future. As was noted
almost ten years
ago: “Copyright from its historic beginnings centered around works of
literature and art in the
traditional
sense of the word; moral rights
have been developed with this in
mind…we must adapt our positions to
the new situation, in
order to save the principle as such.”
While an eventual international plan may eventually come into being,
the balance between rights-holders and consumers
must be equated
while taking into account the substantial rights of the
authors, whether they hold the economic-based copyright or not,
therein lies
a very difficult equation to balance on the international scale. Moral
rights are not dead yet, and it is incumbent
upon current policymakers
to balance the copyright
equation between rights holders, end-users, and, quite
importantly,
*J.D. Candidate, University of Washington School
of Law, 2005. The author would like to thank Eli Hinkel, Daniel Laster,
Mooney, Bryan Stech, Keane VanTrease, David Weiskopf,
Jonathan Zittrain, Corbis Corporation, and Christie’s Inc.
Artnet.com reports on the selling prices of certain pieces of art that have been
put up for auction.
http://www.artnet.com/Auction/AuctionsOnLineDetail_Preview.asp?LotID=2911902&Page=1&T=9&
AUID=26938 (last visited Feb. 24, 2004).
See www.gettyimages.com. To
find this particular image, type in “Christie’s” in the search
engine. Getty Images’
inventory of images is not permanent. This image
was last viewed Feb. 24, 2004.
See www.corbis.com. To find this
particular image, type in “Degas” in the search engine.
Like Getty Images’ inventory
of images, Corbis’ inventory
permanent. This particular image was last viewed Feb. 24, 2004.
Picassomio Art Posters, Danseuses en Bleue, available
at http://www.picassomio.com/posters/c1013,c10996,c12558/en/ (last visited
Feb. 24, 2004).
See The Pushkin Museum, Art of the Eighteenth and
Nineteenth Centuries, available at http://www.museum.ru/gmii/defengl.htm (last
visited Feb. 24, 2004).
Paul Goldstein, INTERNATIONAL
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW, 143 (Foundation Press, 2001).
Matt Jackson,
Harmony or Discord? The Pressure Toward Conformity in International
43 IDEA 607
, 611 (2003).
The original ten countries were
Belgium, France, Germany, Haiti, Italy, Liberia, Spain, Switzerland, Tunisia and
the United Kingdom.
The Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works, Paris Act of July 24, 1971, as amended on
September 28, 1979,
available at
http://www.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo001en.htm. [hereinafter the Berne
Convention] Art. 1 reads: “The countries
to which this Convention
applies constitute a Union for the protection of the rights of authors in
their literary and artistic works.”
See The Berne
Convention, Contracting Parties, available at
http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/documents/word/e-berne.doc (last visited
The Berne Convention, supra note 9. Art. 5 of the
Convention reads: “Authors shall enjoy…in countries of the Union
than the country of origin, the rights which their respective laws do now
or may hereafter grant to their nationals, as well as the
rights specially
granted by this Convention.” Id.
Graeme B. Dinwoodie, The
Development and Incorporation of International Norms in the Formation of
62 OHIO ST L.J. 733
, 741-42 (2000).
Convention, supra note 9, at Art. 6bis.
Jackson, supra
See the Berne Convention Implementation Act, available at
http://www.cni.org/docs/infopols/US.Berne.Convention.html (last visited
Richard E. Vaughan, Defining Terms in the Intellectual Property
Protection Debate: Are the North and South Arguing Past Each Other
When We Say
‘Property’? A Lockean, Confucian, and Islamic Comparison, 2 ILSA
J. INT’L. & COMP. L. 307, 321
Graeme B. Dinwoodie,
The Integration of International and Domestic Intellectual
Property Lawmaking, 23 COLUM. VLA J.L. & ARTS
307, 312 (2000).
Fred H. Cate, Introduction: Sovereignty and the Globalization of Intellectual
Property, 6 IND. J. GLOBAL LEG. STUD. 1, 1-2 (1998).
Jackson, supra note 7, at 643.
Mark V.B. Partridge, Choice of Law in
International Copyright Disputes, Pattishall, McAullife, Newbury, Hilliard &
Berne Convention, supra note 9, Art. 7.
Council Directive 93/98/EEC, Oct. 29, 1993, Harmonizing the term of protection
of copyright and related rights, available at
http://europa.eu.int/eur-
lex/en/consleg/pdf/1993/en_1993L0098_do_001.pdf. (last visited Apr. 4,
William Patry, Choice of Law and International Copyright,
J. COMP. L. 383
, 469 (2000).
For an excellent discussion of current
choice of law issues in copyright, see Patry, id.
Two treaties were
concluded in 1996 at the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in
Geneva. One, the WIPO Copyright Treaty
(WCT), deals with protection for authors
of literary and artistic works, such as writings and computer programs; original
musical works; audiovisual works; works of fine art and photographs.
The other, the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT),
certain “related rights” (that is, rights related to copyright): in
the WPPT, these are rights of performers
and producers of phonograms. There are
currently 46 States party to the WCT and 43 States party to the WPPT. The
United States is
party to both; France is party to neither. See generally
http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/index.html (last visited Apr. 5,
Raquel Xalabarder, Copyright: Choice of Law and
WIPO, Copyright, Frequently Asked Questions, available at
http://www.wipo.int/copyright/en/faq/faqs.htm#P21_3830 (last visited Apr.
Intellectual Property on the Internet: A Survey of
Issues, 81, para. 277. World Intellectual Property Organization,
Jane C. Ginsburg, Book Review: Balance in
International Copyright Law: The WIPO Treaties 1996: The WIPO Copyright Treaty
WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty: Commentary and Legal
Analysis. By Jorg Reinbothe and Silke von Lewinski, 2002. 26 COLUM.
ARTS 201, 216 (2003).
See Rochelle C. Dreyfus & Jane C.
Ginsburg, Draft Convention On Jurisdiction and Recognition of Judgments In
Intellectual Property
77 CHI.-KENT L. REV. 1065
Masato Dogauchi and Trevor C. Hartley, Preliminary
Draft Convention on Exclusive Choice of Court Agreements, Draft Report, March
2004, at 6, available at http://www.hcch.net/doc/jdgm_pd25e.pdf (last visited
April 17, 2004).
H.R. 1 juli 1988, NJ 1988, 1000.
Rstmt (2d) of Torts § 652c (1977).
Laboratories v Topps Chewing Gum Inc.,
[1953] USCA2 7
202 F. 2d 866
, 868 (2d Cir.
Daniel J. Solove and Marc Rotenberg, INFORMATION PRIVACY LAW,
162 (Aspen Publishers, 2003).
J. Thomas McCarthy, THE RIGHTS OF
PUBLICITY AND PRIVACY §5:61, at pp. 5-110 (2000).
Code Civil de la
France, Art. 9. “Chacun a droit au respect de sa vie privée. Les
juges peuvent, sans préjudice
de la réparation du dommage subi,
prescrire toutes mesures, telles que séquestre, saisie et autres, propres
empêcher ou faire cesser une atteinte à l'intimité de la
vie privée : ces mesures peuvent, s'il y a urgence,
ordonnées en référé.” Id.
S.A Multimania
Production v. Madame Lynda L., France Cybermedia, SPPI, Esterel. Cour
d’Appel de Versailles, June 8 2000.
Grundgesetz (Basic Law) art.
2, para. 1.
Gabrielle S. Friedman and James Q. Whitman, The European
Transformation of Harassment Law: Discrimination Versus Dignity,
9 COLUM. J.
EUR. L. 241
, 257 (2003).
In 1893, the painter James McNeill
Whistler was commissioned to paint a lady’s portrait. Whistler completed
the portrait with
the approval of the commissioner and exhibited it at a
Parisian Salon. The commissioner paid what Whistler thought an inadequate
amount, after which Whistler painted out the lady’s head. The
commissioner sued for the restoration of the painting, inter
alia, but the Court
of Appeals and the Cour de Cassation agreed that Whistler could not be compelled
to restore the portrait. See
John Henry Merryman and Albert E. Elsen, LAW,
ETHICS AND THE VISUAL ARTS, 308. (4th ed., Kluwer Law International,
Merryman and Elsen, id., at 309.
Nathalie C. Suhl,
Moral Rights Protection in the United States Under the Berne Convention: A
Fictional Work?, FORDHAM INTELL. PROP.
MEDIA & ENT. L.J. 1203, 1209
C. Aide, A More Comprehensive Soul: Romantic Conceptions of
Authorship and the Copyright Doctrine of Moral Right, U. TORONTO L.J.
215 (1990).
Florence-Marie Piriou, The Author’s Right to
Intellectual Property, DIOGENES, No. 196, Vol. 49; Pg. 93 (Dec. 2002).
Caslon Analytics Profile: Copyright Collecting Societies, available at
http://www.caslon.com.au/colsocietiesprofile.htm (last visited
BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY, 1025. (Seventh edition,
Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990, 17 USCA §§ 106A,
Berne Convention, supra note 9, Art. 6bis (1) and (2).
Id., Art. 6bis (2) and (3). “However, those countries whose legislation,
at the moment of their ratification of or accession
to this Act, does not
provide for the protection after the death of the author of all the rights set
out in the preceding paragraph
may provide that some of these rights may,
after his death, cease to be maintained. (3) The means of redress for
safeguarding the
rights granted by this Article shall be governed by the
legislation of the country where protection is claimed.” Id.
Visual Artists Rights Act, supra note 54, § 602 (d).
Suhl, supra
note 49, at 1228.
U.S. Const. art I., 8, cl. 8.
The Berne Convention Implementation Act, supra note 16.
See Roundtable Discussions on United States Adherence to the Berne Convention
(Nov. 25-26, 1987).
“Article 6bis of Berne has generated one
of the biggest controversies surrounding United States adherence to
Berne….Article
6bis would disrupt existing business
practices…” See H.R. 4262, The House Report on the Berne
Convention Implementation
Act of 1988, May 6, 1988.
Shostakovich v.
Twentieth Century Fox-Film Corp.,
80 N.Y.S.2d 575
Letter from Dr. Arpad Bogsch, Director
General, World Intellectual Property Organization, to Irwin Karp, Esq., June
Jon A. Baumgarten and Christopher A. Meyer, Effects of U.S.
Adherence to the Berne Convention, ENT. L. REP., Vol. 10, No. 11
“The BCIA as finally enacted is designed to leave present
American law on
this subject entirely unaffected. It emphatically
provides that the sum
existing U.S. legal principles (copyright "adaptation" rights, federal
protection against "false designations,"
and common law doctrines of
competition, privacy, and defamation) is in full and sufficient
compliance with
moral rights (and
other) provisions of the Convention, that Congress
not intend any part of the Berne Convention to be "self-executing," and
adherence neither expands nor reduces any such existing federal or
statutory or common law analogue of the rights of paternity
creator's right
to be credited as author of his or her work) or integrity (protection
harmful distortion or mutilation).
Although the new Congress is
expected to
consider certain moral rights-related issues, and individual plaintiffs
under current doctrine, the BCIA was structured to assure that
questions are addressed on their own merits, free of claims
obligations and precedents.” Id.
Merryman and Elsen, supra note
47, at 356.
The Visual Artists Rights Act, supra note 54.
George C. Smith, Chief minority counsel for the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on
Technology and the Law, Jan. 1991. See Merryman
and Elsen, supra note 47, at
H.R. Rep. No. 101-514, at 15 (1990).
Helmsley-Spear, Inc.,
[1995] USCA2 1261
71 F. 3d 77
, 83 (2d Cir. 1995).
Waiver of Moral
Rights in Visual Artworks, U.S. Copyright Office, Sep. 24, 1996, available at
www.copyright.gov/reports/exsum.html
(last visited Jan. 10, 2004).
Id. See also VARA, supra note 54, 106A (e), Rights of certain authors to attribution
and integrity, Transfer and Waiver. Id.
The Visual Artists Rights Act,
supra note 54, § 101.
Jane C. Ginsburg, Art and the Law:
Suppression and Liberty,
19 CARDOZO ARTS & ENT. L.J. 9
Robert B. Standler, Moral Rights of Authors in the USA
(1998), available at http://www.rbs2.com/moral.htm (last visited Apr. 14,
French Law No. 57-298 of 11 March 1957, Arts. 6, 9,
French Code of Intellectual Property Law of July 1, 1992,
Art. 111-1. “L’auteur d’une oeuvre de l’esprit
sur cette oeuvre, du seul fait de sa création, d’un droit de
propriété incorporelle exclusif et
opposable à tous.” Id.
Patric Hedlund, Artists’ Rights in the Digital Universe,
available at http://www.forests.com/digitfut.html (last visited Apr.
Id., Arts. 56, 32. For an excellent discussion of French moral
rights, see Thierry Joffrain, Deriving a (Moral) Right for Creators,
INT’L. L.J. 735 (2001).
“Droit de divulgation,” Id.,
“Droit de retrait ou de repentir,” Id., Art.
Shostakovich v. Twentieth Century Fox-Film Corp., supra note
Soc. Le Chant de Monde v. Soc. Fox Europe et Soc. Fox Americane
Twentieth Century, 1 Gazette du Palais 191 (13 Jan 1953), aff'd,
D.A. Jur. 16,
80 Cour d'Appel Paris.
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, Fourth
Session, Geneva,
Dec. 9-17, 2002. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/4/INF/5 Add., available at
http://www.wipo.int/documents/en/meetings/2002/igc/pdf/grtkf_ic_4_inf5add.pdf
(last visited Apr. 24, 2004).
See Overview Legal Framework for
Activities in the Sphere of Information Technologies in the Russian Federation,
available at www.outsourcing-russia.com/kb/
docs/legal/l16092-01.html (last
visited Apr. 24, 2004).
See, e.g., Erin E. Arvedlund, Hollywood
Competes with the Street in Russia; To Combat Rampant DVD Piracy, U.S. Film
Companies Cut
Prices, THE N.Y. TIMES, Apr. 7, 2004.
Adolf Dietz, The
Moral Right of the Author: Moral Rights and the Civil Law Countries, 19 COLUM.
V.L.A. J. OF LAW AND THE ARTS 199,
213 (1995), quoting The Report to the ALAI
Congress on Moral Rights, Antwerp, Belgium, Sept. 19-24 (1993).
Report to the ALAI Congress, supra note 90.
Craig Joyce,
et. al., COPYRIGHT LAW 37 (5th ed. 2001).
Ralph Oman, From Scourge to
Savior: How Digital Technology Will Save Authorship in the Age of the
Internet. WIPO International Forum
on the Exercise and Management of
and Neighboring Rights in the Face of the Challenges of Digital
Technology,
Spain, 1997, at 209. (WIPO Pub. No. 756 (E), 1998).
Iannella, Digital Rights Management Architectures, D-LIB MAGAZINE, June 2001,
available at http://www.dlib.org/dlib/june01/iannella/06iannella.html
visited Apr. 15, 2004).
Severine Dusollier, Some Reflections on
377 (2003).
See, e.g. BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY (7th ed.
Dusollier, supra note 96, at 382.
Dan L. Burk and Julie
E. Cohen, Fair Use Infrastructure for Rights Management Systems, 15 HARV. J.
LAW & TECH 41, 47 (2001).
See Intellectual Property on the
Internet, supra note 30, at 30.
Jim Lahore, Fair Dealing and the
Digital Agenda: Will the Copyright Balance Survive?, Vol. 18(1), Copyright
Reporter, 23-34 (July
Report of the House Comm. On Commerce,
H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, pt. 2, at 25 (1998).
Dusollier, supra note 96,
Jeffrey P. Cunard, Keith Hill and Chris Barlas, Current
Developments in the Field of Digital Rights Management, World Intellectual
Property Organization, Standing Committee on Copyright and Related Rights,
Tenth Session, Nov. 3-5, 2003, at 29, available at
http://www.wipo.int/documents/en/meetings/2003/sccr/pdf/sccr_10_2.pdf.
Markus Fallenbock, On the Technical Protection of Copyright: The Digital
Millennium Copyright Act, the European Community Copyright
Directive and
Their Anticircumvention Provisions, 7 INT’L J. COMM. L. & POL’Y
Id., at 30.
supra note 96, at 381.
See Corbis Corporation, Overview, available at
http://www.corbis.com/corporate/overview/overview.asp (last visited Apr. 18,
Alan Cane and Steve Davis, Images You Can Count On: Interview
Steve Davis, Corbis, Financial Times, London, Sep. 16, 2003, at 15.
Introduction to the Corbis Art Collection, available
http://pro.corbis.com/search/searchframe.asp?typ=set&isuid={9364dda5-2dd0-4b13-a1a4-
c4ee15f22e2c} (last visited Apr. 17, 2004).
Cane and Davis, supra note
See Corbis.com, image # WE001028 (last
viewed Apr. 30, 2004).
See Corbis.com, image # IH049206 (last viewed
Apr. 30, 2004).
Author’s conversation with a member of the
Department of Visual Resources at Harvard’s Fogg Museum, Summer
Piriou, supra note 51.
E. Gabriel Perle, John Taylor
Williams, and Mark A. Fischer, Electronic Publishing and Software, THE COMPUTER
LAWYER, Jan. 2000,
Simon Stokes, ART AND COPYRIGHT, 97. Hart Publishing, 2001.
Dusollier, supra note 96, at 390.
Id., at 391, quoting Jane C. Ginsburg, Have Moral Rights Come of (Digital) Age
in the United States?,
10 CARDOZO ARTS & ENT. L.J. 9
, 11 (2001).
Id., at 393.
Rainer Oesch, Licensing of Photographs in the Digital
Age, SEPI/ECPA Conference, Helsinki, Sep. 2003, available at
http://www.knaw.nl/ecpa/sepia/conferencePapers/Oesch.pdf
(last visited
Apr. 24, 2004).
Hedlund, supra note 81.
Dusollier, supra
note 96, at 399.
Intellectual Property on the Internet: A
Survey of Issues, supra note 30, at 111.
Michael S. Shapiro, Museums and the Digital Future, 18. International
Intellectual Property Institute, 2000, available at
http://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/studies/pdf/iipi_digital_museum.pdf
visited Apr. 24, 2004).
William Cornish, The Author as
Risk-Sharer, 26 COLUM. J.L. & ARTS 1, 11 (2002).
M. Shapiro,
General Counsel, International Intellectual Property Institute, First WIPO E-
Commerce Conference (Sep. 1999).
See AMICO, available at www.amico.org
(last visited Apr. 18, 2004).
See The AMICO Library, available
at http://www.amico.org/AMICOlibrary/contents.html (last visited Apr. 18,
The Hermitage Museum, Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.hermitagemuseum.org/html_En/00/hm0_7.html (last visited Apr. 18,
The current system seems to parallel that of the Hermitage,
i.e., there is no interference between viewing the thumbnail and a larger
image, and a viewer must take it upon himself to find and read the copyright
terms of use. See http://www.getty.edu/legal/copyright.html
visited Apr. 24, 2004).
Kenneth Hamma, Assistant Director for
Collections Information and Project Director for Getty.edu. See Martha
Lufkin, Tip-toeing through
the Jungle, THE ART NEWSPAPER, Jan. 2002.
See The Verdi Project, available at
http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/tecup/Verdi.htm (last visited Apr. 24,
Caslon, supra note 52.
See CISAC, International Confederation of Societies of
Authors and Composers, available at
http://www.cisac.org/web/content.nsf/Builder?ReadForm&Page=Article&Lang=EN&Alias=MAN-AR-
(last visited Apr. 25, 2004).
See Caslon, supra note 52.
Dietz, supra note 90.
See Artists Rights Society, available at
http://www.arsny.com/index.html (last visited Apr. 25, 2004).
The University of Lucerne Faculty of Law, The End of Collecting Societies,
available at http://www.unilu.ch/images/bilder_rf/Programme.pdf
(last visited
Apr. 25, 2004).
See Réunion des Musées Nationaux,
available at http://www.rmn.fr/index-gb.html (last visited Apr. 24,
Agence photographique de la Réunion des Musées
Nationaux, available at http://www.photo.rmn.fr/fr/index.html (last
visited Apr.
36 F. Supp. 2d 191 (S.D.N.Y.
The Bridgeman
Art Library has since been bought by Getty Images. “Getty Images
produces, preserves and markets the largest
collection of imagery in the
world.” See Getty Images, Our Company, available at
http://corporate.gettyimages.com/about/ (last
visited Jan. 30, 2004).
36 F. Supp. 2d at 195.
See www.artnet.com (last visited Apr.
See Artnet, Terms and Conditions of Use,
available at http://www.artnet.com/about/antscs.asp (last visited Apr. 25,
See Gettyimages, Site Terms and Conditions, available
at http://editorial.gettyimages.com/ms_gins/CFW/terms.aspx (last visited Apr.
See Amedeo Modigliani, biography, available at
http://www.artchive.com/artchive/M/modigliani.html (last visited Apr. 25,
Id., quoting Edward Lucie-Smith, LIVES OF THE GREAT TWENTIETH
CENTURY ARTISTS. Thames & Hudson, Sep. 1999.
Archives Légales Amedeo Modigliani, available at http://www.modigliani-
amedeo.com/ServENG.htm (last visited Apr. 25,
See Guggenheim
Museum, Le Sweater Jaune, available at
http://www.guggenheimcollection.org/site/artist_work_md_110_1.html (last visited
Apr. 25, 2004).
See Modigliani and the Artists of Montparnase,
available at
http://templates.earthstores.com/1129/proddetail.asp?id=4C41434D4173746F7265&prod=186511
visited Apr. 25, 2004).
Sharon Appel, Copyright, Digitization of
Images, and Art Museums: Cyberspace and Other New Frontiers,
6 UCLA ENT. L.
, 229 (1999).
David Usborne, Sitting Comfortably? Then
Gates will Tell You about His Other Firm, Independent on Sunday (London), Jan 18
Cunard et. al., supra note 105, at 11.
Christopher Jensen, The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same:
56 STAN. L. REV. 531
Id., at 12.
Michel A. Jaccard, Securing Copyright in
Transnational Cyberspace: The Case for Contracting with Potential Infringers, 36
J. TRANSNAT’L. L. 619, 661 (1997).
Dietz, supra note 90,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter