URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Winter, Ian --- "Social objectives in planning for affordable housing" [2009] ALRCRefJl 38; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 36
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 36–39 of the original
Social objectives in planning for affordable housing
By Ian Winter*
The Ten Commandments—despite being etched in clay tablets an age
ago—are today a subject of scholarly debate.
Some Biblical scholars maintain the third commandment (the one about not
taking the Lord’s name in vain) was originally about
swearing an oath of
cooperation with your neighbours rather than today’s version of
‘thou shalt not swear when a hammer
has whacked thine
It is argued that the
third commandment originally had a social objective—mutual collaboration.
Neighbourly assistance to bring
in the harvest was critical to survival. The
third commandment’s collective intent, while apparently obvious in its
social context, is re-interpreted in contemporary society in an
individualist manner—my hammer, my thumb, my oath.
As the third commandment has lost sight of its social objectives so too has
land use planning. Land use planning has social values
embedded within it, but
today these are rarely explicit. A conscious effort to make these obscured
social objectives part of the
public debate about metropolitan planning would, I
believe, advance somewhat stalled conversations in urban policy and planning
how we will live together successfully. One illustration of this is
planning for affordable housing.
Planning for affordable housing, at its best, makes the value judgment that
neighbourhoods in which households on a range of incomes
can afford to live are
better. It makes an explicit commitment to social difference and thereby
justifies the use of planning legislation
and practices to deliver an amount of
affordable housing that can either preserve or enhance the social mix of a
neighbourhood. It
is a rejection of socio-economic homogeneity—a rejection
of having lower income households living in one part of the city and
income households in another. It is also a value judgment that planning is
rightly concerned about the social dimensions of
the neighbourhood.
The South Australian Government provides a good example of land use planning
with explicit social objectives. It has made clear that
it is planning for
affordable housing to promote social mix in the community. Whether or not one
agrees with this particular social
objective, and the values that go with it, is
not my primary concern. The mere fact that the social objective is explicit is,
a starting point for a more constructive urban policy debate. But
this approach to land use planning is unusual. Is it unusual because
need more affordable housing? Is it unusual because we do not know how to plan
for affordable housing? Or is it unusual
because we have failed to debate the
social objectives of land use planning?
Do we need more affordable housing?
The National Housing Supply Council
State of Supply Report 2008
that ‘housing
affordability for first home buyers and private
renters declined over the decade to
proportion of lower income private
renters in housing stress increased to
from 43% in 1996.
Australian Housing and
Urban Research Institute (AHURI) research
finds that these circumstances will deteriorate
to 2045 as ‘the
number of lower-income
households in housing stress is projected to
increase by 84% (or 13,500 households per
Demography is a key driver of our housing affordability destiny. Single
person households represented 1.8 million or 25% of all households
in 2001. They
are the fastest growing household type and are projected to increase to between
2.8 million and 3.7 million (28% to
34%) of all households in
Households on one income find
it that much more difficult to meet housing costs.
Australians are also consuming more housing space. Despite the average
household size falling throughout the 20th century (from 4.5
to 3.0 persons),
and down to 2.51 persons in 2006, the size of houses has increased. The size of
houses grew one third between 1988
and 2008; from 181 square metres to 239
square metres. The average cost of housing in Australia rose in the same 10 year
$65,000 to $236,000.
On these figures there can be little doubt that we need to plan for an
increased supply of affordable housing.
Do we know how to plan for more affordable housing?
Nicole Gurran and colleagues in some recent work for AHURI found that in many
cities of the United Kingdom, Ireland, USA, and Netherlands,
the land use
planning system plays a central role in promoting the supply of affordable
housing. The approaches can be grouped under
five different strategic
objectives:
1. Increase housing supply
2. Reduce barriers to affordable housing development
3. Preserve and offset the loss of low-cost housing
4. Encourage new affordable housing
5. Seek a dedicated affordable housing supply in new
developments.
Different planning tools will be more or less effective in pursuit of such
strategic objectives dependent upon local land and housing
conditions.
For example, in high growth areas, protective mechanisms may be required to
retain existing levels of low-cost housing, whereas in
areas of lower land value
non-financial incentives could be introduced that encourage a proportion of the
development to be set aside
for purchase by social housing providers or
households.
1: Planning strategies and mechanisms for affordable housing
Strategic objective
Approach/mechanism
Increase housing supply
• Audit of potential residential land
• Government dedication/acquisition of land
• Land development or renewal authority
• Land development incentives/penalties
Reduce barriers to affordable housing development
• Audit existing planning controls
• Assess impact of proposed regulations on housing
affordability
• Development controls permit diverse housing, in as many areas as
• Faster approvals for preferred development
• Overcome local barriers to affordable housing construction
Preserving and offsetting the loss of low-cost housing
• Social impact framework
• Preserving particular house types at risk
• Assistance for displaced residents
Encouraging new affordable housing
• Graduated planning standards relating to building use and context
(eg boarding houses near transport require less parking)
• Planning bonuses/concessions on development standards for
designated affordable housing creation or contribution
• Fast track approvals for affordable housing meeting defined
• Fee discounts for affordable housing meeting defined criteria
Securing new dedicated affordable housing
• Voluntary negotiated agreements for affordable housing
contribution
• Inclusionary zoning—mandatory contributions for all
identified development in the zone to contribute to affordable housing
fund/supply
• Impact fees—mandatory contribution to offset impact of
development on affordable housing needs
The following table details a range of planning mechanisms that can be used
to pursue affordable housing
objectives.
The South Australians have progressed one of these
approaches—inclusionary zoning to secure new dedicated affordable housing.
In March 2005 the
Housing Plan for South Australia
was released with the
explicit aim of providing for affordable housing in major, new developments on
government land. Fifteen per
cent of such developments are to include affordable
housing with 5% being for those who have complex housing needs:
In implementing the 15% target, an important aspect of Housing SA’s
strategy has been to work closely with the Department of
Planning and Local
Government, and the Local Government sector to provide support for planning
mechanisms that provide specific provisions
and incentives for affordable
housing developments. Emphasis has also been on supporting socially inclusive
and sustainable communities
that provide a mix of household types throughout the
amendment to the
Development Act 1993
(SA) gave explicit legal definition
to affordable housing with the objects of the Act expanded to include ‘to
promote or support
initiatives to improve housing choice and access to
affordable housing within the community’.
Since July 2007 some 900 housing starts have been undertaken to meet these
affordable housing commitments in South Australia.
Other states and territories have taken steps, less comprehensive than South
Australia, to plan for affordable housing. Victoria and
NSW, through their
respective land development agencies, have instigated affordable housing supply
targets. VicUrban aims to have
25% of house and land packages sold in the lowest
quartile of house prices. In NSW, Landcom targets 7.5% of its house and land
to be sold at prices affordable to moderate income households. In
Western Australia, the East Perth Redevelopment Authority aims
to deliver up to
15% of all new housing as affordable housing. In the ACT, 15% of all new house
and land packages are to be sold
in the $200,000–300,000 price range.
We know how to use the planning system to provide for an increased supply of
affordable housing. We also know we need more affordable
housing. So why in
Australia do we not use our land use planning system more frequently to affect
an increased supply of affordable
housing? One reason is because we have not
debated and made explicit what the social objectives in planning for affordable
Planning and social values
Though contemporary land use plans might articulate social aspirations such
as ‘protecting liveability’, or ‘increasing
the supply of well
located affordable housing’, these lack a clear commitment to an express
social objective. What is meant
by ‘liveability’? Whose
‘liveability’? Does ‘increasing the supply of well located
affordable housing’
mean something about creating greater social mix, or
is it about access to jobs? Moreover, without the legislative change needed
drive them and the concrete measures needed to implement them, such statements
remain aspirations rather than clear strategic
objectives.
This lack of explicit social objectives in planning helps to explain the
apparent gulf between the views of suburban communities and
their governments on
our cities’ futures, on how we are going to live together. Plans for a
‘compact city’ seem
a long way from our suburban reality. All this
‘compactness’ at least seems to imply a different way of living,
social outcomes. Be it about neighbouring, noise levels, privacy, or
time spent with family and friends, these are all aspects of
social life in the
compact city that could be different. Yet rarely does land use planning
purposefully engage with these social
It is not that these social outcomes can simply be read from the urban form.
The physical dimensions of neighbourhood and cities do
not determine these
things, but they can shape them.
Observers of land use planning in Australia will recognise this long standing
critique that the physical, technical and aesthetic
dimensions of land use
planning have been embraced and practiced more readily than the social
This has long been the case despite the origins of Australian town planning
in the English social reform movement at the turn of the
19th century. Expert
analysts have explained why this is so and made sustained calls for social
objectives such as equity to be centre
stage in urban
One obvious reason for the lack of explicit social objectives is because it
is difficult. Debate of social objectives is not straight
forward. There is not
a singular, overarching ‘public interest’ that will come to a
comfortable consensus.
seems so subjective, judgmental and difficult compared to the
‘obvious’, ‘calculated’, ‘rational’
objective of higher population density. But our discomfort in discussing these
issues is no reason to bury them and pretend they
do not exist. Such
non-decisions also have particular social outcomes. As Skidelsky warns the
substitution of words for targets that
codify the uncodefiable, and the
substitution of bureaucratic directives for professional honour and wisdom, are
today too common.
We must drop
our ‘moral neutrality’.
The philosopher Michael Sandel, the 2009 Reith lecturer for the BBC, in
seeking to revitalise public discourse argues that in recent
decades we have
tended to shy away from debates about moral values—preferred to ignore
them and leave them undisturbed, conducting
public life without reference to
them but that this means suppressing moral disagreement.
A more robust engagement with our moral disagreements could provide a stronger,
not a weaker basis for mutual
housing and urban research community has an obligation to contribute to this
robust engagement in two ways. First, by being transparent
orientation, and there is healthy debate within journals such as
Theory and Society
on this matter. Second, by conducting research and
providing understanding of the issues important to public life. And this is why
AHURI is committed to working with all governments in Australia to develop a
national cities’ research program.
Land use planning is unavoidably value-laden. Land use planning affects the
shape and form of our residential environment. It shapes
how we live together.
It shapes our social relations. Decisions about whether to retain or supply
affordable housing in particular
neighbourhoods are decisions about what types
of households will be able to afford to be neighbours. They are decisions about
mix. They are judgments that social mix, social heterogeneity, is better
than social homogeneity. We need to identify such objectives,
debate them, and
pursue them—whatever they ultimately are—so that we can continue to
live together successfully.
* Dr Ian Winter is the Executive Director of the Australian Housing and
Urban Research Institute (AHURI).
D Bodanis, ‘A progressive
manifesto’ (2009) 154
National Housing Supply Council (2009)
State of Supply Report
J Yates et al (2008)
Sustaining fair
shares: the Australian housing system and intergenerational sustainability
Final Report No:111
, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute,
Year Book Australia
2008, 1301.0.
Australian Housing and Urban Research
Institute (2008) ‘International practice in planning for affordable
Research and Policy Bulletin
South Australian Government (2005)
Housing Plan for South Australia.
R Fincher, ‘Seeing cities and
their planning with diversity in mind’ (Paper presented at State of
Australian Cities
national conference, Adelaide, 28–30 November, 2007); B
Gleeson, ‘The endangered state of Australian cities (Paper presented
State of Australian Cities national conference, Adelaide, 28–30 November,
R Fincher, ‘Seeing cities and
their planning with diversity in mind’ (Paper presented at State of
Australian Cities
national conference, Adelaide, 28–30 November,
E Skidelsky, (2008) ‘The return
of goodness’ 150
Prospect Magazine.
M Sandel, ‘Markets and
Reith Lectures 2009: A new citizenship
, BBC Radio 4, 9
http://www.bbc.co.uk/ radio4/reith
at 20 September 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter