URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:35:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Griffith, Gareth --- "The Office of Attorney General in New South Wales" [2007] AULegHist 5; (2007) 11(1) Legal History 79
The Office of Attorney General in New South Wales
I The Attorney General as a Primarily Political Office
II The Attorney General in Britain
III The NSW Attorney General – Political History
IV The NSW Attorney General – Role in Prosecutions
V The NSW Attorney General – Prerogative Powers
VI The NSW Attorney General – Defender of the Courts
The Office of Attorney General in New South
As in other comparable jurisdictions, the office of Attorney General in NSW
is a ‘hybrid’ one, combining legal and political
functions. The
office pre-dates the establishment of responsible government in 1856. Except for
a brief period in the 1870s, the
Attorney General has been a Cabinet member,
often drawn from the Upper House of Parliament. Cabinet membership is in
contrast to
British practice, but consistent with the more political nature of
the office in Australia. The importance of having expert legal
advice on hand at
Executive Council meetings in colonial times may have been the reason for
including the Attorney General (and Solicitor
General) in the Cabinet in NSW.
Discussed is the evolving nature of the Attorney General’s legal
functions, including the office’s
declining role in prosecutions and in
the exercise of prerogative powers. The Attorney General’s continuing role
in defending
the integrity of the courts is also
considered.
The office of Attorney General has been called a ‘hybrid’
in that it combines seemingly
contradictory functions, some legal and quasi-judicial, some political. It is
both a legal and political
office therefore. Attorneys General are members of
Parliament, Ministers of the Crown and Chief Law Officers of the Crown.
to Diana Woodhouse, writing in a British context:
In constitutional terms the position of Attorney General is at best awkward and
at times barely sustainable. He is required to serve
two masters, the government
and the law, and thus to combine the role of a politician with that of a lawyer.
As a result, he is sometimes
expected to exhibit partisanship, and to pursue the
government’s interest and at other times to be independent, impartial,
upholding the public
One point to make is that the constitutional conundrum posed by the office is
more or less constant across Westminster systems of
government. Another is that
in different jurisdictions within that tradition a different balance has been
struck between the functions
of the Attorney General. The main concern of this
paper is to look at the state of play in NSW and Australia generally. First,
a comparative note can be made, looking at the position in Britain, as
a point of departure for Australian practice.
I The Attorney General as a Primarily Political
Taking the long view, over the course of the past 150 years or so the offices
of Attorney General in NSW, as well as in other Australian
said to have travelled in opposite directions to their equivalent in Britain.
Whereas the British position
has moved closer to what is described as
‘independent aloofness’, in NSW and Australia generally it is the
aspect of the office that has come to the fore. Attorneys General are
usually Cabinet members with a full array of departmental responsibilities
statutory powers.
In 1994 a controversial formulation of the political character of the office
was presented by the future Federal Attorney General,
Daryl Williams. He cast
doubt on the convention that the Attorney General acts independently of politics
by referring to the fact
that many functions are now performed by other
officers, including the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) in criminal
or have declined in importance. Here he referred to the decline in the
need to grant fiats in relator actions with the expansion
in the rules of
standing, and to the fact that legal advice is usually provided by the Solicitor
He concluded:
In the light of these circumstances, it ought to be concluded that the
perception that the Attorney-General exercises important functions
independently
of politics in the public interest is either erroneous or at least
Two years later Williams expressed similar views when in office, saying:
The public no longer perceives the Attorney-General as independent of political
imperatives. The Attorney-General, these days, is
not simply a legal adviser to
the Government but is clearly also a politician answerable to Parliament and to
the electorate.
II The Attorney General in Britain
These views can be contrasted with the present position of the office of
Attorney General in Britain, which can be summarised as follows:
The Attorney General is generally a leading counsel of established
reputation, is nominated by the head of the Bar and has precedence
QC’s. Similarly in NSW the Attorney General, whether or not himself a QC,
is the leader of the Bar.
The Attorney General provides legal advice to Cabinet, represents the Crown
in matters of public interest and supervises major public
prosecutions. On a
day-to-day basis, the common law functions of the Attorney General with respect
to prosecutions are handled by
Although holding ministerial rank, the Attorney General has only minor
administrative responsibilities and is not a member of the
The Attorney General is further removed from routine administrative issues
as each department possesses internal legal resources.
Unlike Australia
generally and NSW in particular, where the Attorney General represents the Crown
in the broader sense that the term
refers to all government departments, in
Britain ‘the Crown’ in this context refers primarily to the
Government machinery is structured so as to exempt the office of Attorney
General from involvement in most political and administrative
matters. Both the
Lord Chancellor and Home Secretary are Cabinet members with extensive
responsibilities for law reform and the administration
of justice, in the case
of the former, and for policing and the development of penal policies, in the
case of the
The position of the British Attorney General is described as one of
‘independent aloofness’. This is taken to mean that
the Attorney
General should not be involved in questions of government policy, should not
engage in robust political debate except
in relation to his portfolio, and
should be generally non-confrontational with respect to party
This ‘depoliticised’ conception of the Attorney General as an aloof
guardian of the public interest was not always so
clear-cut. Complicating
matters, until a Cabinet ruling of 1892 Attorneys General were permitted to
engage in private practice. The
independence of the Attorney General from
Cabinet interference in criminal prosecutions was also in question. Reviewing
around the turn of the 20
century, Edwards
it is impossible to discern a universal acceptance of the doctrine that the
Attorney General, in discharging his responsibilities
in criminal proceedings,
is completely independent of the executive. On the contrary, the assumption
that, in the case of political
crimes, the exercise of the Law Officers’
discretion is subject to the overriding decision of the Cabinet, has been amply
by the precedents reflected in the Most, Taggart and Tillett
Matters came to a head in the ‘Campbell affair’ of 1924, when the
Attorney General of the day Sir Patrick Hastings was
directed by Cabinet to
withdraw a criminal prosecution for incitement to mutiny against the editor of
the communist newspaper,
Workers Weekly
. The incident proved a turning
point on two counts. First, in asserting the independence of the Attorney
General from Cabinet direction.
Secondly, in establishing (or re-establishing)
the custom (if not convention) that the Attorney General should not be a member
Cabinet. Traditionally, this had been the position in Britain. A departure
was made in 1912 when Sir Rufus Isaacs was given a seat
in Cabinet, largely for
pragmatic reasons.
Following the
‘Campbell affair’ the former practice was reverted to and no British
Attorney General has been a member
of Cabinet since 1928. From this time, it
might be said that the independence of the Attorney General developed into a
of the constitution, as famously expressed in 1951 by Sir Hartley
Shawcross (later Lord Shawcross), Attorney General in the post-war
Government.
III The NSW Attorney General – Political
The significance of the British experience is that it formed the backdrop for
the development of the office of Attorney General in
the colonies, including
NSW. In this context a former Attorney General of South Australia (1970-75), L J
King, argues:
The history of the office in Australia has been different. From colonial times
the Attorney General has always been an important
political as well as legal
figure. He has been a member of the Cabinet and has frequently held other
portfolios.
The office of Attorney General in NSW pre-dates the establishment of
responsible government. Between 1788 and 1824 it was the Deputy
Judge Advocate
who decided on, and conducted, prosecutions in the Court of Criminal
judge and prosecutor was one of
the justifications for the establishment in 1824 of the separate offices of
Chief Justice and Attorney
The first Attorney General was Saxe Bannister, who arrived in the colony in 1824
and left two years later after fighting a duel with
Robert Wardell, a lawyer and
the editor of the
newspaper, an adventure from which both men
emerged unscathed.
Also established in 1824 was the first Legislative Council of which the
colourful Bannister was not a
From 1829 on Attorneys
General were Council members, most notably one of the great colonial
administrators, JH Plunkett, who served
as Attorney General from 1836 to the
establishment of responsible government in
During this period Supreme
Court trials were often conducted by the Attorney General personally. Plunkett
wrote of this time:
From the year 1836 to 1841 I discharged the duties of Attorney General without
the assistance of a Solicitor General. It was my duty
to give legal advice to
every Department connected with the government, to draft all Acts and support
them in their passage through
the Legislative Council. I was the sole adviser of
the entire magistracy of the Colony. In criminal business, the whole
responsibility
fell upon me as grand jury and public prosecutor, and in the
preparation and conducting of all trials in the Supreme
If Plunkett’s energy was enormous, so too was his influence. The
Sydney Morning Herald
He exercised important influence on general legislation, and we believe that
every measure tending to equalise the social conditions
and promote civil and
religious liberty amidst the various, and often hostile, elements of this Colony
has either been framed or
supported by
of responsible government in 1856 brought its own difficulties for the office of
Attorney General, some practical in nature,
others touching on points of
principle. Following British precedent the Attorney General would have to be
found from amongst the
leading members of the Bar. For
‘conservative’ administrations this was not a major hurdle. The
first Attorney General
in NSW under responsible government in the short-lived
Donaldson Ministry was the prominent barrister WM Manning. For more
administrations, however, the hurdle was that bit higher.
Cowper earned the ire of the Sydney Bar when, later in 1856, he appointed
Martin as Attorney General a few days before he was admitted as a barrister.
Claiming a violation of its privileges, the Bar
petitioned the Governor against
the appointment, only to be told by him that he could not refuse to take his
Demolishing the contentions of the Bar, Martin argued that the appointment of an
Attorney General was a matter for the Crown. He
It would be absurd to suppose that the Crown, which has the absolute right to
appoint directly to the highest grade in the profession
of an advocate, and to
regulate the inferior grade, and declare who shall or shall not be admitted to
it, is not at liberty to make
any one it pleases its Attorney General. As
against the Crown the barristers have no rights or privileges, for they are in
mode of creation the creatures of the
It was an era of short-lived and unstable administrations. When Premier on
his own account on three occasions, Martin also served
as Attorney General.
Other administrations found more innovative solutions to the difficulty. Cowper
(Premier on five occasions)
often had to accept makeshift arrangements,
including the appointment of the politically incompatible Plunkett as Attorney
in 1865. Likewise, in 1856 the ‘conservative’ Manning was a
member of the Donaldson Cabinet, whereas in 1868 during Robertson’s
Ministry he only became Attorney General on the understanding that he would not
be a member of the ‘liberal’
It helped in these
circumstances that the legal officers were drawn from the Upper House, making
the connection with ministerial
responsibility more tenuous. According to
Loveday and Martin, the same expediency had been resorted to by Cowper in 1858
and Forster
in 1859-60, when such arrangements, ‘scarcely compatible with
the principle of collective responsibility’, were ‘tolerated
many people believed the Attorney General should not be a member of
Explaining the
hybrid functions of the colonial Attorney General, Loveday and Martin
The Attorney General was made responsible to the Assembly for all judicial
establishments and for the administration of justice in
the department
reorganisation of 1856, and he was required to advise the ministry on all legal
questions and to assist in the preparation
of bills. However, he also had the
duties of Crown prosecutor and grand juror in the colony. Many people thought
that these could
not be performed by an officer politically identified with any
government.
Why then was the Attorney General usually a Cabinet member when this
contradicted British precedent? The answer may lie in the structure
of colonial
government, in which the Executive Council played a central role. Whereas the
Cabinet was a more informal body in this
period, in which the influence of
factions undermined cohesiveness, the Executive Council, consisting of the
Governor plus the Ministry,
was the ‘instrument of governmental
co-ordination’ by which Cabinet decisions were ‘given force and
legitimacy’.
The importance of having expert legal advice on hand at these important and
well-attended meetings may have been the reason for including
the Attorney
General (and Solicitor General) in the Cabinet in NSW. Significantly, it also
continued the arrangements in place prior
to responsible government.
The position changed in November 1873, during the first Parkes Ministry, when
the NSW Legislative Assembly resolved to abolish the
office of Solicitor
and to exclude the
Attorney General from the Executive Council (and by extension from the
Speaking for the
motion Parkes combined practical arguments with issues of principle. He said he
did not favour making the Attorney
General a non-political office, as many
suggested, as this would be contrary to the doctrine of responsible government.
rather, was to make the NSW position ‘on a level with the state
in England’, thereby bringing the ministerial arrangements
of the colony
‘more in accordance with Parliamentary Government’. Parkes said the
‘large proportion of the legal
element in the Executive Councils of the
Colony was anomalous’ and he went on to explain that
By removing the Attorney General from the Executive Council they would get rid
of what he thought was the most serious anomaly in
the present state of the
Crown law officers, which was this, that while the Attorney General was the
grand jury and the public prosecutor,
he in the last resort sat in the Cabinet
in judgment upon the cases which he had initiated and
Parkes also discussed conflicts arising from the fact that the Attorney
General could engage in private practice, saying ‘it
had very frequently
happened that the exigencies of that private practice seriously interfered with
his duties as Minister of the
Crown’. He even claimed that ‘it had
been the case more than once that the principal law adviser of the Crown had
briefs against the
Political waters ran fast and deep between these words. The immediate
background related to the resignation in November 1873 of Edward
Attorney General in the Parkes Government. Contrary to the usual British
practice of appointing the Attorney General to fill
the Chief Justiceship when
that position became vacant, Parkes overlooked Butler in favour of his rival for
the Premiership, Martin.
The bitterly disappointed Butler, a Roman Catholic,
claimed he had been ignored for sectarian
Not one to waste an
opportunity, Parkes sought to regain the political initiative by creating a
Minister of Justice and Public Instruction,
a position that would not require
legal qualification. Conversely, the office of Attorney General was politically
downgraded, a move
that was calculated to please the querulous guardian of
responsible government – the Legislative Assembly.
For the Assembly, the advantage was that, now that the office did not confer
a seat in Cabinet, the Lower House was no longer so inclined
to resent the
Attorney General sitting in the Upper House, a regular occurrence in the 1860s.
In effect, it reduced Upper House Cabinet
membership to one, this being the
Representative of the Government in the Legislative Council. The complicating
factor was that the
Council insisted that the Representative of the Government
had to be a member of the Executive Council. The corresponding disadvantage
that, where a Ministry could not appoint an Attorney General from the Assembly,
it had to look to find at least two supporters
in the small and badly attended
Council, one to fill the post of Attorney, the other as its Representative. It
was when the Farnell
Ministry in 1878 ran into difficulties on this score that
the Attorney General was restored to the
Farnell argued that
members of the Bar from the Lower House were reluctant to accept the office
‘without being a member of
the Executive Council’ and that
‘great difficulties had by this condition been placed in the way of
securing an Attorney
Qualms about
conflicts between the office’s role as public prosecutor and politician
were swept aside, by Farnell saying that
in his experience ‘no Attorney
General had ever taken part in any case that had come before the Executive
Council in regard
to the alteration of punishment’. Speaking for the legal
profession, the future Supreme Court judge William Windeyer struck
a pragmatic
note, arguing that ‘it was to be regretted that the Attorney General had
been deprived of a seat in the Executive,
for it made that Minister’s
office less desirable for clever and ambitious men to fill’. To this he
added that the colonial
Attorney General was analogous, not to his British
counterpart, but to the Lord Chancellor. Windeyer concluded:
There could be no danger in his [the Attorney General] having similar power to
other Ministers; and if he held the same position
it would prove attractive
because he might, if of sufficient eminence, become a
George Reid was to achieve such eminence at the end of his Premiership in
1899, while C G Wade combined both offices for the term
of his Premiership
B R Wise, the
Attorney General during the See Ministry (1901-04) was twice Acting Premier,
this despite the fact the he was a member
of the Upper House. Likewise, William
Holman was Attorney General and Acting Premier during the first Labor Ministry
headed by James
McGowen (1910-13), and afterwards in 1913-14 he held the offices
of Premier and Attorney General simultaneously. Subsequently, the
Attorney General has been held by those eminent in politics and the law, among
them the Coalition’s H E Manning,
Attorney General from 1932 to 1941, and
Labor’s Reg Downing, Attorney General from 1956-65. Never again was the
office to attract
the political interest or doctrinal controversy that had
attached to it in the early days of responsible government. Basically, it
operated since the late 1870s as an integral, if unique, part of government in
NSW, with Attorneys General of all political persuasions
becoming members of
Cabinet on an equal footing with their
colleagues.
As Berriedale Keith
observed in 1927, the rule in the British dominions was that ‘the Attorney
General plays a great figure
in the Ministry, the office being one which a
Premier may hold’.
An administrative footnote can be added to this commentary. From 1856 to 1866
administrative responsibility for the courts was divided
between the departments
of the Attorney General and Colonial Secretary (effectively the Premier), with
the last controlling the Courts
of Petty Sessions. These arrangements were
consolidated during Martin’s Premiership in 1866, only to be divided again
Parkes in the 1870s, with the creation of the Department of Justice and
Public Instruction (later the Department of Justice). By
the 1880s a new
administrative division of labour had been created which was to last for the
rest of the 19
century and beyond, with the Attorney General taking
administrative responsibility for the Crown Solicitor, Parliamentary Draftsman
and Quarter Sessions, while the Minister of Justice assumed responsibility for
the administration of all other courts, including
Courts of Petty
In 1901, under B R Wise, the Attorney General’s Department and the
Department of Justice were amalgamated, an arrangement that
was to endure
through the 20
century. As in the case of Wise (1901-04) and
Downing (1956-65), at times these Ministries were combined, whereas the more
practice was for the two offices to be held by separate Ministers. This
was the position in 1941 when Labor’s Clarrie Martin
became Attorney
General. On the day he took over the Department from Sir Henry Manning, he noted
in his diary:
I met Nott, the US [Under Secretary from 1936 to 1945] and various senior
officers – generally speaking, they look a rather
dull lot ... The offices
staff is housed in are simply appalling – cold, dreary and dirty –
the whole place is cold and
depressing.
By the 1890s one major anomaly remained to be clarified. This related to
Attorneys General continuing to engage in private practice,
as was the case in
both Britain and NSW at that time. When Martin was Premier, when he also served
as Attorney General, strong objections
were voiced to ‘his continuing to
take private briefs’, to which he responded ‘when the administration
was properly provided for, and the public interests were not likely
to suffer, he was not called upon to neglect his private
The question
flared up in 1893 when it was revealed that Attorney General Edmund Barton and
Minister of Justice Richard O’Connor
(both later judges of the first High
Court of Australia) had been retained by litigants against the Railway
Commissioners. The Opposition
attacked this as a clear conflict of interest.
Barton defended himself by claiming that as the Railway Commissioners were a
body independent of the Government there was nothing improper in his
action. This dubious argument failed to carry the day and, after
an adjournment
motion condemning them was carried, both Barton and O’Connor
Whether this incident
spelled the immediate end of Attorneys General engaging in private practice
while in office, be it against
the Crown or otherwise, is hard to say. No record
suggesting that private practice continued into the first half of the
century appears to
What the record does show is that the Attorney General was briefed on
occasions to represent the State in constitutional cases. For
example, in the
mid-1930s Manning appeared for NSW and Queensland before the Privy Council in a
‘section 92’ freedom
of interstate trade case (the
while in 1959
Downing appeared for NSW in the
Second Uniform Tax
Instances of the Attorney
General appearing in person are now the exception, not the
IV The NSW Attorney General – Role in
Prosecutions
As first law officer of the Colony, then State of NSW, the Attorney General
has broad responsibility for the prosecution of serious
offences. Undoubtedly,
with the creation of the DPP in 1986 this aspect of the Attorney General’s
office has decreased. That
is not to say that it has disappeared.
Before 1824 it was the Deputy Judge Advocate who decided on, and conducted,
prosecutions in the Court of Criminal Jurisdiction. As
noted, criticism of that
double role of judge and prosecutor was one of the justifications for the
administrative changes that occurred
in 1824, with the establishment of the
Supreme Court and the office of Attorney General. From then, criminal
prosecutions were to
be filed by the Attorney General. Section 4 of the
South Wales Act 1823
allowed the Attorney General to proceed by way of ‘information’ (ie
written charge) against offenders. His signature
on such a document was to be
regarded as the authorisation for prosecution and
Likewise, the
Australian Courts Act 1828
(UK) provided that all crimes, misdemeanours
and offences tried in the Supreme Court should be prosecuted by information in
of the Attorney
This was said to be an
interim measure until grand juries were constituted. As they never were
constituted in the Colony’s
Supreme Court, procedure by information
endured, until replaced by the terminology of ‘indictment’ under s 3
Criminal Law Amendment Act 1883
Speaking in 1986, the then Attorney General, Terry Sheahan, explained the
situation as follows:
In the early colonial days of New South Wales, the Attorney General was given
additional functions which differed from his English
counterpart. Because the
population was largely convict, it was determined that the grand jury system,
whose members would have been
drawn from the population, was an inappropriate
means of determining whether a person should face a trial by jury ... Therefore,
by ... the Australian Courts Act it was provided that the responsibility for the
decision to prosecute serious criminal offences
should lie with the Attorney
General, and certain individuals appointed by the Governor for this purpose.
These individuals eventually
evolved into the office of Crown Prosecutor as it
Nearly two decades earlier, in 1958, the position was summarised by the then
Solicitor General, H A Snelling, who said:
The Grand Jury which lasted in England into the present [20
century was never adopted in this State and the institution and prosecution of
criminal offences has been the responsibility of
the Attorney General. This
means that he exercises a general control over and is head of the administration
of the criminal
The Solicitor General went on to explain that certain statutes required the
Attorney General’s consent to commence criminal
proceedings, for example,
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) in respect to the crime of incest.
Further, appeals against sentences had to be initiated by the Attorney General.
It was also
customary, though not required by statute, to refer for the Attorney
General’s consideration other types of criminal prosecutions
before they
were instituted, including conspiracies, bigamies, public mischief and offences
by public servants in the course of their
duty. The Solicitor General
In exercising these functions the Attorney General acts with absolute
impartiality unaffected by pressures political or otherwise,
excitement. Almost invariably his decisions are based on the recommendations of
commentary is found in the handbook on the NSW departmental structure from 1972,
Crown Prosecutors appointed by the Governor-in-Council on the recommendation of
the Attorney General, file indictments against accused
persons committed for
trial, but it is the Attorney General who makes the final decision whether or
not an indictment should be filed
or, in cases where an accused person has
already faced a trial and the jury has failed to agree, whether further
proceedings should
be taken against
In summary, the Attorney General had responsibility for the decision to
prosecute serious criminal offences. The powers of the Attorney
General included
the power to determine that no bill of indictment be found against a person
committed for trial; to direct no further
proceedings against a person where a
bill had been found; to commence proceedings for indictable offences in the
District Court or
Supreme Court by
indictment (an indictment
presented to a court without the defendant being committed for trial by a
Magistrate); and to appeal to
the Court of Criminal Appeal against the alleged
leniency of a sentence passed in the District Court or Supreme
Though rarely used, the power to initiate indictments
prove controversial, as demonstrated by the Botany Council bribery case in the
1970s, concerning charges against two Labor
politicians, Laurie Brereton and
Geoffrey Cahill, involving the alleged bribery of four Botany Council aldermen
over a land rezoning
matter in which News Ltd had an interest. The charges were
dismissed in August 1975 by Chief Stipendiary Magistrate, Murray Farquhar,
indictment to be instigated against Brereton by the
Solicitor General, acting in the absence of the Attorney General, the
Liberal-Country
Party’s John Maddison. With Labor in power in May 1976,
reportedly at the insistence of the new Attorney General, Frank Walker,
action was ‘covertly’ dropped, in circumstances where no ‘no
bill’ had been filed that could be taken
to have nullified the
indictment.
As Terry Sheahan
acknowledged in 1986, the power to terminate prosecutions for indictable
offences was problematic, for the simple
reason that, as it was exercised by a
politician, it was ‘easy to assert that on some occasions it might be
exercised improperly’.
This was one argument for establishing the office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP), a landmark development for the administration
criminal law in NSW.
that, formally at least, several functions relating to prosecution are in fact
shared between the DPP and the Attorney General.
The main functions of the DPP
are set out in s 7 of the Act. By s 7(1) the DPP is empowered to institute and
conduct a variety of
proceedings including:
prosecutions for indictable offences in the District Court and Supreme
appeals in which the Crown is appellant or respondent;
committal proceedings for indictable offences;
summary proceedings for indictable offences that may be dealt with summarily
in the Local Court.
By s 7(2) the DPP and the Attorney General have the same capacity to:
find a bill of indictment for an indictable offence;
determine that no bill be found;
direct that no further proceedings be taken against a person who has been
committed for trial or sentence.
Contrary to the situation in most other States, the Director in New South
Wales is specifically prohibited from granting a witness
an indemnity from
prosecution, but may request the Attorney-General to do so: s
The reasoning for leaving
this power with the Attorney General was explained in the following terms:
At present indemnities are rarely given. That is a power that should be
exercised with extreme caution, and only when it is in the
public interest to do
so. The interest of the prosecution in securing a conviction is only one of the
matters that should be considered
and, therefore, the power is to reside in the
Attorney General.
Generally, the DPP is responsible to the Attorney General for the due
exercise of his functions (s 4(3)). However, nothing in s 4(3)
derogates from the authority of the Director with respect to the preparation,
institution and conduct of any proceedings.
The Second Reading Speech for the
highlighted both the DPP’s independence and the importance
of the Attorney General retaining some responsibility for prosecutions:
It is crucial that the community has confidence in the way criminal justice is
administered. It must not only be impartial, efficient
and free from political
and personal interference, but, as well, must be seen to be so ... It would defy
the principles of responsible,
democratic government if the Attorney General
were to abdicate totally his responsibility for such an important area of
government,
in favour of a person who is not elected, and thus not answerable to
Parliament or the community. However, it is proper, in order
to facilitate a
more efficient and consistent prosecution policy, and to provide for what is
perceived as a more independent decision-making
process, that the Government
should give authority to a person to exercise these powers on a day-to-day
relationship between the Attorney General and the DPP is set out in Part 4 of
the Act (ss 25-30). Section 25 places reciprocal
duties on the DPP and the
Attorney General to consult at each other’s request about the exercise of
the Director’s functions.
The Attorney General may issue guidelines to the
Director, for example, on the circumstances in which the Director should
or carry on prosecutions, but not on specific cases (s 26). By s 27
the Attorney-General must notify the Director whenever the Attorney
finds a bill, determines that no bill be found, directs no further proceedings
be taken, or appeals to the Court of Criminal
Appeal against a
Only on two occasions to date has the Attorney General
‘overruled’ a decision of the DPP. One was in relation to the
General’s power to initiate an appeal, found in
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
By this means the Government can launch its own Crown appeal if it is
sufficiently dissatisfied with the DPP’s failure to do
so. This occurred
in the case of the rape gang leader, Bilal Skaf, whose 46 year sentence had been
reduced by the Court of Criminal
Appeal to 25
Events surrounding the
case had caused a storm of controversy in the media, resulting in the
introduction of a new offence of aggravated
sexual assault in company carrying a
maximum penalty of life
imprisonment.
In respect to
Skaf, against the advice of both the DPP and the Crown Solicitor, the Attorney
General sought leave to appeal to the
High Court. In February 2006 this was
refused, the High Court finding no important question of legal principle at
issue. As Chief
Justice Gleeson observed, ‘the fact that this Court might
make a different appreciation of the seriousness of the circumstances
particular case is not of itself a ground for
intervention’.
The second instance of where the Attorney General ‘overruled’ the
DPP was in the 2004 case of a man (Matthew Curran) who
in February 2003 had
successfully appealed against his conviction of indecently assaulting an 11-year
old girl. In that case the
District Court judge committed an error of law when
she ruled that, by reason of self-induced intoxication, Curran was unable to
form the requisite intent to commit the offence.
Section 428D
provides that the defence of self-induced intoxication is only
available for offences of specific intent. Indecent assault in not
listed in the
Act as an offence of that kind. The DPP decided in June 2003 not to appeal this
decision on the ground that the 28-day
time limit for filing an appeal had
However, after seeking
alternative advice from the Crown Advocate in January 2004 the Attorney General
decided to mount an appeal.
This occurred under s 29 of the
DPP Act 1986
by which the Director requested the Attorney General to exercise his power to
bring a stated case in the matter. The trial judge
stated a case, filed in April
2004, which was worded as follows: ‘Did I err in taking into account the
self-induced intoxication
of Matthew Curran in considering whether or not he had
for the offence with which he was charged’. In the
event, the Court of Criminal Appeal refused extension of time for filing
appeal, arguing that the delay of 13 months resulted in undue prejudice to the
respondent.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
the Attorney
General has the power to request the Supreme Court to issue a guideline judgment
for a particular type of criminal offence,
but not a specific case. A guideline
judgment nominates a sentencing range and/or principles to be applied by
sentencing judges.
An example of this provision in operation is the 1999 case of
R v Ponfield
the Attorney General applied for a guideline judgment in relation to the offence
of break, enter and steal.
Likewise, in 2002 the Attorney General applied for a guideline judgment on
taking into account previous convictions when
sentencing.
In terms of the day-today administration of the criminal law, the Attorney
General’s role has diminished greatly. Prosecutions
are now a matter for
the DPP. However, the Attorney’s role is significant in a broader sense,
standing as he does at the apex
of the system. A residual place is kept in this
system for the Minister who is responsible to Parliament and through Parliament
the electorate at large. Specifically, it remains the case that certain
offences can only be prosecuted with the consent of the Attorney
General. In NSW
this includes the offence of serious racial
vilification,
for which, to
date, no proceedings have been commenced. This suggests that the Attorney
General will tend to retain a role in those
areas which are likely to prove
highly politically charged. Preventive detention is one such area, where the
protection of the public
is the paramount consideration. In April 2006 the
Attorney General acquired the power to apply to the Supreme Court for the making
of either an ‘extended supervision order’ or a ‘continuing
detention order’ against serious sex
The power was
activated immediately the Act came into force, and again in April 2007. On the
first occasion, at the preliminary hearing
the Court made an order for an
interim supervision order;
the second occasion an interim detention order was
In the Second Reading
speech for the Act the Minister said:
It is appropriate that the Attorney General, as the first law officer of the
State, consider any proposal to make an application
– following advice
from the Commissioner of Corrective Services to the Minister for Justice –
before matters are filed
in the Supreme
V The NSW Attorney General – Prerogative
Historically, the Attorney General was the person who acted for or
represented the Crown in litigation. In NSW, in addition to powers
specifically
conferred by statute, the Attorney General has the right and duty of doing all
acts done by usage or custom by the Attorney
General as Chief Law Officer in
Britain, as at 1824, the date when the first Attorney General was appointed in
NSW. It is to this
common law basis that we look to find the prerogative powers
of the NSW Attorney General. The convention is that in exercising the
prerogative powers the Attorney General acts independently of political
pressure, acting as the guardian
of the public interest
of the administration of
These prerogative
powers include:
the power to initiate and terminate criminal prosecutions;
to advise on the grant of pardons to grant immunities from prosecution;
to issue a fiat in relator actions in defence of public rights;
to represent the Crown as the protector of all property subject to
charitable trusts;
to institute proceedings for contempt of court;
to appear as amicus curiae;
to intervene in cases that involve the prerogatives of the
to intervene in any case where the validity of a State law is under
challenge (at least where the Attorney General would not merely
duplicate the
arguments that other parties wish to
to provide legal advice to Cabinet and Executive Council.
Some of the Attorney General’s common law prerogative powers and their
continuing operation have been discussed, including the
granting a witness an
indemnity from prosecution. In some cases, the prerogative powers are rarely
used these days, including personally
providing legal advice to government and
representing the government in court. These functions have been devolved onto
other legal
officers, notably the Solicitor General, the Crown Solicitor and the
Crown Advocate. The control over major prosecutions once exercised
Attorney General has also passed by statute to the DPP. Likewise, while the
prerogative power to enter a ‘no bill’
nolle prosequi
criminal proceedings is now shared under statute by the Attorney General and the
DPP, it is the latter who applies the power on
a completely independent
As for the Attorney General’s right to intervene in relevant
it has been accepted
since 1908 that a State Attorney General has standing to commence proceedings to
challenge the validity of a
The High Court
expressed this right in terms of a common law prerogative power, with Griffith
CJ stating:
The ground of the Attorney General’s right to interfere is a common injury
to the public, and it appears to me that, if a person
claims to be authorized by
law to exercise some public function which is in fact not authorized by law and
is injurious to the public
of a State, the Attorney General for the State may
sue to protect the right of the public of the
Supplementing this common law power, in 1976 a statutory right of
intervention was granted to all State Attorneys General in respect
arising under the Commonwealth
Constitution
or involving its
interpretation’.
that time it has become common for Attorneys General to intervene in
constitutional cases before the High
Generally, the Attorney General has a responsibility to act to protect the
public interest as the representative of the Crown. This
role is considered in
the context of the power to issue a fiat in relator actions. By this means the
Attorney General lends his assistance
to a person to bring legal proceedings in
the name of Attorney General, as the representative of the Crown in whom the
the public are
Complimenting the argument that public rights can only be asserted by the
Attorney General, there developed strict rules of standing
that prevented
individuals who did not have a greater interest in a matter than the public at
large from instituting legal proceedings
to vindicate a public right or enforce
the law. The following propositions emerge from the cases on relator
the decision of the Attorney General whether to grant or refuse a fiat in
connection with a relator action is not justiciable;
where the Attorney General moves upon the relation of a third party, it is
unnecessary that the relator have any interest in the proceedings;
if the Attorney General declines to grant a fiat, a person without a special
interest has no standing to proceed;
a person with a sufficient interest to enforce the public duty in question
may pursue the matter concurrently with relator proceedings
by the Attorney
General; and
upon the grant of a fiat, the proceedings becomes the Attorney
General’s proceeding, under his exclusive
Gouriet v Union of Post Office Workers
Lord Wilberforce described
the rule that only the Attorney General or a person who has been granted the
Attorney General’s
fiat may commence proceedings with respect to a public
wrong as ‘constitutional’ in nature, saying that ‘it is
exclusive right of the Attorney General to represent the public
However, the
High Court has distinguished the British constitutional position from that in
Australia. In particular, it has rejected
Lord Wilberforce’s claim that it
is the exclusive right of the Attorney General to represent the public interest
in enforcing
the law against statutory bodies. The rule that it is the Attorney
General who enforces public rights may apply well enough in Britain
doctrine of ‘independent aloofness’ is in place, but less so in
Australia where Attorneys General play a different
constitutional role as
Cabinet members. In
Batemans Bay Local Aboriginal Land Council v The
Aboriginal Community Benefit Fundamental Pty Ltd
the High Court
Both at Federal and State levels, the Attorney General is a minister in charge
of a department administering numerous statutes, is
likely to be a member of
Cabinet and at least at State level may not be a lawyer. At the present day, it
may be ‘somewhat visionary’
for citizens in this country to suppose
that they may rely upon the grant of the Attorney General’s fiat for
protection against
ultra vires action of statutory bodies for the administration
of which a ministerial colleague is
responsible.
Selway notes that such ‘political’ considerations were behind the
doubts cast by Daryl Williams on the Attorney General’s
interest’ function to issue fiats in relator
That political
considerations were in play in
a High Court case
concerning the rights of unmarried women to access infertility treatment, is
contradict.
For the first time in more than 10 years the Commonwealth Attorney General
granted his fiat, in this case to the Australian Catholic
Bishops to quash the
decision of the Federal Court for non-jurisdictional error of law apparent on
the face of the record. It might
be argued that in granting his fiat in that
case the Federal Attorney General only highlighted the inescapably political
deciding on ‘public interest’
Important as such considerations may be, Selway’s broader point is that
the constitutional differences between Britain and Australia
have resulted not
in a narrowing of the role of the Australian Attorneys General in public
interest litigation, but ‘a broadening
of the standing rules so as to
avoid the need for the citizen to seek a
Both the courts and
Parliament have contributed to this relaxation in the rules of standing. For
their part the courts tend to apply
potentially restrictive tests such as
‘special interest’ and ‘person aggrieved’ more flexibly
than in the
An example of
a statutory open standing provision is found in the
Environmental Planning
and Assessment Act 1979
(NSW) s 123 which provides that ‘Any person
may bring proceedings in the [Land and Environment] Court for an order to remedy
or restrain a breach of this Act, whether or not any right of that person has
been or may be infringed by or as a consequence of
that breach’. Likewise,
the standing to make a complaint under the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
is stated in broad terms. The upshot is that fiats are rarely
granted. The record shows that between 1992 and 2002 seven fiats were
NSW and only two granted, one on a matter concerning a charitable trust, another
referring to compliance with State
legislation.
Several of the prerogative powers of the Attorney General are in decline for
one reason or another, as statutory powers widen and
alternative mechanisms are
found to enforce public rights. It might be argued that, generally, the Attorney
General’s role
as the broadly defined guardian of the public interest is
in retreat. On the other hand, the Attorney’s more defined role as
guardian of the administration of justice, especially as this relates to the
core functions associated with maintaining the integrity
of the courts remains
to the fore.
The prerogative power to institute proceedings for contempt of court is a
case in point. In
Attorney General (UK) v Times Newspapers
Lord Diplock
The Attorney General accepts the responsibility of receiving complaints of
alleged contempt of court from parties to litigation and
of making an
application in his official capacity for committal of the offender if he thinks
this course to be justified in the public
interest. He is the appropriate public
officer to represent the public interest in the administration of justice. In
doing so he
acts in constitutional theory on behalf of the Crown, as do Her
Majesty’s judges themselves; but he acts on behalf of the Crown
‘the fountain of justice’ and not in the exercise of its executive
In an Australian context, in 2001 Merkel J cited this passage as
‘long-standing’ authority for the proposition that ‘the
Attorney General is the appropriate officer of the State to represent and
safeguard the public interest in vindicating the authority
High profile contempt cases were instituted by the Attorney General in NSW in
the second half of the 20
century, including the prosecution of
Jack Mundey, Secretary of the Builders’ Labourers’ Federation in
1972 for claiming
in a TV interview that the conviction of two
fellow trade unionists was ‘a miscarriage of justice...it showed the judge
was a racist judge’. The convictions related to damage caused to
goal posts at the Sydney Cricket Ground during the course
of anti-apartheid
demonstrations seeking to prevent the playing of a rugby union match between
Australia and South Africa. The statements
quoted above were found in the
circumstances not to constitute that form of criminal contempt amounting to
scandalising the court.
However, the further statement that industrial action
had ‘stopped the racist judge from sending these two men to jail’
(they were fined and bound over to be of good behaviour) was found to constitute
such contempt, suggesting as it did that the trial
judge had been overawed by
the presence of workers in and around the court. It was further held that, since
the imputation required
immediate refutation, it was appropriate for the matter
to be dealt with summarily (and not on indictment which is the more usual
in such cases). However, bearing in mind the circumstances of the case,
including the fact that Mundey did not initiate the
interview over which he had
no subsequent control, the only penalty imposed on him was an order for
Whatever one thinks of the
case from a political standpoint,
the role played by the Attorney General in the Askin Coalition Government in
seeking to safeguard
the integrity of the judicial process against imputations
that the court was subject to improper influence was clear enough. A different
kind of role was evident in the later case of
Attorney General for NSW v
another case relating to criminal contempt, the Attorney sought successfully to
ensure that the respondent should be obliged
to attend the court to answer the
summons. In the words of Kirby P, it was ‘important that Mr Hayden should
have brought home
to him the seriousness with which he should approach the
proceedings’.
Different again is a third contempt case
Attorney General for the State of
point at issue was the application of
Supreme Court Act
(NSW). This provides that, where at the conclusion of contempt
proceedings where it was found that a contempt had not been committed,
‘the Attorney General may submit to the Court of Appeal any question of
law arising from or in connection with the proceedings’.
The case can be
said to illustrate two points. First, the way the common law powers of the
Attorney General has been supplemented
by statute in this area, as in so many
others. Secondly, the continuing role played by the Attorney General as First
Law Officer
of the State in supervising the administration of law in the
broadest sense.
The role played by the Attorney General in preventing the abuse of process by
vexatious litigants is another facet of the Attorney’s
function in
defending the judicial process. This power also finds statutory expression under
s 84(1) of the
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW). The provision permits the
Court, on an application from the Attorney General, to order that the vexatious
litigant cannot
institute further legal proceedings without leave, or continue
any ongoing proceedings. A case in point is
Attorney General v Wentworth
involving an unrepresented serial litigant who, in the words of Roden J, was
‘sailing close to the wind’, but not so
close as to constitute a
vexatious litigant.
Attorney General (NSW) v Solomon
Young J arrived at the opposite
conclusion.
There is of
course an important balance to be struck in such cases, against the wasteful use
of court resources, and for the right
of the individual to prosecute their
rights in the courts. It is for the Attorney General, in his hybrid role as law
officer and
as a Minister operating within the framework of responsible
government, to act as the plaintiff in such cases. While such powers
in everyday use, they are very much alive nonetheless.
VI The NSW Attorney General – Defender of
Historically, instituting proceedings for contempt of court and against
vexatious litigants have been ways in which the Attorney General
has defended
the integrity of the courts. More broadly, the role of the Attorney General as
the guardian of the administration of
justice has come under critical scrutiny
in Australia in recent times. The particular field of controversy has been over
the Attorney’s
role in defending judges from adverse criticism.
Both before and after he became Federal Attorney General, Daryl Williams,
argued the case that the office was primarily political
in nature. Specifically,
it was emphasised that Australian Attorneys are members of both Parliament and
the Executive government
and, as such, cannot be independent of political
imperatives. This is as true of his role as the defender of the courts as of any
other his functions. On a point of principle, Williams also maintained that the
doctrine of the separation of powers requires the
judiciary, as the third arm of
government, to take the lead in defending themselves and their courts against
criticism. He said that
in his opinion it was ‘consistent with maintaining
the independence of the judiciary from the executive that the judiciary
not normally rely on the Attorney General to represent or defend it in public
The one qualification Williams made was that ‘where sustained political
attacks occur that are capable of undermining public
confidence in the judiciary
it would be proper and may be, depending on the circumstances, incumbent on the
Attorney General to
intervene’.
In 2002 Williams revisited these arguments, stating:
I also believe that there are circumstances when it is appropriate for an
Attorney General to comment on or explain judicial actions
or developments. This
may be appropriate where criticism could significantly impair confidence in the
Of course, it boils down to a judgment about when, in the circumstances of a
particular controversy, it is appropriate for the Attorney
General to comment.
Just how exceptional or ‘political’ do the circumstances need to be?
What kind of criticism will
invoke a response by the Attorney: one that is
directed against a judge personally, or only one that is aimed expressly against
court itself? The other side to this debate concerns the judges themselves,
whether they should adopt the traditional rule of ‘silence’
‘reticence’ when it comes to speaking on controversial matters
outside the courtroom door, or whether greater latitude
should be provided to
judges in this
Chief Justices in particular might be said to have a role to play in
articulating the practices and outcomes of judicial reasoning
to the wider
public. There is likely to be considerable scope for disagreement. When four
judges of the NSW Court of Appeal wrote
a letter in 2000 to the
Morning Herald
critcising mandatory sentencing laws, the Federal Attorney
General (Williams) responded by saying that ‘Judges should refrain
commenting on politically contentious issues which are properly the domain of
the democratic political
The circumstances surrounding the more recent controversies at the
Commonwealth level in Australia have been discussed
A strong case can
be made that the Attorney General must do everything in his power to protect and
maintain both the impartiality
of the judiciary and public confidence in the
courts. The Attorney’s role in this respect has many facets. For the
operate efficiently they must secure adequate resources and it is for
the Attorney General to argue this case in Cabinet. With the
approval of
Cabinet, it is the Attorney General who is responsible for the appointment of
judges, in which capacity he has a duty
to protect the integrity of the courts
by adhering to the rule of appointment on
Where complaints are
made about judicial conduct, in NSW distinctive mechanisms are in place for
dealing with these through the Judicial
Commission, established by the
Judicial Officers Act 1986
Independence does not
mean that judges are not accountable.
On an historical note, for the lower courts in NSW security of judicial
tenure was only secured in the 1990s. Until 1985, magistrates
in NSW were in
fact officers in the public service which meant that, although their duties were
judicial, they were nevertheless
structured as part of the executive arm of
government. The question was whether judicial independence could be guaranteed
the public service, an issue that came to the surface in 1955 when
Magistrate W Finlay criticised Attorney General W J Sheahan in
open court,
claiming that he had interfered in a case of negligent
That situation
changed with the
Local Courts Act 1982
, which became effective on 1
January 1985.
This Act placed
magistrates in a position similar to that of judges of the District Court.
Unlike the situation obtaining in the
Supreme Court where removal of judges
could only be by Parliament, District Court judges were subject to removal by
the Governor
under s 14 of the
District Court Act 1973
interpretations can be placed on this. On one side, it could be said to have
left the Court open to political interference.
On the other, in practice it also
provided considerable discretion to the Attorney General to dispose of
non-preforming judges. Security
of tenure for all judicial officers was inserted
into the NSW
Constitution
in 1992 and entrenched by referendum three
years later.
Underlying the Attorney General’s role in defending the courts is the
view that, for public confidence in the courts to be sustained,
the independence
of the judiciary is to be protected at all costs. This involves recognition of
the distinctive position of judges
in our constitutional scheme. They are not to
be viewed as public servants. While they serve the Crown, more broadly their
is to uphold the rule of law, impartially and independently. In the
words of the Chief Justice of Australia, Murray Gleeson, judges
have a duty
‘to maintain both the reality and the public appearance of
impartiality’. Indeed, he suggests that ‘impartiality
is a condition
on which judges are invested with
authority’.
of necessity place limits on the extent to which judges can engage in their own
defence when contentious issues arise,
be it over the requirement to apply
unpopular law, to uphold minority rights, or where a particular judgment proves
controversial
on other grounds. This is not to say that an Attorney General is
obliged to defend judicial decisions
. Rather, his obligation as
chief law officer of the State is to defend the institution of the judiciary.
One can add that this function is, if anything, required more today than in
the past when a high level of deference was shown to the
judiciary, thereby
immunising them largely from public criticism. In 1966 Speaker Ellis formulated
this categorical statement of
immunity in a parliamentary setting, stating
‘It is essential that judges should be permitted to administer the law not
independently and freely and without favour, but also without fear of
attack upon them or their
decisions’.
today’s world there is a healthy tendency to scrutinise the judicial
system. Like everything this can be taken too far and
in the wrong direction. It
is to be expected that some of the criticism and discussion will be wrong,
ill-informed and unintelligent,
and perhaps even impolite. Some of these attacks
can be ignored as trivial and unworthy of comment. This may apply to isolated
of sentencing decisions. It is where public confidence in the courts
themselves is threatened by broader or more concerted attacks
on their integrity
that the Attorney General has a duty to act in their defence.
Bob Debus, NSW Attorney General from June 2000 to March 2007, spoke out on
this side of the argument. In his colourful address at
the World Conference of
Advocates in April 2006, Bob Debus described Attorneys General as ‘Jedi
Knights striving to preserve
the rule of law and the liberty of the
He went on to
As a contemporary Attorney General, my view has been that it is not the role of
the Attorney to defend each and every decision. Some
decisions can be in fact
puzzling, and in that situation one can only throw oneself on the mercy of the
appellate courts.
But I do defend the institution of the judiciary, and will stand against the
torrent of ill informed and emotional attacks upon judges
which pour out every
Many of the complexities and dilemmas of the office of Attorney General,
characterised by Debus as traversing ‘countervailing’
political and
legal forces, were encapsulated in the speech. From the ‘hybrid’
standpoint of his office, he said ‘The
thankless task of an Attorney
General is, somehow, to produce a principled outcome which nevertheless
addresses the deeply felt concerns
successive State elections turning into law and order auctions, the task is
unlikely to get any easier at any time in the foreseeable
Senior Research Officer,
Parliamentary Library, New South Wales. The views expressed here are those of
the author and should not
be attributed to the NSW Parliamentary Library.
L J King ‘The Attorney
General, Politics and the Judiciary’
D Woodhouse, ‘The
Attorney General’ (1997) 50
Parliamentary Affairs
This summary is based on
– G Carney, ‘Comment – the Role of the Attorney General
[1997] BondLawRw 1
D Williams, ‘Who Speaks
for the Courts?’ in Courts in a Representative Democracy, AIJA, (1994)
D Williams, ‘The
Judiciary, Parliament and the Executive. Who Speaks for the Judges?’
(paper presented at the Australian
Judicial Conference, Canberra, 3 November
B Selway, ‘The Dfferent
Role of an Australian Attorney General’
Public Law Review
This is based on –
Queensland Electoral and Administrative Review Commission,
Report on Review
of Independence of the Attorney General
B Debus, ‘Maintaining
the Rule of Law: The Role of the Attorney General’ (Winter 2006)
5; L J King, ‘The Attorney General, Politics and the
J L J Edwards,
Officers of the Crown
(1964) 187. J L J Edwards,
The Attorney General,
Politics and the Public Interest
(1984) 105. Edwards writes, ‘During
the first quarter of this century the Home Secretary considered it his
prerogative to instruct
both the Attorney General and the Director of Public
Prosecutions on the necessity for prosecuting offences involving interests of
state or public security’.
Officers of the Crown
169. For a commentary on the relationship between the Attorney General and
Cabinet at the federal level in Australia, including
the resignation in 1977 of
Attorney General Ellicott in protest against what he regarded as an attempt by
Cabinet to control the
exercise of his discretion in criminal proceedings see
– R Plehwe, ‘The Attorney General and Cabinet: Some Australian
Precedents’
[1980] FedLawRw 1
Federal Law Review
United Kingdom, Hansard
(HC) 1950-51, vol 483, 682. That is not to say that the office of Attorney
General in Britain has escaped
commentary or controversy, as in the civil action
taken in Australia to prevent publication of the book Spycatcher, or in relation
to the later Matrix Churchill affair. These and other instances are reviewed in
Woodhouse, above n
. The present
British Attorney General, Lord Goldsmith, is reported to have warned Prime
Minister Blair that the use of force against
Iraq may be illegal, suggesting
that UN approval be sought – Debus, above n
King, above n
A History of
Criminal Law in NSW: The Colonial Period 1788-1900
C H Currey,
Dictionary of Biography, Vol 1, 1788-1850
(1967) 55-56.
Before 1843 the Legislative
Council was a wholly nominated body; after 1843 part nominated and part elected.
J M Bennett writes
that Sir Charles Cooper declined the offer of the post of
Solicitor General in 1830, probably because he had been made aware of the
stature of the Crown Law officers in NSW – J M Bennett,
Sir Charles
Cooper: First Chief Justice of South Australia 1856-1861
In 1856 he became
Australia’s first QC in recognition of his standing in the legal
Quoted by M Tedeschi,
‘History of the NSW Crown Prosecutors 1830-1901’ in G Lindsay and C
Webster (eds),
No Mere Mouthpiece
T L Suttor,
Dictionary of Biography, Vol 2, 1788-1850
P Loveday and A W Martin,
Parliament, Factions and Parties
(1966) 116-7; J M Bennett,
‘Martin’ in D Clune and K Turner (eds),
The Premiers of NSW Vol 1
(2006) 109. For a more detailed account see – J M Bennett,
Sir James Martin
(2005) 95-9. A particular concern of the Bar was that,
traditionally, the Attorney General in Britain had a prior claim on any judicial
appointment falling vacant during his incumbency. It was feared that Martin
would ride over the heads of long established barristers
onto the judicial
‘Robertson’ in Clune and Turner, above n
, 91. Both Plunkett and Manning were at
this time members of the Upper House.
Loveday and Martin, above n
, 117. On 17 December 1858 a motion
was passed in the Assembly ‘That the public service would benefit by the
separation of the
duties of the Crown law officers from those of cabinet
Ministers’. In February 1860 it was resolved ‘That the Attorney
General and Solicitor General shall not in future be responsible
Ministers’. These were later discussed by Parkes –
‘Parliamentary
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 27
November 1873, 2.
Loveday and Martin, above n
‘Donaldson’ in Clune and Turner, above n
, 8; D Clune and G Griffith,
and Deliberation: The Parliament of NSW 1856-2003
(2006) 28-29; P Finn,
‘Myths of Australian Public Administration’ in J Power (ed),
Public Administration in Australia: A Watershed
(1990) 45-47.
The office of Solicitor
General was abolished until 1894. Between then and 1922 it was a political
office, held usually by a member
of the Legislative Council, but not attracting
a seat in Cabinet. Since then it has been a non-political office, with its
being placed on a statutory basis by the
Solicitor General Act
(NSW): see – M G Sexton, ‘The Role of the Solicitor
General’ in G Lindsay and C Webster (eds),
No Mere Mouthpiece
Votes and Proceedings of
the NSW Legislative Assembly, Session 1873-74
, 170. The resolution, which
passed on the voices, said that ‘the Attorney General shall not be a
Member of the Executive Council,
but shall continue to be the holder of a
Political Office with a seat in Parliament, entering upon his official duties
and retiring
with the Ministry for the time being’.
‘Parliamentary
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 27 November 1873, 2.
Ibid. Martin is said to
have resigned the office of Attorney General in Cowper’s second Ministry
in 1858 following criticism
‘that he was devoting too much time to his
profession and particularly, that he had failed to ensure that certain assignees
of insolvent estates had furnished returns, one of the duties of his
department’ – J M Bennett (ed),
A History of the NSW Bar
Woods, above n
, 269-73; See also ‘A Brief History
of the Attorney General’s Department’
http://www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/history/lah.nsf/pages/hist_toc
The motion, which was
carried on the voices, read ‘That with the view to the more effective
administration of Government,
the Attorney General may, but shall not
necessarily be a member of the Executive Council’:
Proceedings of the NSW Legislative Assembly, Session 1877-8
‘Parliamentary
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 29 March 1878, 3.
Wade was also Minister of
Justice from October 1907 to December 1909.
Section 38(1)
Constitution
(NSW) prevents the functions of the Attorney
General, as the First Law Officer, from being exercised by another Minister who
not be qualified as a lawyer:
Solicitor General v Wylde
[1945] NSWStRp 28
(1945) 46 SR
, 94; A Twomey,
Constitution
(2004) 692-3.
Responsible
Government in the Dominions
ed, 1928) 238.
Responsible Office: A History of the NSW Magistracy
(1991) 84-5. Before the
Department for Corrective Services was established in the 1970s, the Minister of
Justice had responsibility
for prisons. For a brief period during the Greiner
Premiership, in June 1992, separate Departments of Courts Administration and
Services were created. These were afterwards combined under the
Department for Justice.
C E Martin:
A Political Biography 1900-1953
(MEcon Thesis, University of Sydney,
1986) 172-173. Provided is a breakdown of the division of labour between the
Attorney General
and the Minister of Justice (Downing).
Clune and Griffith, above n
, 31. G Bolton,
Edmund Barton: The
One Man for The Job
(2000) 118-9.
As the former Attorney
General, Bob Debus, commented recently, the ‘right to appearance in a
private capacity’ is retained
– Debus, above n
James v The
Commonwealth
[1936] AC 578
; J M Ward, ‘W M Manning’ in
Australian Dictionary of Biography, Vol 10, 1891-1939
(1986) 398.
Victoria and NSW v
Commonwealth
[1957] HCA 54
(1957) 99 CLR 575.
Unusually for a Minister in the
century, in 1956 Downing was appointed chairman of the Joint
Committee on the Australian
Constitution
. The Committee produced a progress
report on the uniform tax system in February 1957, followed by a brief final
report in November
1958: Clune and Griffith, above n
There is almost certainly
an element of overstatement in the claim made by the former Attorney General,
Bob Debus, that his predecessor,
Jeff Shaw, ‘exercised the right to argue
a case in person from time to time’, sometimes appearing without warning
‘argue a routine case before a local magistrate or a perplexed Fair
Trading Tribunal’ – Debus, above n
4 Geo IV c 96.
Woods, above n
9 Geo IV c 83,
J M Bennett,
of the Supreme Court of NSW
(1974) 69. This is still reflected in
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) which provides that ‘All offences
shall be punishable by information (to be called indictment) in the Supreme
the District Court, on behalf of the Crown, in the name of the Attorney
General or the DPP’.
, Parliamentary
, 1 December 1986, 7340. For the history of NSW Crown Prosecutors see
– M Tedeschi, above n
H A Snelling, ‘The
Attorney General’ (1958) 12
The Australian Police Journal
It was said that the courts of Petty Sessions were at that time under the
summary prosecutions were not
in general the Attorney’s responsibility ‘though he may advise the
Police Department in
respect thereof’. For a commentary on the grand jury
see – Woods, above n
This grand jury function of the Attorney General was to be replaced by the
system of committal hearings.
Snelling, above n
Know Your Department
(1972) (held by NSW Parliamentary Library).
Independence
and Accountability of the DPP: A Comparative Survey
, NSW Parliamentary
Library Research Service Briefing Paper No 9/2001, 9. The following account of
the relationship between the DPP
and the Attorney General draws on this
J S Ramsden, ‘An Ugly
Mix of the Law and Politics’,
The Australian Financial Review
(Sydney), 16 August 1976, 1.
, Parliamentary
, 1 December 1986, 7341.
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1986
(NSW) received assent on 23 December 1986 and had
commenced in its entirety by 13 July 1987.
The Attorney
General’s powers to grant indemnities and give undertakings are found at
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
, Parliamentary
, 1 December 1986, 7343.
Ibid 7339-40.
Once the Attorney General
exercises such a function, the DPP shall not exercise a function in an
inconsistent manner without the
consent of the Attorney General
confirms that nothing in the Act affects any functions of the Attorney
General that the Attorney General has apart from the Act.
The wording of s 5D(1) is:
‘The Attorney-General or the Director of Public Prosecutions may appeal to
the Court of Criminal
Appeal against any sentence pronounced by the court of
trial in any proceedings to which the Crown was a party and the Court of
Appeal may in its discretion vary the sentence and impose such sentence
as to the said court may seem proper.’
R v Bilal Skaf
[2005] NSWCCA 297.
The background is discussed
in R Johns, G Griffith and R Simpson,
Sentencing ‘Gang Rapists’:
Crimes Amendment (Aggravated Sexual Assault in Company) Bill 2001
Parliamentary Library Briefing Paper No 12/2001.
Transcript of Proceedings,
(High Court of Australia, Gleeson CJ, 3 February 2006).
Criminal Appeal Act
Attorney General (NSW) v
[2004] NSWCCA 234.
Re Attorney General
Application [No1] under
Criminal Procedure Act
: R v Ponfield; R v
Scott; R v Ryan: R v Johnson
[1999] NSWCCA 435
[1999] 48 NSWLR 327.
Crimes Act 1900
Re Attorney
General‘s Application under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
No 1 of 2002
[2002] 56 NSWLR 146.
Anti-Discrimination Act
(NSW) s 20D.
Crimes (Serious Sex
Offenders) Act 2006
(NSW), ss 6 and 14. Proceedings under the Act are in
fact civil proceedings (s 21).
Attorney General for the
State of NSW v Gallagher
[2006] NSWSC 340.
Attorney General for the
State of NSW v Tillman
[2007] NSWSC 356.
NSW Parliamentary
, 29 March 2006, 21731.
Carney, above n
For example,
Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd v Taylor
(1915) 32 WN (NSW) 106
it was held that in
a suit to determine the construction and effect of a bequest, contained in the
will of a testator domiciled in
NSW, to a charity in England, the NSW Attorney
General was a proper party, as representing the Monarch in his/her character as
parens patriae
C Maxwell, ‘In the
Line of Fire Re McBain and the Role of the Attorney General as a Party’
Public Law Review
, 288. See for example
Attorney General
for NSW v Butterworth and Co (Australia) Ltd
[1938] NSWStRp 9
(1937) 38 SR (NSW) 195
where it was held that the NSW Attorney General was competent to maintain a suit
for the protection of the Crown’s proprietary
rights, in this case
relating to the Crown’s exclusive prerogative right of printing and
publishing statutes.
Selway, above n
For a critical commentary
on this power see – King, above n
, 452-3. King comments that the power does
not clear the accused of guilt and the accused remains vulnerable to prosecution
same crime. He notes that in Britain the development of conventions has
severely restricted the circumstances in which the Attorney
General or the DPP
may enter a
nolle prosequi
. The normal methods of terminating a
prosecution in Britain are to tender no evidence, or no further evidence,
leading to a verdict
of not guilty by direction, or to seek the Judge’s
consent to withdraw the prosecution.
The right is recognized
Crown Proceedings Act 1988
(NSW) which provides that
the Act ‘does not affect any law, custom or procedure under which the
Attorney General is entitled
or liable to sue, or be sued, or to intervene in
any proceedings on behalf of the Crown, on the relation of, or on behalf of, any
other person or in any other capacity or for any other purpose
Attorney General for NSW
v Brewery Employ
s’ Union of NSW
[1908] HCA 94
(1908) 6 CLR 469.
brought by the Attorney General was at the relation of four NSW brewery
companies who were joined as plaintiffs.
Attorney General for NSW
v Brewery Employees’ Union of NSW
[1908] HCA 94
(1908) 6 CLR 469
Judiciary Act 1903
E Campbell,
‘Intervention in Constitutional Cases’
, 256. According to Campbell, of the 33 such cases before the High
Court in 1994-97, the Commonwealth Attorney General intervened
in 20, his NSW
counterpart in 15.
The Attorney General can
sue ex officio without a relator, in any case involving a public nuisance or
breach of public statutory
interests. The procedure used to be initiated by
filing an ex officio information, but normal originating process is used
Just as in relator actions, this form of proceeding can be used only
where a public interest is at stake. See – M Aronson,
B Dyer and M Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
ed, 2004) 817; R
Creyke and J McMillian,
Control of Government Action: Text, Cases and
(2005) 883.
Maxwell, above n
[1977] UKHL 5
[1978] AC 435
[1998] HCA 49
(1998) 194 CLR 247
Cited with approval was the decision of Harvey J in
Attorney General (NSW) v
Mercantile Investments Ltd
[1920] NSWStRp 98
(1920) 21 SR (NSW) 183
, 187 to the effect that an
injunction would not be granted to the Attorney General where ‘the only
injury alleged is to the
moral well-being of the public’. The Attorney
General had sought an injunction to restrain a limited company from promoting
lottery. Harvey J observed that an injunction would be granted where the
threatened wrongful act was a menace to public rights
of a proprietary nature,
or where injury was likely to be caused. It would not be granted where the
‘only injury alleged is
to the moral well-being of the public, even though
that injury is prohibited by an Act of Parliament under a penalty’.
Selway, above n
[2002] HCA 16
(2002) 209 CLR 372.
For a forthright discussion
see – M Aronson, B Dyer and M Groves, above n
See the discussion in King,
Selway, above n
Creyke and McMillian, above
, 874. For a general discussion of
standing see – Aronson, Dyer and Groves, above n
C Saunders and P Rabbat,
‘Relator Actions: Practice in Australia and New Zealand’
Public Law Review
, 296. An earlier example is found in
General for NSW (Ex rel McLeod) v Grant
[1976] HCA 38
(1976) 135 CLR 587
in which a fiat
was granted to two members of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of
Australia who opposed unions with
other churches under the
Presbyterian
Church of Australia Act 1971
(NSW). Another example is found in
General for NSW (Ex rel McKellar) v the Commonwealth
(1978) 139 CLR 527 in
which the Attorney General granted a fiat to relator action challenging the
validity of the Commonwealth electoral
legislation.
[1974] AC 273
Australian Industry
Group v Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries
Union of Australia
[2001] FCA 774
(2001) 188 ALR 653
Attorney General (NSW) v
[1972] 2 NSWLR 887.
[1994] 34 NSWLR 638.
[1994] 34 NSWLR 638
[2000] NSWCA 199
[2000] 49 NSWLR 653.
[1988] NSWCA 8
[1988] 14 NSWLR 481
[1987] 8 NSWLR 667.
D Williams, ‘The
Role of an Australian Attorney General: Antipodean Developments from British
Foundations’ (paper presented
at the Anglo-American Lawyers Society (UK
Branch), 9 May 2002) para 77.
D Williams,
‘Judicial Independence’,
Canberra Times
(Canberra), 13
January 1997; quoted in R McColl, ‘Reflections on the Role of the Attorney
Public Law Review
D Williams, ‘The
Role of the Attorney General’
Public Law Review
See for example –
K Mason, President of the NSW Court of Appeal, ‘Bench and Bar Dinner
Speech 2000’ (Spring 2000)
18; A Mason, ‘Some
Problems Old and New’
(1990) 24(2)
University of British Columbia Law
; A Mason, ‘The State of the Judicature’
Australian Law Journal
; E Campbell and H Lee,
The Australian
(2001), Ch 9.
Campbell and Lee, above
E Campbell and M Groves,
‘Attacks on Judges under Parliamentary Privilege: A Sorry Australian
; T Abbott, ‘Reflections on the
Role of the Attorney General’ (2002)
Public Law Review
273; McColl,
For a commentary on this
process by a former Attorney General of NSW see – J W Shaw, ‘On the
Appointment of Judges’
Australian Law Journal
For an overview see
– Campbell and Lee, above n
Golder, above n
For the background to
these reforms and the delays involved see Golder, above n
Campbell and Lee, above
, Parliamentary
, 29 March 1966, 4707. The only exception was for a substantive
motion for the removal of a judge from office. This ruling was later
with Speaker Ellis accepting ‘it has always been competent and in order
for an honourable member to criticize judgments
of the court and a wide range of
criticism is permitted’. Criticism had to be in ‘good faith’
, Parliamentary Debates
, 31 March 1966, 4937-8.
Debus, above n
Debus, above n
Debus, above n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
PDF format (908 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter