URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gordon, Michelle --- "Corporate Governance: Big Ideas and Debates?" [2024] MelbULawRw 11; (2024) 47(2) Melbourne University Law Review 510
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE: BIG IDEAS AND DEBATES?
II Recent Events and Debates about Corporate Purpose
III The Australian Setting
A Corporate Purpose
B Shareholders
C Other Stakeholders
D The Public Interest
IV Responses and Observations
V Conclusion
critique and comment
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE: BIG IDEAS AND DEBATES?
The Hon Justice Michelle Gordon
Traditional conceptions of corporate governance are being challenged by
recent events and debates in and outside Australia. Developments
such as the
Business Roundtable’s 2019 restatement of corporate purpose, the World
Economic Forum’s Davos Manifesto as
well as the ways in which companies
and their directors are expected to identify, supervise, manage, and disclose
environmental,
social and governance issues, are causing corporations, directors
and other stakeholders to stop and ask: what is the purpose of
the corporation;
what kinds of interests and consequences should directors consider when making
decisions; and how far ahead should
Australian responses have been fragmented and uncertain, permeated by soft
law. What lessons may be drawn from other jurisdictions,
such as the United
Kingdom and the United States? How, and to what extent, should corporate law in
Australia address the purposes
and activities of a corporation and then require,
or permit, the identification, supervision, management and disclosure of risk
those purposes and activities intersect with or affect the interests of
shareholders, asset owners, financiers, regulators, governments
and communities?
Or is a whole of law response required which adopts a system-level view and
review of the regulatory network affecting
corporate conduct and governance in
shaping the modern corporation and its role in
Introduction
Emeritus Professor Harold Ford AM, rightly, has been described as a doyen of
Australian corporations law and trusts law.
The description as a doyen properly reflects his work, large and enduring, as a
teacher, scholar, author, and adviser to government.
I say large and enduring
because all that he did as a teacher, scholar, author and adviser to government
influenced and continues
to influence generations of law students, legal
practitioners, judges and government. Although not taught by him, I was and
a student and beneficiary of his work and wisdom. It is therefore a great
honour and privilege to deliver the Harold Ford Memorial
Lecture for 2023.
Recent events and debates in and outside Australia about corporate governance
may be seen as suggesting that company directors and
the law about
directors are facing new and different challenges. Many of those debates have
been framed by reference to environmental, social and
issues, issues that arguably challenge traditional conceptions of corporate
governance. The question I pose in this lecture is what can Australia learn
from these debates legally, practically, and commercially?
I cannot and will not try to give a comprehensive answer to that question.
There are simply too many possible issues and answers.
My chief focus will of course be on legal issues. But legal, practical, and
commercial considerations necessarily intersect and overlap.
As will appear, the legal issues that emerge from the question I have
identified must be understood in Australia recognising that there may be
differences — a disconnect — between corporate activity (what
companies and their boards are actually doing), the content
of applicable legal
obligations, and the ability of regulators and others to enforce or seek legal
and thereby effect change — in relation to those activities measured
applicable legal obligations.
As will also appear, focusing only on ESG issues — however
may be too narrow. ESG issues raise broader and deeper questions about corporate
purpose and corporate governance. In this
lecture I will focus on ideas of
principle at a high level of generality. Those ideas do not provide any
resolution for any particular
dispute, the resolution of which will depend upon
the factors and circumstances of that dispute.
Three ideas keep arising in any debate about corporate governance and
directors’ duties: what is the purpose of the corporation;
what kinds of
interests and consequences should directors consider when making decisions; and
how far ahead should they look?
None of those questions are novel. But new and different answers may be
emerging as increasing emphasis is given to how companies
are governed and to
the responses companies can or should have to ESG issues. And if new and
different answers are emerging it is
because the kinds of interests and
consequences which directors should consider are seen as wider than they once
were and, relatedly,
directors are being asked to look beyond the immediate
short-term as may be reflected in metrics like share price, total shareholder
return or reported profit for the latest accounting period. These two causes
— the wider interests and consequences to be considered,
and the longer
horizon — are then seen as provoking further issues about prioritisation
of interests and increased focus on
a need for identification, supervision,
management and disclosure of risk, especially where a particular interest or
interests, and
the applicable time frame, diverge from other relevant
So, what are the events and debates?
II Recent Events and
Debates about Corporate Purpose
There has been a lot of discussion and thought, including in the United
States (‘US’) and the United Kingdom (‘UK’)
to name just
two jurisdictions,
governance in recent years which builds upon debates that have occurred
throughout the 20
The most obvious change that has occurred in the US recently is the Business
Roundtable’s 2019 restatement of corporate purpose
(‘2019 Business
Statement’).
Understanding the nature and extent of that change calls for an understanding of
some matters of history.
In 1932, as the Great Depression continued, Professor Merrick Dodd urged the
view that the management of large companies bore a duty
(after ensuring no more
than a ‘fair’ rate of return to shareholders) to ensure that the
company was operated ‘in
He identified three relevant groups: stockholders, employees, and customers and
the general public.
Adolf Berle (one of those
consulted by Franklin D Roosevelt about the New
offered the contrary view, urging that
historically, and as a matter of law, corporate managements were required to run
the affairs
of the corporation in the interests of the security
Even so, Berle concluded his note on
Professor Dodd’s view by saying:
Most students of corporation finance dream of a time when corporate
administration will be held to a high degree of required responsibility
a responsibility conceived not merely in terms of stockholders’ rights,
but in terms of economic government satisfying
the respective needs of
investors, workers, customers, and the aggregated community. Indications,
indeed, are not wanting that without
such readjustment the corporate system will
involve itself in successive
cataclysms perhaps leading to its ultimate
And by 1954, Berle
could write that the ‘controversy’ between himself and Dodd had been
settled, at least for the time
being, ‘squarely in favor’ of
Dodd’s contention that directors’ exercise of corporate
‘powers were
held in trust for the entire
community’.
Debates of this general kind have continued ever since the 1932 exchange of
views between these two very considerable company
for the last decades of the 20
century and for the early years of
this century, shareholder primacy seemed to be the dominant
The dominance of this view can be traced to the 1970 publication, in
New York Times
, of Professor Milton Friedman’s essay titled ‘A
Friedman Doctrine: The Social Responsibility of Business Is To Increase
In that essay, Friedman wrote that businessmen who said that business is not
concerned ‘merely’ with profit but also
with promoting desirable
‘social’ ends were ‘preaching pure and unadulterated
socialism’ and were ‘unwitting
puppets of the intellectual forces
that have been undermining the basis of a free society these past
For more than three decades, Friedman’s conclusion that the sole role
of the corporation is to maximise profits (if not the
political explanations he
offered in support of that conclusion) dominated the thinking of many
corporate leaders, lawyers, academics, investors, and asset managers in the
US and beyond.
For some at least, however, the 2008 global financial crisis revealed the
inadequacy of focusing only on short-term maximisation of shareholder
returns at the expense of sustainable growth, innovation, and systemic
The ideas put forward by Friedman must be understood against two underlying
considerations: profit can be measured; and changes in
profit can be
observed. There is, therefore, a seductive appearance of objective
mathematical precision in taking profit and changes in profit as
corporate performance. Friedman’s conclusion suggested simplicity and
certainty. Company boards and managers could
focus on only one narrowly defined
objective — profit maximisation. But, of course, ‘profit’ is a
concept calling
for judgement and what significance can or should be attached to
some change in profit over time is also a matter for judgement because
much affected by what has caused the change over the time chosen for
consideration. Put in different terms, the Friedman doctrine’s
not merely short-term but concealed an economic calculus — maximising
profits — which by itself is almost meaningless.
All profit-making
activity involves risk. The Friedman doctrine, even in the short-term, can only
be understood as one that means
‘maximising
profits with a given appetite for risk’.
These difficulties and qualifications could be (and often were) ignored.
Instead, because profit is computed at least annually, the
immediately obvious
time for comparison is year-on-year and immediate attention could always be
directed to the ‘headline number’.
Debates about the causes and
significance of whatever change was seen to have occurred could be pushed to one
More importantly, short-term performance of the company became the touchstone
of success.
And this was justified on the
basis that the company making profit served the interests of the shareholders
‘who own[ed] the
corporation’.
The generality and apparent simplicity of those ideas — serving the
interests of shareholders who ‘owned’ the company
so much that might bear upon a company’s continued success over time. It
treated shareholders as a homogeneous
block having identical reasons to own the
shares they did with identical time horizons. It then treated the members as
with and identical to the corporation despite the corporation having
legal personality.
Two other considerations reinforced the attention to short-term performance.
For many decades, senior corporate executives have been
paid in a way that ties
significant parts of their remuneration to short-term performance measures. The
most obvious measures to
choose have been profit and share price (or some
compound measure like total shareholder return). And both are measures preferred
by hedge funds and other passive investment vehicles which make important parts
of their profits from trading shares in ways that
allow realisation of
short-term gains resulting from short-term fluctuations in share price. Hence
those shareholders favour short
periods for performance measurement and fixing
of variable remuneration. Unsurprisingly, then, the executives who stand to gain
short-term gains may make their business
decisions in ways that will lead to gains of that kind.
This was the context in which the Business Roundtable reconsidered its
statement about corporate purpose. What is the Business Roundtable?
views about corporate purpose matter?
The Business Roundtable describes itself as ‘an association of more
than 200 chief executive officers [(‘CEO’)]
of America’s
leading companies [whose]
members develop and advocate directly for policies to promote a thriving US
economy and expanded opportunity for all
Americans’.
Since 1978, the Business Roundtable has periodically issued principles of
corporate governance.
The documents issued
before 2019 largely endorsed principles of shareholder primacy — that
corporations exist principally to
shareholders.
But in August 2019, the
Business Roundtable redefined the
purpose of the corporation. It said:
While each of our individual companies serves its own corporate purpose, we
share a fundamental commitment to all of our stakeholders.
• Delivering value to our customers. We will further
the tradition of American companies leading the way in meeting or exceeding
customer expectations.
• Investing in our employees. This starts with compensating them fairly
and providing important benefits. It also includes supporting
them through
training and education that help develop new skills for a
rapidly changing world. We foster diversity and inclusion, dignity and
• Dealing fairly and ethically with our suppliers. We are dedicated to
serving as good partners to the other companies, large
and small, that help us
meet our missions.
• Supporting the communities in which we work. We respect the people in
our communities and protect the environment by embracing
sustainable practices
across our businesses.
• Generating long-term value for shareholders, who provide the capital
that allows companies to invest, grow and innovate. We
are committed to
transparency and effective engagement with shareholders.
Each of our stakeholders is essential. We commit to deliver value to all of
them, for the future success of our companies, our communities
The statement was
signed by 181 CEOs.
Later that year, the World Economic Forum adopted a similar position in its
new Davos Manifesto titled ‘The Universal Purpose
of a Company in the
Fourth Industrial Revolution’ (‘Davos Manifesto
The opening paragraph of the
manifesto reads, in part:
The purpose of a company is to engage all its stakeholders in shared and
sustained value creation. In creating such value, a company
serves not only its
shareholders, but all its stakeholders — employees, customers, suppliers,
local communities and society
at large. The best way to understand and harmonize
the divergent interests of all stakeholders is through a shared commitment to
policies and decisions that strengthen the long-term prosperity of a
Relevantly, the
manifesto also states that a
company is more than an economic unit generating wealth. It fulfils human and
societal aspirations as part of the broader social
Performance must
be measured not only on the return to shareholders, but also on how it achieves
its environmental, social and good
stakeholders were not only identified and to be considered but were described as
essential. But none of those identified commitments
to stakeholders can be
measured in the same way as profit can be
and to what extent a company meets any of these commitments will be a matter for
judgement about which reasonable minds may well
differ. But together the
commitments recorded in the statements of the Business Roundtable and the World
Economic Forum marked a
sharp turn away from the Friedman doctrine —
at least in language, if not in
Is the change as radical as it seems to be?
An important clue may be found in the last sentence of the 2019 Business
Roundtable Statement on the purpose of a corporation which
relates the
commitment (to deliver value to all stakeholders) to an outcome that looks to
the future — ‘the
success of our
companies’.
Couple that with the
reference to generating ‘
value for shareholders’
and it is evident that the statement sees the purpose of a corporation as
demanding a more distant
horizon than the next (annual or other) statement of
financial results.
This claimed change in focus and horizon was very significant. It marked a
sharp turn away from how ideas of shareholder primacy had
been understood and
applied. I say understood and applied because there is no compelling prudential
reason why a corporation determined
to measure its performance only by reference
to profit could not treat comparisons from year to year as less significant than
comparisons
over much longer periods. But this was not what shareholder primacy
was seen as demanding. It was seen as demanding
maximisation of profit at every point; nothing more and nothing less.
The 2019 Business Roundtable Statement was released at a time when
there had been increased attention given in the UK to questions about
corporate purpose.
In May 2016, the Big Innovation
published an interim report titled
The Purposeful
The steering group for the
centre’s work included representatives of the Bank of England, large
corporations, and leading business
The central thesis of the report was that ‘[p]urpose is key to corporate
and economic success’.
It concluded
British companies are inadequately organised around clear corporate purposes
that unite all stakeholders in common goals and values.
The economic costs of
this are huge, potentially exceeding £130bn a
In 2017, The British
Academy began what it called its Future of the Corporation programme to explore
the role of business in
programme ran over four years, concluding with a final report published in
British Academy describes the Future of the Corporation programme as having
‘combined research from a range of academic
disciplines with insight from
senior business and policy
The programme’s initial research ‘highlighted trust in business
and its impact on people and the environment along with
globalisation and
technological disruption as drivers of a shifting view of business’ and
was seen as suggesting ‘a need
to develop a new, more human framework for
the corporation around well-defined and aligned purposes, complemented by
ethical cultures
commitments to trustworthiness’.
This led to the development of eight
principles for purposeful business:
Corporate law
should place purpose at the heart of the corporation and
require directors to state their purposes and demonstrate commitment to
should expect particularly high duties of engagement, loyalty
and care on the part of directors of companies to public interests
important public functions.
should recognise obligations of shareholders and engage them in
supporting corporate purposes as well as in their rights to derive
Corporate governance
should align managerial interests with
companies’ purposes and establish accountability to a range of
stakeholders through
appropriate board structures. They should determine a set
of values necessary to deliver purpose, embedded in their company culture.
Measurement
should recognise impacts and investment by companies in their
workers, societies and natural assets both within and outside the firm.
Performance
should be measured against fulfilment of corporate purposes
and profits measured net of the costs of achieving them.
Corporate financing
should be of a form and duration that allows
companies to fund more engaged and long-term investment in their purposes.
Corporate investment
should be made in partnership with private, public
and not-for-profit organisations that contribute towards the fulfilment of
programme understood the purpose of business as ‘creating profitable
solutions for problems of people and planet, and not profiting from creating
Though, the final report
recognised that ‘[f]ew companies take up the option that exists within the
law to adopt purposes beyond
promoting shareholder interests, and there is
insufficient appreciation and enforcement of directors’ duties under the
It recommended that governments
‘put purpose at the heart of company law and the fiduciary
responsibility
of directors’.
However, as the programme’s eight principles of purposeful business
demonstrate, the recommendations were not confined to the
expression of
corporate purposes and the consequences of embedding them in company
constitutions. The programme’s final report
acknowledged that
comprehensive reform would require ‘a coherent set of policies and
practices to be adopted by government,
regulators, business and
investors’.
As the authors of the
report observed, ‘[s]ystemic change needs systematic
solutions’.
To that end, the report
included a raft of recommendations directed at shareholders, directors,
financiers, regulators and governments to both strengthen accountability
for corporate purposes and promote more effective implementation of
corporate purposes.
The British Academy’s system-level view recognised that in the
regulatory network applicable to the conduct and governance of
corporations,
corporate law is but one of many
highlights that corporate law directly and indirectly influences and intersects
with other nodes in the regulatory network,
including the behaviours of
shareholders, asset owners, financiers, regulators and governments, in important
ways. One reason these
influences are important is because they must be
understood if the regulatory network relevant to the conduct and governance of
corporations
is to address effectively systemic problems including, but not
limited to, environmental crises and
financial instability.
These developments in the US and the UK have to be understood in the context
provided by the applicable law.
In the US, where corporate law is state-based, many states (although not
Delaware) have corporate constituency statutes which specifically
directors to consider non-shareholder
example, the provision in New York law provides that, in taking action, a
director is entitled to consider the long-term and
short-term interests of the
corporation and its shareholders and the effects that the corporation’s
actions may have in the
short-term and long-term upon a number of matters,
including employees, customers, creditors, and the ability of the corporation
contribute to the communities in which it does
In the UK, the developments have to be understood against the provisions of s
Companies Act 2006
’) which, as
enacted, provided for the so-called ‘enlightened shareholder value
172 Duty to promote the success of the company
(1) A director of a company must act in the way he considers, in good faith,
would be most likely to promote the success of the company
for the benefit of
its members
, and in doing so have regard (amongst other
matters) to —
(a) the likely consequences of any decision in the long term,
(b) the interests of the company’s employees,
(c) the need to foster the company’s business relationships with
suppliers, customers and others,
(d) the impact of the company’s operations on the community and the
environment,
(e) the desirability of the company maintaining a reputation for high
standards of business conduct, and
(f) the need to act fairly as between members of the company.
(2) Where or to the extent that the purposes of the company consist of or
include purposes other than the benefit of its members,
subsection (1) has
effect as if the reference to promoting the success of the company for the
benefit of its members were to achieving
those purposes.
(3) The duty imposed by this section has effect subject to any enactment or
rule of law requiring directors, in certain circumstances,
to consider or act in
the interests of creditors of the
Notice the express reference to ‘the long term’. Notice the
references to the benefit of the members ‘as a whole’
and to acting
fairly as between members. Notice, too, the obligation to have regard to
employees, suppliers, customers, the impact
of the company’s operations on
the environment and maintaining a reputation for high standards of business
Finally, notice the modification
for directors to promote the success of the company by acting to achieving
the benefit of members, where or to the extent
that the company has such a purpose.
This being the statutory framework in the UK, it is unsurprising that matters
of the kind mentioned in the 2019 Business Roundtable
Statement and the World
Economic Forum’s Davos Manifesto 2020 can be accommodated with (and are to
a significant degree reflected
United Kingdom Corporate
Governance Code 2018
UK Corporate Governance
Principle A of the
UK Corporate Governance Code
identifies the role of
the board as being ‘to promote the long-term sustainable success of the
company, generating value for
shareholders and contributing to wider
And Principle B explains
that the ‘board should establish the company’s purpose, values and
strategy, and
satisfy itself that these and its culture are
UK Corporate Governance Code
is published by the Financial
Reporting Council (‘FRC’) (a body that regulates auditors,
accountants and actuaries, and
sets the UK’s corporate governance and
stewardship codes).
The functions of the
FRC derive from several sources. It has direct statutory powers in relation to
audit regulation and some statutory
powers delegated by the Secretary of State;
some functions are supported by statutory obligations imposed on others to meet
FRC requirements
or participate in arrangements the FRC
Some of its functions have no
statutory backing but ‘derive their authority from widespread support
from, and voluntary arrangements’
stakeholders.
Compliance with the
UK Corporate Governance Code
The Financial Conduct
Authority’s listing rules require listed companies to report on their
compliance with the code on a ‘comply
or explain’
But the FRC’s development of
governance principles has not been confined to large listed entities. In late
2018, the FRC published
The Wates Corporate Governance Principles
Large Private Companies
Wates Corporate Governance
to provide ‘a
framework to help large private companies raise their standards of corporate
governance’.
And now, in 2023, the
Better Business Act campaign, a movement supported by over 2,000 UK businesses
as well as the UK Institute
of Directors,
is advocating for amendments to be made to s 172, among others, such that the
obligation in that section would be reframed as that
to ‘act in the way
the director considers, in good faith,
would be most likely to advance the
purpose of the
In pursuit of the campaign’s stated ambition to ensure its
‘proposals are included in all the main parties’ manifestos’
ahead of the UK general election, in April 2023 the campaign hosted a reception
at Westminster attended by Members of Parliament, policy makers and
business leaders.
Three other international institutions and events must be mentioned. First,
the Financial Stability Board (‘FSB’), established
after the 2009
Group of 20 (‘G20’) Summit in London, is an international body that
monitors and makes recommendations
The FSB’s Task Force on
Climate-related Financial Disclosures (‘TCFD’) has done a lot of
work developing
recommendations
investors, lenders, and insurance underwriters in
appropriately assessing and
pricing ... risks related to climate
recommendations are built around four ‘thematic areas’ —
governance, strategy, risk management,
and metrics and
Together these four areas
represent core elements of how companies work.
Second, in November 2021 at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in
Glasgow, the International Financial Reporting Standards
(‘IFRS’) announced the formation of the International Sustainability
Standards Board (‘ISSB’)
to build upon earlier recommendations of
the TCFD and establish a ‘comprehensive global baseline of sustainability
disclosures
for the capital markets’.
The IFRS describes itself as ‘a not-for-profit, public interest
organisation established to develop high-quality, understandable,
enforceable
and globally accepted accounting and sustainability disclosure
standards’.
The ISSB is now finalising its own general requirements for an entity to
disclose sustainability-related financial
information,
well as specific information about its climate-related risks and opportunities
Climate-Related Disclosures Exposure
Those requirements are expected to be published by
be noted that later this year the revised
Principles of Corporate Governance
will also be
Separately, the American Law Institute (‘ALI’) is currently
working on a restatement of the law of corporate governance.
It published its
first tentative draft in 2022 (‘
Restatement of Corporate Governance
(Tentative Draft)
provision of the proposed restatement — § 2.01 — deals with
‘the objective of a
corporation’.
It states that ‘the objective of a corporation is to enhance the economic
value of the corporation, within the boundaries of
the law’ and
distinguishes between ‘common-law jurisdictions’ (such as Delaware)
and ‘stakeholder jurisdictions’
(which have ‘constituency
statutes’).
In common law
the benefit of the corporation’s
shareholders, and in doing so, a
corporation
consider other stakeholders such as employees, customers,
the community and the environment.
stakeholder jurisdictions, the enhancement of the economic value of the
corporation is for the benefit of shareholders and, to
the extent permitted by
state law, other stakeholders.
What lies behind all of these recent events — the 2019 Business
Roundtable Statement, the Davos Manifesto 2020, the FRC’s
UK Corporate
Governance Code
Wates Corporate Governance Principles
, the TCFD,
the ISSB, as well as s 172 and the ALI’s
Restatement of Corporate
Governance (Tentative Draft)
— is a fundamental shift in the
understanding of corporate purpose and corporate governance. It is certainly a
marked shift
in how corporate purpose and governance is talked about. It remains
to be seen whether the developments will result in material changes
legally, practically or commercially — to how companies are governed,
corporate purposes are identified, stakeholder
interests are considered, and
risk is identified, supervised, managed and
In any event, the changed
understanding of corporate purpose demonstrates that there is greater
recognition that what corporations
do affects not only the economy and the hip
pocket of shareholders but the health and wellbeing of society more generally
and long into the future.
III The Australian
The question for us in Australia is how, if at all, does Australian corporate
law about directors’ duties intersect, reflect and accommodate these
and debates?
The most relevant Australian directors’ duties to consider for present
purposes are:
• the ‘best interests’ and ‘proper purpose’
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act
’), which require directors and officers to
exercise their powers and discharge their duties ‘in good faith in the
interests of the corporation’ and ‘for a proper
treats this as a single duty, it is in fact a compound duty which
contains separate obligations of best interests and proper
• the ‘care and diligence’ duty in
Corporations Act
, which requires that a director or other officer
exercise their powers and discharge their duties with the degree of care and
that a reasonable person would exercise in the same position.
Both of these duties have equivalents in the general law; the difference is
Sections 180
are civil penalty
provisions,
meaning that the potential
consequences for breach include declarations, disqualification, pecuniary
penalties, relinquishment and
compensation,
and criminal liability may also be imposed for breach of
if the director
is reckless or dishonest.
Australian law, however, contains no direct analogue to many of the codes,
principles or provisions mentioned earlier. The ‘best
duty contains no list of mandatory considerations to inform that concept or give
effect to that duty. Does this
matter? How much weight will our statutory
framework of
directors’ duties bear? If they are consistent with giving effect to
purposes and considerations of the kind now described in
the US and UK
provisions and by the other statements and recommendations I have mentioned, do
directors to do so? If they do not, should they? There has
been little exploration in the case law of when a purpose for acting will
beyond those purposes that are ‘proper’. Acting for personal reasons
will not be for the purposes of the corporation.
But what about acting for
purposes that are contrary to the basic constituents of the corporation? Would a
director of a corporation
with environmental objects be acting for proper
purposes if the company invested in a highly profitable project that is known to
cause major pollution?
As will be seen, Australian law may accommodate some of these developments,
but the directors’ duties do not expressly require
or permit directors to
consider matters of the kind set out in the UK and may not permit, or at least
may inhibit, them doing so
in given circumstances.
It may be useful to develop these points about the operation of Australian
law by reference to five matters referred to in s 172 of
Companies Act
• Corporate purpose — how should boards conceive of corporate
• Shareholders — what is meant by the company or members
‘as a whole’ and fairness ‘between’ members?
• Other stakeholders — should boards consider the interests of
employees, customers, suppliers and creditors? Are there
others whose interests
can or should be considered?
• The public interest — should boards take account of
environmental effects or other public interest considerations?
• Horizon — how far ahead should boards be looking?
As will soon appear, these matters overlap.
Australian law makes limited reference to corporate purpose. Old requirements
to state the objects of the company
in the face of companies stating their objects as widely as they could to avoid
possible applications of principles of ultra
There is now no general obligation
to include a reference to
corporate purpose in the company
constitution.
And if a company elects to
include an objects clause in its constitution,
Corporations Act
provides that an act of the company will not be invalid because the act
contravened, or is beyond, an object in the company’s constitution.
Now, perhaps due in part to that change, the closest many Australian
companies come to identification of corporate purpose appears
to be a vision or
mission statement designed more as a public relations tool than a statement
informing why the entity exists, what
it seeks to achieve and how it is
governed. Such statements shed little light on the practical content of
directors’ duties.
We are a long way from the Future of the Corporation
programme’s proposal that we use ‘systems of measurement and
for company purposes and ensure that financial reports reflect costs
and profits of delivering them’.
Australian laws not requiring companies to identify their purpose may leave a
gap to be filled. For all except not-for-profit or charitable
entities or no
liability companies, many boards may fill that gap by framing the purpose as
solely to enhance the economic value
of the corporation for the
shareholders.
That said, the fourth edition of the ASX’s
Corporate Governance
Principles and Recommendations
, published in 2019, recommended for the first
time that a ‘listed entity should articulate and disclose its
This recommendation was in line with the third of eight principles identified by
the ASX Corporate Governance Council, that a ‘listed
entity should instil
and continually reinforce a culture across the organisation of acting lawfully,
ethically and responsibly’.
The ASX Corporate Governance Council commentary on those principles and
recommendations explains that a listed entity’s values
the guiding principles and norms that define what type of organisation it
aspires to be ... creat[ing] a link between the entity’s
purpose (why it
exists) and its strategic goals (what it hopes to do) by expressing the
standards and behaviours it expects from
its directors, senior executives and
employees to fulfil its purpose and meet its
The Council further
states that
[i]n formulating its values, a listed entity should consider what behaviours are
needed from its officers and employees to build
long term sustainable value
for its security holders
. This includes the need for the entity to preserve
and protect its reputation and standing in the community and with key
stakeholders,
such as customers, employees, suppliers, creditors, law makers and
regulators.
Is the reference
to a listed entity’s values something less than what a corporation does,
where it does it, how it does it,
why it does it and who is affected by what it
does? If so, why? But whether the answer is yes or no, many issues appear to be
unaddressed: must a corporation ask these questions; how, or by reference
to what standard, is a corporation to answer these questions;
whose interests
are to be taken into account in formulating the answers; and what
consequences do those answers have for corporate governance and
duties in the short, medium and long term? As will become apparent, the same
questions repeatedly arise.
This commentary can be compared with the Future of the Corporation
programme’s proposal that
[c]ompanies place purpose at the heart of their annual reporting and demonstrate
to their stakeholders how their ownership, governance,
strategy, values,
cultures, engagement, measurement, incentives, financing and resource allocation
deliver it.
This commentary
can also be compared with the programme’s recommendation that
‘[o]wners, boards and executives take responsibility
for overseeing the
adoption and implementation of corporate purposes’, including through
measuring, reporting, and basing the
company’s incentives and remuneration
on, the fulfilment of corporate
Encouraging or obliging companies to identify the purposes that they seek to
pursue in the short, medium and long term is the first
step towards companies
identifying not only why they exist but also the immediate and longer-term risks
from pursuing those purposes.
Connecting a statement of purpose with
identification of risk may inhibit adoption of a boundless laundry list of
purposes because
the wider the list of purposes the longer and more diverse the
list of risks. But identification of purpose is just one aspect to
be addressed.
Careful identification of the content of the legal obligations informed by that
purpose is no less important.
Shareholders
The debate about the separation, if any, between the interests of the company
and the interests of its shareholders
Because companies are abstract right- and duty-bearing entities, the
temptation to draw comparisons with natural persons is very strong.
unsurprising then, that when we speak of directors owing duties to the company,
we seek to personify the beneficiaries of that
obligation as the
‘members’ as if all shareholders were natural persons. And it is
often tempting to frame the kinds
of outcome to be sought or avoided in pursuit
of the interests of members as some generalised statement of desires attributed
some or all of those members.
Steps of that kind are apt to mislead or confuse.
Articulating the content of the ‘best interests’ and
‘proper purpose’ duties must stop at a level of abstraction
points towards what would
the duty or would amount to an
purpose. Going beyond that seeks to gloss the statutory language
and if that is done, error beckons. That is, like the case law,
which inevitably
focuses on whether there has been a
of the relevant duty or duties
concerned, it will usually be more profitable to look at the ‘best
interests’ and ‘proper
purpose’ duties through the lens of
what is not best interests and what is not proper purpose.
When that is done, the matters mentioned in
— in particular the references to ‘members as a
whole’ and ‘fair[ness] ... between members’ —
to fit neatly within the best interests and proper purpose duties. They fit
neatly within those concepts in the sense that
not taking account of the
interests of one group of members may well constitute a failure to act in the
best interests of the company
and preferring the interests of one group of
members to the exclusion of the interests of another group may well be, as the
decision in
Mills v Mills
demonstrates, to act for an improper
is providing is a more particular identification of whose
interests must be considered than may be conveyed by saying only that it
in the best interests of the company. That latter concept — ‘best
interests’ of the company — does
not expressly tell a director to
take account of the various interests referred to in
It might be
understood as referring to the best interests of the company having regard to
all those who are interested in the company
rather than trying to identify some
notion of ‘members as a whole’.
Stakeholders
What about considering the interests of other stakeholders like employees,
customers, suppliers and creditors?
Unsurprisingly, this question has been the subject of wide and ongoing
debate. At one end of the spectrum, those who subscribe to
doctrine would readily deny the consideration of such interests to the extent
that it detracts from the attainment
At the opposite end of the
spectrum, those with a communitarian perspective are likely to support affording
each set of interests
equal weight in acknowledgement that the corporation is
drawn from, and reliant upon, the community it operates within and
Other commentators contend that
companies should not build into their core business the concerns of too many
stakeholders because
doing so risks organisational
Instead, companies should
build a deeper understanding of the societal challenges and stakeholders most
critical to their business
focus on those.
The spectrum of views
Whether and when a company and its board should consider the interests of
creditors has long been controversial.
The Supreme Court of the UK
considered the issues recently in
BTI 2014 LLC v Sequana
These issues have been and will be litigated here. I therefore say nothing more
What about other stakeholders? Unlike the UK, there is no legislation in
Australia that expressly
directors to consider the interests of
employees, customers and contractors when making decisions in the best interests
the company.
Of course, companies are subject to specific laws that are aimed at
protecting some stakeholder interests — environmental protection,
occupational health and safety, employment and industrial relations, consumer
protection and whistleblower laws, to name a few. As
I will address shortly,
directors may breach their duties if they disregard such laws or fail to take
appropriate steps to ensure
that the company complies with those laws.
Apart from where a specific stakeholder or stakeholder interest is the
subject of direct regulation, whether and how a company
consider the interests of stakeholders like employees, customers
and suppliers will almost always intersect with what s 172(1)(e)
Companies Act
describes as ‘the desirability of the
company maintaining a reputation for high standards of business conduct’.
that is seen not to treat employees, customers or suppliers well will
not enjoy a reputation for high standards of business conduct.
It will lose the
trust of its stakeholders, sometimes referred to as a business’ social
licence to operate.
Whether, when and
how that reputation affects the company’s financial performance will be
much affected by the market or markets
in which the company operates. But the
time, effort, and money that so many companies devote to burnishing their
reputations suggest
that they see close links between reputation and
performance.
At general law, directors are given considerable latitude to determine where
the company’s interests lie and how they are to
be served. Subject to
limited review by courts, it is for the directors to determine what are the best
interests of the company.
This principle
is also reflected in the
Corporations Act
director or officer ‘who makes a business judgment is taken to meet’
the ‘care and diligence’
and their equivalent general law
duties, if they, among other things, ‘rationally believe that the judgment
is in the best
interests of the
corporation’
— and a belief
is deemed to be ‘rational’ unless it is one that ‘no
reasonable person’ in the director’s
position would
It remains important to observe, however, that
[t]he longer the period of reference, the more likely it is that the interests
of shareholders, customers, employees and all associated
with any corporation
will be seen as converging on the corporation’s continued long-term
financial advantage. And long-term
financial advantage will more likely follow
if the entity conducts its business according to proper standards, treats its
well and seeks to provide financial results to shareholders that, in
the long run, are better than other investments of broadly similar
All this being so,
it is at least arguable that a board considering the interests of a broad range
of stakeholders in the manner I
have described is doing no more than acting for
the benefit of the corporation in accordance with existing
That directors may take a broad view of the ‘best interests’ duty
is consistent with the empirical evidence assembled
by Marshall and Ramsay in
their 2012 paper about directors’ understanding of their duties and
responses to what was then called
the ‘corporate social
responsibility’ movement.
than a decade later, the issues examined in that paper remain unresolved, and as
will be seen, remain uncertain in the face
of continuing debate, discussion and
diverse regulatory responses.
What is not clear is whether or to what extent under Australian law directors
take into account interests of not only shareholders but also
‘customers, employees and all associated with any corporation’
including suppliers and creditors. Nor is it clear
that question is
to be answered recognising that corporations operate in complex environments and
face a multitude of overlapping
rules and risks. Stakeholders are not uniform
and balancing their respective interests is invariably difficult. Does
identification
of corporate purpose drafted by reference to what a corporation
does, where it does it, how it does it, why it does it and who is
provide a base — a better base — for informed corporate
decision-making, for the balancing of competing interests
in the short, medium
and long term and for better and informed regulation and, possibly, enforcement
of corporate governance?
The fourth of the five topics I suggest arises from s 172 of the
Companies Act
is the public interest. The public as a stakeholder has
interests that raise distinct issues. For example, do the ‘best
and ‘proper purpose’ duties permit or require a
board to consider ‘the impact of the company’s operations
community and the environment’?
More generally, do those duties permit or require a board to consider that kind
of ESG issue?
Boards must apply reasonable care and diligence to identify, supervise,
manage and disclose risks to the company’s
The issues with which I am
concerned are those which are material to long-term performance of the company
— its sustainability
and its long-term value creation. Two examples may
make the point, one a social issue, the other environmental. A company selling
harmful, poor value or otherwise inappropriate products to vulnerable consumers
can be framed as a social issue and thus an ESG issue.
Similarly, a company
lawfully, but harmfully, disposing of hazardous waste from its
manufacturing processes may be framed as an environmental issue. Both are
steps which may contribute to the company’s profit, but each is an act
that can be framed as an ESG issue (and in ways that are damaging to the
company’s reputation).
Framing the issue as an ESG issue does not dictate the outcome. That is,
recognising that the issue is an ‘ESG issue’
— or might be
labelled as an ‘ESG issue’ — is not a trump card that obliges
the board to stop or modify the
practice in question.
In either of the cases mentioned, the ‘best interests’ duty may
well be understood as obliging the board to take reasonable
care to identify and
recognise the risks
from continued pursuit of a relevant practice
and then, according to the nature and intensity of the risks identified, take
action in response. But it will be the nature and intensity of the risk
to the company
that will be of central importance.
This is not consistent with s 172 of the
Companies Act
insofar as that provision requires a board to look beyond risks
and consider the impact of the company’s operations on the
community and the environment. And the Australian ‘best interests’
duty may not be consistent with the ALI’s
Restatement of Corporate
Governance (Tentative Draft)
, which permits
a corporation to consider the impact of its operations on the community and
the environment when pursuing the objective of enhancing its economic value
for shareholders.
That said, there is of course direct legislation and regulation in Australia
aimed at the protection of specific stakeholders and
the environment from the
impacts of corporate activity. For example, the new ‘general environmental
duty’ in Victoria,
which came into effect in July 2021, requires a
‘person who is engaging in an activity that may give rise to risks of harm
to human health or the environment from pollution or waste’ to
‘minimise those risks, so far as reasonably
practicable’.
A person who is
conducting a business or undertaking will also be deemed to have contravened the
general environmental duty in certain
circumstances, including where the person
fails, so far as reasonably practicable, to ‘use and maintain systems for
identification,
assessment and control of risks of harm to human health and the
environment from pollution and waste that may arise in connection
Breach of this
obligation may result in civil
and, where committed in the
course of a business or undertaking, criminal
both for companies and for
directors and other officers.
Failure to comply with specific laws for stakeholder or environmental
protection may also result in liability for directors under
the ‘care and
diligence’ and ‘best interests’ directors’ duties. As
Edelman J observed in
Securities and Investments Commission v Cassimatis [No 8]
[a] corporation has a real and substantial interest in the
conduct of its activity independently of whether the
illegitimacy of that conduct will be detected or would cause loss. One reason
for that interest is the corporation’s reputation. ... Another is that the
corporation itself exists as a vehicle for lawful
activity. ... [T]he
foreseeable risk of harm to the corporation which falls to be considered in s
180(1) is not confined to financial
harm. It includes harm to
interests of the corporation ... including its reputation, includ[ing] its
interests which relate to compliance with the
It is useful to
explore these issues of public interest further by reference to what has come to
be called the ‘Caremark’
doctrine in the US. In 1996, in
Caremark International Inc Derivative Litigation
, the Delaware Court of
Chancery considered what duties directors have to oversee the company’s
activities.
The ‘Caremark’ oversight obligation was said to be rooted in a
director’s duty to act in good faith and be reasonably
informed about the
corporation.
In 2019, in the
Marchand v Barnhill
case, the Supreme Court of Delaware said that ‘directors have a duty
“to exercise oversight” and to monitor
the corporation’s
operational viability, legal compliance, and financial performance’ and
that a ‘board’s
“utter failure to attempt to assure a
reasonable information and reporting system exists” is an act of bad faith
of the [directors’] duty of
The facts of that case are revealing.
Blue Bell’s only product was ice cream. There was a listeria outbreak.
After eating some of Blue Bell’s ice cream, customers
got sick, some died.
The company operated in a highly regulated
environment.
It was subject to
government inspection and oversight. The company had in place some safety
manuals and commissioned audits from
But none of that showed that the
board implemented any reporting system to monitor food safety or the
company’s operational
performance. The Court held that the fact that Blue
Bell complied with some regulations did not foreclose the inference that
directors’ lack of attentiveness rose to the level of bad
faith indifference required to state a
Court said that ‘[i]f
means anything, it is that a
corporate board must make a good faith effort to exercise its duty of
It is the ‘failure to
make that effort’ that constitutes a breach of the duty
of loyalty.
The issue in
was whether the directors had made a good faith
effort to address what had to be ‘one of the most central issues at the
whether it is ensuring that the only product it makes — ice cream
— is safe to eat’.
no board committee that addressed food safety; there were no regular processes
or protocols obliging management to keep
the board apprised of food safety
compliance practices, risks or
Facts of this kind may well found a claim under existing provisions of
Australian law — a claim that there had been a failure
to meet the
‘care and diligence’ duty in s
2009, Austin J noted that discharge by directors of their
‘oversight’ duties under
Corporations Act
not protected by the business judgment rule under
because the failure
to discharge those duties did not involve any ‘business judgment’ or
‘decision to take or not
Rather, Austin J suggested such a failure would amount to neglecting to deal
with proper safeguards or turn one’s mind to what
safeguards there should
Even where a director has made a
‘business judgment’, subsequent cases have reinforced the
propositions that a director
has the onus of proving that they made the
judgement in good faith for a proper purpose and where that onus is not
discharged the
defence cannot be
established.
But even if that is right, the kind of analysis made in
later cases may raise quite difficult questions about how those ideas fit with
‘best interests’ duties and ‘proper
requirements. The risk considered in the
case went to the heart
of Blue Bell’s business. How do best interests and proper purpose duties
(or duties of care and diligence)
intersect with other kinds of risk?
Good corporate governance may require boards to identify, supervise, manage
and disclose identifiable risk, but is this required by
law? If so, what kinds
of risk are to be addressed? What is the risk matrix to be adopted — risks
to whom? Risks of what intensity?
Risks of what likelihood and proximity? And
over what time horizon? These questions point to a disconnect between
corporate purpose, corporate governance and the content and enforcement of
What about the last of the matters raised by
Ignoring long-term consequences
and looking
to the short term may as easily found a case of breach
of the Australian provisions as it would of s 172(1)(a) of the
Companies Act
, despite there being no express mention in the Australian
provisions of directors needing to take account of the long-term consequences
of a decision.
On the investment side, by failing to consider the interests of long-term
investors, Australian asset owners may not satisfy the
Australian Asset
Owner Stewardship Code
’) published by
the Australian Council of Superannuation
states that signatories should ‘encourage
better alignment of the operation of the financial system and regulatory policy
the interests of
is voluntary and where a signatory is not acting in compliance with
’s principles, the signatory must
explain why that is so.
Considering the
criticisms which have been made of Australia’s stewardship
further work in this area may assist in bringing Australia into line with asset
stewardship practices internationally.
Such work could also support the proposal of the Future of the Corporation
programme that ‘[f]inancial institutions steward
investments in companies to promote companies’
While stewardship codes which emphasise long-term corporate value may provide
some comfort to directors who are considering how a
decision may affect the
interests of shareholders to whom the code or codes apply, many uncertainties
remain. The economic value
of a corporation can be identified at any time. But
when deciding whether the value of the enterprise will be enhanced over time,
one must consider whether the change in value that might be achieved is
sustainable for an economically significant period of time.
Those questions
— what value, what measure and what is an economically significant period
of time — and the answers to
those questions, are not straightforward.
Corporate purpose may have a role to play in assisting with framing the
questions and the answers. At present, the purpose of the
activities of the
corporation is not defined and the contents of the legal obligations (governing
the activities and the decisions
made) are opaque or arguably not fit for
purpose. Unsurprisingly, this limits the capacity of regulators to adequately
will leave it to others to consider whether giving regulators new
powers to ‘hold directors and controlling owners to account
corporate purposes’ is an idea which holds any
The regulatory impact of such
existing legal obligations is, however, reduced if the time between the activity
and any enforcement,
whether by regulator or private litigation, is too long to
effect a change in behaviour. And that still leaves very large questions
whose interests
are to be considered and how the effect on those interests is to be measured
and remedied.
IV Responses and
Observations
How Australian companies should respond to or deal with these issues —
how Australian companies should identify, supervise,
manage and disclose
identifiable risk — remain current matters of unresolved controversy.
These issues
in Australia are not new. The Australian responses so far are unsurprisingly
fragmented and anything but unified and certain.
Two areas illustrate this uncertainty. First, discussion and guidance on
the extent to which directors can and should consider interests other than
shareholder interests. Second, the identification, supervision, management
disclosure of environmental risks, particularly climate risks.
Turning to that first area — there have been a number of inquiries and
consultations in Australia into the meaning of ‘best
interests of the
company’ and the degree to which it accommodates interests other than
shareholder interests.
In 2005 and 2006,
there were two parallel
While each inquiry came to the same conclusion — that no reform was
necessary because the existing law was sufficiently broad
— each adopted
different interpretations of the scope of the ‘best interests’
The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services
(‘PJC’) was of the view that there was ‘no
need to change the
existing legal framework, because it is currently sufficiently open to allow
companies to pursue a strategy of
enlightened self
The PJC said that it
preferred the interpretation of directors’ duties that
acknowledges that investments in corporate responsibility and corporate
philanthropy can contribute to the long term viability of
a company even where
they do not generate immediate profit. ... [D]irectors may consider and act upon
the legitimate interests of
stakeholders to the extent that these interests are
relevant to the corporation. ... [F]orward thinking directors, motivated by an
enlightened approach to the company’s self-interest, can undertake
activities which contribute to social wellbeing and environmental
protection,
and which are clearly in the best interests of the company from a commercial
perspective.
Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee (‘CAMAC’) agreed with
the PJC that no reform was required, taking the
view that, ‘[t]he
established formulation of directors’ duties allows directors sufficient
flexibility to take relevant
interests and broader community considerations into
account’ and ‘[c]hanges of a kind proposed from time to time do not
provide meaningful clarification for directors, yet risk obscuring their
accountability’.
The CAMAC however
took a less expansive view of the ‘best interests’ duty — that
it obliged directors to act in
the best interests of the shareholders generally,
although directors could take into account other interests if this benefited
the shareholders as a whole.
The Governance Institute of Australia issued a discussion paper in 2014
titled ‘Shareholder Primacy: Is There a Need for Change?’,
April 2019, the Australian Institute of Company Directors released a
consultation paper titled ‘Forward Governance Agenda:
Lifting Standards
and Practice’.
In 2022, the
Australian Institute of Company Directors sought and published advice from
counsel on questions including whether the
law, as it now stands, requires
directors to take account of the purposes of the company and the interests of
stakeholders other
than shareholders and
The advice included that the
meaning of ‘the interests of the company’ may be different under the
general law and the
Corporations
and that it may be not
merely permissible, but mandatory, to have regard to the ‘interests of
persons such as customers, employees,
suppliers and the local community in which
a company conducts business,
at least insofar as these persons may be the
subject of the company’s legal
obligations
Following the
publication of that advice, the Australian Institute of Company Directors issued
a practice statement which explained
that ‘[a]s a guiding principle,
directors should take a long-term view of where the company’s interests
lie, while seeking
to maintain as respectful and transparent a relationship as
possible with stakeholder
Clearly the issue of when and how directors may and must consider
stakeholder or ‘third-party’ interests is an area of ongoing
and uncertainty.
Second, there is the developing area of the identification, supervision,
management and disclosure of ESG risks. A lot has been written.
From time to time since 2016, the Centre for Policy Development, an
independent policy institute, has sought and published opinions
of counsel on
the extent to which the ‘care and diligence’ duty permits or
requires Australian directors to respond to
climate risks. In 2016, the opinion
focused on the existence of a
2019, the opinion argued that the risk of liability for directors was rising
exponentially;
and in 2021, the focus of
the opinion shifted to how the duty is
discharged.
In terms of disclosure, in April 2011, the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission (‘ASIC’) published
Prospective Financial
Information
Regulatory Guide 170
’) giving guidance to
issuers of financial products on ASIC’s ‘approach to the use of
prospective financial information
(including financial forecasts and
projections) in a disclosure document or Product Disclosure
Statement’.
Regulatory Guide 170
drew a distinction between short-term
estimates (not exceeding two years) relating to an existing business and
prospective financial information for a longer
The latter class of information,
it was said, ‘may require independent or objectively verifiable sources of
information to
establish that there are reasonable grounds to provide
As I explained earlier, the ASX Corporate Governance Council has issued
Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations
. The latest edition,
published in February 2019,
that listed entities disclose
whether they have any ‘material exposure to environmental or social
risks’ and, if they
do, ‘how [the entity] manages or intends to
manage those
‘Material exposure’ in this context is defined as meaning ‘a
real possibility that the risk in question could materially
impact the listed
entity’s ability to create or preserve value for security holders over the
short, medium or
And the commentary to
the recommendation explains that ‘[h]ow an entity manages environmental
and social risks can affect its
ability to create long-term value for security
In August 2019, ASIC published
Effective Disclosure in an Operating and
Financial Review
Regulatory Guide 247
that a company’s operating and financial review
should include a discussion of environmental, social and governance risks where
those risks could affect the entity’s achievement
performance or outcomes disclosed, taking into account the nature and business
of the entity and its business strategy.
Regulatory Guide 247
states that each risk disclosed
should ‘be described in its context (eg why the risk is important ... and
its potential impact
on the entity’s financial prospects)’ and
accompanied by ‘relevant associated analytical comments (eg whether the
risk is expected to increase or decrease in the foreseeable future)’, as
well as how management will control or manage risk
factors within its
The guide states ASIC’s
view that ‘the risk of being found liable for a misleading or deceptive
forward-looking statement
is minimal’ provided, among other things,
‘the statements are properly framed ... [as] being based on the
information
available at [the] time’, the ‘statements have a
reasonable basis, which involves good governance at [the] board level
signing off on the statements’ and ‘there is ongoing compliance with
continuous disclosure obligations when events
or results overtake forward
looking statements’.
In June 2022, ASIC published Information Sheet 271 titled, and on, ‘How
To Avoid Greenwashing when Offering or Promoting Sustainability-Related
Products’ issued by funds.
states that the ‘principles’ in it ‘may apply to other
entities that offer or promote financial products that
take into account
sustainability-related
considerations’.
Information Sheet, ‘[t]o help improve the quality of disclosure’,
ASIC recognises and encourages voluntary disclosure
in accordance with the TCFD
— that is, the framework
by the FSB’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures which
referred to earlier.
More recently, in December 2022, Commonwealth Treasury released its
Climate-Related Financial Disclosure
consultation paper building on the
work of the
Treasury’s consultation paper notes that several jurisdictions are
contemplating, or have introduced, mandatory requirements
for large companies to
disclose climate-related risks in line with the TCFD’s recommendations,
and that these developments
‘create a potential guidance gap for
Australia’.
To that end, the
consultation paper’s stated purpose was to focus on climate disclosure
reforms, as part of a broader initiative
by government to ‘introduce
standardised, internationally-aligned reporting requirements for businesses to
make disclosures
regarding governance, strategy, risk management, targets and
metrics — including greenhouse
In the same month, the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors
published an opinion on the potential liability of directors
for forward-looking
statements under the ISSB’s
Climate-Related Disclosures Exposure
As I mentioned, the finalised version of the ISSB’s
Climate-Related
Disclosures
standard is expected to be published by July
The advice addressed three
questions: whether the requirements in the
Climate-Related Disclosures
Exposure Draft
presented ‘
liability risks to company
directors of publicly-listed corporations’ compared to those under
prevailing disclosure laws; to
what extent a ‘safe harbour’
attaching to such forward-looking disclosures was ‘necessary or desirable
to manage liability exposure risks for directors’; and
‘[w]hat general principles of governance practice should be followed
directors in order to minimise liability concerns associated with
forward-looking statements made under’ the
Climate-Related Disclosure
Exposure Draft
My purpose in mentioning these disparate developments is not to examine or
comment on their particular content or to provide any resolution
any particular dispute, the resolution of which will depend upon the
factors and circumstances of that dispute. Rather, it is to make the
eight observations.
First, melding what has been published into a coherent, readily understood
and explained set of principles informing what directors
must do and what they
can do is not easy. The ideas come from different sources and are all at
different stages of development. Some
are no more than
some are inconsistent one with
Do we adopt the lowest or
highest common denominator,
when different government agencies appear to rely on different standards and
recommendations?
The reality that the legal landscape of corporate governance is permeated by
soft laws presents problems and opportunities. Such permeation
may undermine the
law’s certainty and capacity to be understood: important aspects of the
rule of law. But a legal landscape
permeated by soft laws also presents
opportunities. Soft law can develop much faster than legislation or case law and
may be more
dynamic and responsive to shifts in societal perspectives and
advancements in technology and knowledge. It may also more quickly
significant degree of consistency across jurisdictions. That is evident from the
widespread adoption of the recommendations
Does that have anything to say
Second, it is equally difficult to say whether, and to what extent, the
provisions and publications that form part of the current
Australian corporate
governance landscape
that existing law
directors to
take account of the interests of non-shareholders or obliges them to do
This may be due to the open-textured
nature of the statutory provisions and the proliferation of soft law guidance
such as the ASX
Corporate Governance Council’s
Principles and
Recommendations
, ASIC regulatory guides and information sheets, ASX listing
rules guidance notes, TCFD recommendations and ISSB standards. And soft
been used in past cases concerning directors’ duties to inform how a
reasonable director would conduct
themselves.
The uncertainty about if,
and if so to what extent, the interests of non-shareholders are to be considered
may also be attributable
to the absence of bright lines between financial and
non-financial risks in modern corporate governance, particularly when a
long-term perspective is adopted.
Third, at least some of the questions posed in these first two observations
are more readily answered in other jurisdictions because
corporate law in those
may have a greater volume
of specific laws and regulations designed to protect
the environment and some other stakeholder interests than other jurisdictions
which means those matters may need to be considered to ensure compliance with
those laws, and to discharge directors’ ‘best
interests’ and
‘care and diligence’ duties. Directors and companies have no choice
except to comply with those
laws. Is that a better model? If so, this means
those matters may need to be considered to ensure compliance with those laws,
to discharge directors’ ‘best interests’ and ‘care
and diligence’ duties.
Fourth, are the only risks to be considered by directors risks affecting
enhancement of the economic value of the corporation? Are
risks to community and
the environment relevant? Are those risks relevant
if they are risks
that may affect the economic value of the corporation? If directors may consider
any or all of these risks, must
they? Arguably, many so-called ‘ESG
risks’ have a significant financial dimension and consequently cannot be
directors even on the strictest interpretation of shareholder primacy.
Fifth, it is foreseeable that public disclosure of some forms of ESG
information may be mandated. Disclosures with respect to climate
and the gender pay
are two examples. How will the
regulatory framework balance the competing objectives of comparability and
usefulness to ensure that
the disclosures best inform the market?
Sixth, any consideration of risk looks ahead and often demands making
financial predictions in the short, medium and long term. Are
principles of the
kind described in
Regulatory Guide 170
to apply more broadly? In what
circumstances should ESG issues be disclosed in a company’s operating and
financial review under
Regulatory Guide 247
? Is the general law
prohibiting misleading and deceptive conduct to
so, what evidence will be necessary to establish ‘reasonable
grounds’ for making representations as to future ESG
are these matters to be regulated only through the provisions governing the
obligations of directors? Will directors be able to
avail themselves of the
business judgment rule? And is good faith and honesty to be the sole measure of
what directors do, or is
there to be some external and objective norm or
standard? Do we need to revisit whether new safe harbour provisions are
or desirable in the short, medium or long term and, if so, what
principles should determine the purpose and dimensions of that harbour?
Seventh, how, if at all, should the framing of these questions and the
answers to them relate to the need for, and appropriate identification of,
corporate purpose?
Eighth, these observations, these questions, are not just a debate about
legal theory. Research suggests that purposeful companies
achieve better
financial performance.
Uncertainties
the costs of doing business.
— and often competing — concerns of over-regulation and uncertainty
are real. Some suggest these uncertainties
discourage people from taking up
directorships.
Would eliminating the uncertainties, or even some of them, bring economic and
other benefits?
V Conclusion
In 2023, what is now believed to be a company’s purpose, and thus what
are its interests, appears to have fundamentally changed.
Is it now time in
Australia to mirror what is happening in the UK and the US? Or, should we be
aiming higher to reflect better the
place which companies now have not only in
the economic life of the country but the place they have more broadly in our
Is it time to be as bold as the Victorian legislature was in 1958
— when this State was the ‘first ... in the English-speaking
to enact a publicly
enforceable statutory duty requiring a director to ‘at all times act
honestly and use reasonable diligence in the discharge
of the duties of his
— and enact a law
that deals directly with corporate purpose, horizon and risk and how those are
properly to be reflected in
directors’ duties and the law of corporate
governance more generally?
These questions have to be answered knowing whether and to what extent there
is, and may in practical terms necessarily has to be,
a disconnection
between all three elements — activity, obligation and enforcement. Or,
put in different terms, can it be said with the appropriate
level of certainty
that activity, obligation and enforcement proceed from the same known and
suitable premises? One might ask: how
and to what extent should corporate law
— directors’ duties and corporate governance — address the
purposes and
activities of a corporation and then require, or permit, the
identification, supervision, management and disclosure of risk when
purposes and activities intersect with or affect the interests of shareholders,
asset owners, financiers, regulators, the community
and governments? Or is it
time to ask whether there is a need for a whole of law response which adopts a
system-level view and review
of the regulatory network affecting corporate
conduct and governance
in shaping the
nature and conduct of the modern corporation and its role in society?
In the preface to the first edition of
Principles of Company Law
Professor Ford wrote that ‘[o]ver the years company legislation, like most
enacted law of long standing, has attracted to
itself new provisions to meet
felt needs of various periods’.
anniversary of the first edition approaches, perhaps it
is time to ask whether the provisions of the
Corporations Act
more generally, will or needs to attract new provisions to meet the
‘felt needs’ of this period.
* Justice of the High Court of Australia. This is an edited version of the
Harold Ford Memorial Lecture delivered at Melbourne Law
School on 24 May 2023.
My thanks to Nicholas Carey, Margaret Brown and Nicholas Young for their
invaluable assistance in its preparation.
Any errors or omissions are mine.
See, eg, Chief Justice Marilyn Warren,
‘Corporate Structures, the Veil and the Role of the Courts’
[2017] MelbULawRw 7
Melbourne University Law Review
See, eg, Elizabeth Pollman, ‘The
Making and Meaning of ESG’ (Working Paper No 659/2022, European Corporate
Institute, October 2022) 1; Martin Lipton, ‘On the Debate
regarding ESG, Stakeholder Governance, and Corporate Purpose’,
Law School Forum on Corporate Governance
(Forum Post, 14 March 2023)
<https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2023/03/14/on-the-debate-regarding-esg-stakeholder-governance-and-corporate-purpose/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/5HQY-YEPT>.
There have also been significant
developments of this kind in the European Union: see, eg,
Regulation (EU)
2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on
Sustainability-Related Disclosures
in the Financial Services Sector
OJ L 317/1;
Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 December 2022 Amending Regulation (EU) No 537/2014, Directive
2004/109/EC,
Directive 2006/43/EC and
Directive 2013/34/EU, as Regards Corporate Sustainability Reporting
[2022] OJ L 322/17. See also EY,
Study on Directors’ Duties and
Sustainable Corporate Governance
(Final Report, July 2020) 1, which was
prepared for the European Commission Directorate General for Justice and
‘Business Roundtable Redefines the
Purpose of a Corporation To Promote “an Economy That Serves All
Americans”’,
Business Roundtable
(Web Page, 19 August 2019)
<https://www.businessroundtable.org/business-roundtable-redefines-the-purpose-of-a-corporation-to-promot​e-an-economy-that-serves-all-americans>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/A7Y5-76HQ> (‘2019 Business Roundtable
Statement’). Cf Business Roundtable, ‘Statement
on Corporate
Governance’ (White Paper, September 1997) 1–3.
E Merrick Dodd Jr, ‘For Whom Are
Corporate Managers Trustees?’
(1932) 45(7)
Harvard Law Review
1154, quoting Owen D Young (Speech, Park Avenue Baptist Church,
January 1929), as quoted in John H Sears,
The New Place of the
Stockholder
(Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1929).
See above n
Albin Krebs, ‘Adolf A Berle Jr Dies
at Age of 76: Lawyer, Economist, Liberal Leader Aided Presidents’,
New York Times
(New York, 19 February 1971) 1.
AA Berle Jr, ‘For Whom Corporate
Trustees: A Note’
(1932) 45(8)
Harvard Law
Adolf A Berle Jr,
Century Capitalist Revolution
(Harcourt, Brace and Company,
See, eg, William T Allen, ‘Our
Schizophrenic Conception of the Business Corporation’
(1992) 14(2)
Cardozo Law Review
; Stephen M Bainbridge, ‘In Defense of the
Shareholder Wealth Maximization Norm: A Reply to Professor Green’ (1993)
Washington and Lee Law
1423 (‘In Defense of the Shareholder Wealth Maximization
Norm’); Henry Hansmann and Reinier Kraakman, ‘The End
of History for
Corporate Law’
(2001) 89(2)
Georgetown Law Journal
Stout, ‘Bad and Not-So-Bad Arguments for Shareholder Primacy’
Southern California Law Review
; Jean Jacques du Plessis,
‘Corporate Governance, Corporate Responsibility and Law’
Company and Securities Law Journal
; Tim Connor and Andrew
O’Beid, ‘Clarifying Terms in the Debate regarding “Shareholder
(2020) 35(3)
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
See, eg, Bainbridge, ‘In Defense
of the Shareholder Wealth Maximization Norm’ (n
1423–5; Hansmann and Kraakman (n
) 440–1; Colin Mayer, ‘The
Future of the Corporation: Towards Humane Business’ (2018) 6
(Supplementary Issue 1)
Journal of the British Academy
Martin Lipton, ‘The Friedman Essay and the True Purpose of the Business
Corporation’,
Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance
(Forum Post, 17 September 2020)
<https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2020/09/17/the-friedman-essay-and-the-true-purpose-of-the-business-corporation/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/PUP8-TZ5Z> (‘The Friedman
Essay’); Connor and O’Beid (n
Milton Friedman, ‘A Friedman
Doctrine: The Social Responsibility of Business Is To Increase Its
The New York Times
(New York, 13 September 1970). Though
it has been suggested that Friedman’s essay in
The New York Times
was not a fundamental departure from conventional wisdom at the time: see
generally Brian R Cheffins, ‘Stop Blaming Milton
Washington University Law Review
Friedman (n
See Ronald Chen and Jon Hanson,
‘The Illusion of Law: The Legitimacy Schemas of Modern Policy and
Corporate Law’
(2004) 103(1)
Michigan Law Review
, 42; Antony
Page, ‘Has Corporate Law Failed? Addressing Proposals for Reform’
(2009) 107(6)
Michigan Law Review
, 979–80; Mayer (n
) 3–4; Lipton, ‘The Friedman
Andrew Keay, ‘Risk, Shareholder
Pressure and Short-Termism in Financial Institutions: Does Enlightened
Shareholder Value Offer
a Panacea?’ (2011) 5(6)
Law and Financial
435, 437–9; Sheila Bair, ‘Lessons of the Financial
Crisis: The Dangers of Short-Termism’,
Harvard Law School Forum on
Corporate Governance
(Forum Post, 4 July 2011) <
https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2011/07/04/lessons-of-the-financial-crisis-the-dangers-of-short-termism/
archived at <https://perma.cc/NS8D-E6Q7>; Lynne L Dallas,
‘Short-Termism, the Financial Crisis, and Corporate Governance’
(2012) 37(2)
Journal of Corporation Law
See, eg, above n
Friedman (n
Salomon v A Salomon & Co
[1897] AC 22, 30, 33–4 (Lord Halsbury
, Lord Morris agreeing at 54), 42–3 (Lord
Herschell, Lord Morris agreeing at 54), 51 (Lord Macnaghten, Lord Morris
at 54), 56 (Lord Davey, Lord Morris agreeing at 54);
Australasian Temperance & General Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd v
[1922] HCA 50
(1922) 31 CLR 290
, 309 (Isaacs J);
New South Wales v Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 52
(2006) 229 CLR 1
, 97 [121] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Crennan
Work Choices Case
Sons of Gwalia Ltd v
(2007) 231 CLR 160, 175 [3]–[4] (Gleeson CJ), 186 [38]
(Gummow J), 227 [183] (Hayne J), 247 [243] (Callinan J).
‘About Us’,
(Web Page) <https://www.businessroundtable.org/about-us>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/YA7M-DT9S>.
‘Our Commitment’,
Business Roundtable
<https://www.businessroundtable.org/​ourcommitment>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/DT7M-J75F>.
‘2019 Business Roundtable
Statement’ (n
Klaus Schwab, ‘Davos Manifesto
2020: The Universal Purpose of a Company in the Fourth Industrial
Revolution’,
World Economic Forum Agenda
(Web Page, 2 December
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/12/davos-manifesto-2020-the-universal-purpose-of-a-company-in-the-fourth-industrial-revolution/
archived at <https://perma.cc/M4HS-LQV9>.
Ibid [B] (emphasis added).
See, eg, Lucian A Bebchuk and Roberto
Tallarita, ‘The Illusory Promise of Stakeholder Governance’
Cornell Law Review
, 127, which described the ‘2019
Business Roundtable Statement’ (n
) as ‘remarkably vague as to the
nature and content of the
commitment that is being made’.
See, eg, Lucian A Bebchuk and Roberto
Tallarita, ‘Will Corporations Deliver Value to All Stakeholders?’
(2022) 75(4)
Vanderbilt Law Review
, 1037, which explained that
substantial majority of the companies explicitly stated that their joining
the [Business Roundtable] Statement did not require and
was not expected to
bring about any changes in their treatment of stakeholders’. See also
Robert Reich, ‘The Biggest
Business Con of 2019: Fleecing Workers While
Bosses Get Rich’,
The Guardian
(online, 29 December 2019)
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/dec/29/boeing-amazon-business-ethics​-robert-reich>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/UH8W-GMFC>; Bebchuk and Tallarita,
‘The Illusory Promise of Stakeholder Governance’
) 124–39; Bainbridge, ‘In
Defense of the Shareholder Wealth Maximization Norm’ (n
) 311–16, 318.
‘2019 Business Roundtable
Statement’ (n
) (emphasis
Ibid (emphasis added).
This group, launched in 2011,
describes itself as ‘a hub of innovative companies and organisations,
thought leaders, universities
and “what works” open
innovators’: Big Innovation Centre,
The Purposeful Company
Report, May 2016) 2 (‘
The Purposeful Company
(Interim Report)
Ibid. See also Big Innovation Centre,
The Purposeful Company
(Policy Report, 2017).
Big Innovation Centre,
Purposeful Company (Interim Report)
‘Future of the
Corporation’,
The British Academy
(Web Page, 2017)
<https://www.thebritishacademy.ac.uk/programmes/future-of-the-corporation/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/YD6​K-X9B4>.
The British Academy,
Practice for Purposeful Business: The Final Report of the Future of the
Corporation Programme
(Report, 2021) 5 (‘
Policy & Practice for
Purposeful Business
‘Future of the
Corporation’ (n
The British Academy,
Practice for Purposeful Business
) 11 (emphasis added).
Luca Enriques, Alessandro Romano and
Thom Wetzer, ‘Network-Sensitive Financial Regulation’
(2020) 45(2)
Journal of Corporation Law
, 354. See generally Tamara Belinfanti and
Lynn Stout, ‘Contested Visions: The Value of Systems Theory for Corporate
(2018) 166(3)
University of Pennsylvania Law Review
See Enriques, Romano and Wetzer (n
Jason Harris, ‘Shareholder
Primacy in Changing Times’ (Conference Paper, Supreme Court of New South
Wales Corporate and
Commercial Law Conference, 2018) 16; American Law
Restatement (Tentative Draft No 1) of Corporate Governance
(April 2022) 25
Restatement of Corporate Governance (Tentative
NY Business Corporation Law §
717(b) (McKinney 2024).
Companies Act 2006
(emphasis added) (‘
Companies Act
’). See generally Richard
Williams, ‘Enlightened Shareholder Value in UK Company Law’
[2012] UNSWLawJl 15
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Section 414CZA of the
UK Companies
) requires UK companies,
small- and medium-sized companies, to include a ‘section 172(1)
statement’ in their strategic reports for a financial
year describing how
the directors have had regard to the matters set out in ss 172(1)(a)–(f)
when performing their duty under
s 172. However, the Financial Reporting Council
has reported that some investors have found that certain s 172(1) statements are
of a ‘boilerplate’ nature and are ‘not connected to the
business model or strategic issues’:
Financial Reporting Council,
Reporting on Stakeholders, Decisions and
Section 172
(Report, July 2021) 49.
Financial Reporting Council,
Corporate Governance Code
(Report, July 2018) (‘
UK Corporate
Governance Code
‘About the FRC’,
Financial Reporting Council
<https://www.frc.org.uk/about-us/>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/6SNU-TB3P>.
Responsibilities’,
Financial Reporting Council
(Web Page, 25
September 2023)
<https://www.frc.org.uk/about-the-frc/role-and-responsibilities>, archived
at <https://perm​a.cc/WW79-Z5TK>.
UK Corporate Governance Code
Ibid 1–2; Financial Conduct
Listing Rules
(at 20 April 2022) rr 9.8.6(5)–(6).
Financial Reporting Council,
Wates Corporate Governance Principles for Large Private Companies
December 2018).
‘The Wates Corporate Governance
Principles for Large Private Companies’,
Financial Reporting
(Web Page, 4 October 2023)
<https://www.frc.org.uk/directors/corporate-governance/governance-of-large-private-companies>,
at <https://perma.cc/K68C-RWSL>.
‘About The Better Business
Better Business Act
<https://betterbusinessact.org/about/#theact>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/289K-KH8C>.
Better Business Act, ‘The Better
Business Act’ (Draft Amendments) (emphasis added)
<https://betterbusinessact.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/The-Better-Business-Act-2021.p​df>,
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3CTR-ZVDP
also ‘Wake Up to Better Business’,
Better Business Act
Page, 26 April 2023)
<https://betterbusinessact.org/wake-up-to-better-business/>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/VJW4-KBDP>.
‘Wake Up to Better
Business’ (n
, Financial Stability
Board (at 19 June 2012)
<https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/FSB-Charter-with-revised-Annex-FINAL.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/ZWZ7-UQF2>.
Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures,
Recommendations of the Task
Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures
(Final Report, June
2017) 13–23 (‘
Recommendations
Task Force on
Climate-related Financial Disclosures
<https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/about/>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/33DU-4T45>.
‘ISSB Delivers Proposals That
Create Comprehensive Global Baseline of Sustainability Disclosures’,
International Financial Reporting Standards
(Web Page, 31 March 2022)
<https://www.ifrs.org/news-and-events/news/2022/03/issb-delivers-proposals-that-create-co​mprehensive-global-baseline-of-sustainability-disclosures/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/​LX5T-ZLU2>.
‘Introduction to the IFRS
Foundation’,
International Financial Reporting Standards Foundation
<https://www.ifrs.org/sustainability/knowledge-hub/introduction-to-the-ifrs-foundation/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/5CUE-Z5NN>.
International Sustainability Standards
General Requirements for Disclosure of Sustainability-Related
Financial Information
(Exposure Draft, ED/2022/S1, March 2022) 5–6
General Requirements Exposure Draft
International Sustainability Standards
Climate-Related Disclosures
’ (Exposure Draft,
ED/2022/S2, March 2022) 5–7 (‘
Climate-Related Disclosures
Exposure Draft
delivery of this lecture, the ISSB’s
General Requirements for
Disclosure of Sustainability-Related Financial Information
Climate-Related Disclosures
standards have been published: International
Sustainability Standards Board,
General Requirements for Disclosure of
Sustainability-Related Financial Information
(Report, June 2023);
International Sustainability Standards Board,
Climate-Related Disclosures
(Report, June 2023).
Since the delivery of this lecture,
the revised
G20/OECD Principles of Corporate Governance
published: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
Principles of Corporate Governance
(Report, 2023)
<https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/g20-oecd-principles-of-corporate-governance-2023_ed750b30-en/full-report.html>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/LLK7-YQ4C>.
American Law Institute,
Restatement
of Corporate Governance (Tentative Draft)
Ibid 25–58.
See generally Bebchuk and Tallarita,
‘Will Corporations Deliver Value to All Stakeholders?’
The British Academy,
Practice for Purposeful Business
Corporations
Corporations Act
Strategic Management
Australia AFL Pty Ltd v Precision Sports & Entertainment Group Pty Ltd
[2016] VSC 303
(2016) 114 ACSR 1
, 19 [87] (Sifris J);
Re IW4U Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2021] NSWSC 40
150 ACSR 146
, 152 [30] (Gleeson J).
RP Austin and IM Ramsay,
Austin and Ramsay’s Principles of Corporations Law
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 17
ed, 2018) 450 [8.035].
Corporations Act
) s 1317E(3) item 1.
Ibid ss 206C (disqualification power),
1317E (declaration power), 1317G (pecuniary
penalties), 1317GAB (relinquishment orders), 1317H (compensation orders).
Ibid s 184(1).
Ashbury Railway Carriage
& Iron Co Ltd v Riche
[1875] UKLawRpHL 13
(1875) LR 7 HL 653
, 664 (Lord
Cairns LC);
Companies Act 1981
, as at 30 June
Cotman v Brougham
[1918] AC 514
, 517 (Lord Finlay LC, Lord Atkinson agreeing
at 519, Lord Parker agreeing at 519), 524 (Lord Wrenbury); Nicholas Bourne,
‘Drafting Objects Clauses and
Ultra Vires
(2004) 25(10)
Business Law Review
, 258; Paul J Omar, ‘Powers, Purposes and
Objects: The Protracted Demise of the Ultra Vires Rule’
[2004] BondLawRw 4
(2004) 16(1)
Bond Law Review
Though where a company is registered
as a no liability company pursuant to
Corporations Act
must have a clause in its constitution explaining that the company is formed
exclusively for ‘mining purposes’:
at s 112(2)(b). Similarly, where
a company is registered under ch 2 of the
Australian Charities and
Not-for-Profits Commission Act 2012
(Cth) and wishes to delete the word
‘Limited’ from its name pursuant to s 150(1) of the
Corporations
), it must have a
statement of charitable purpose: see
Charities Act 2013
Similarly, s 299A(1)(c) of the
Corporations Act
) requires a directors’ report for
a financial year to contain information that would allow members of the listed
make an informed assessment of the ‘business strategies’
of the entity reported on. The Australian Securities and Investments
suggests that the directors’ report would likely need to set out an
entity’s ‘business objectives’
to satisfy the obligation in s
299A(1)(c): Australian Securities
and Investments Commission,
Effective Disclosure in an Operating and
Financial Review
(Regulatory Guide No 247, August 2019) 18 [RG 247.57] (‘
The British Academy,
Practice for Purposeful Business
ASX Corporate Governance Council,
Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations
February 2019) 16 (recommendation 3.1).
Ibid (emphasis added).
The British Academy,
Practice for Purposeful Business
See, eg, Austin and Ramsay (n
) 479–82 [8.090]–[8.095];
) 11–15; Bret Walker
and Gerald Ng, ‘The Content of Directors’ “Best
Interest” Duty’ (Memorandum
of Advice, Australian Institute of
Company Directors, 24 February 2022) 5 [13]–[15]. See also
Ltd v McCann
[1953] HCA 39
(1953) 90 CLR 425
, 438 (Williams ACJ, Fullagar and Kitto
Pilmer v Duke Group Ltd (in liq)
[2001] HCA 31
(2001) 207 CLR 165
[18] (McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and
Callinan JJ);
Bell Group Ltd (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation [No
[2008] WASC 239
(2008) 39 WAR 1
, 533–4 [4392]–[4395] (Owen J).
[1938] HCA 4
(1938) 60 CLR 150
, 164 (Latham CJ),
170 (Rich J, Evatt J agreeing at 188), 175–9 (Starke J), 186–8
Hansmann and Kraakman (n
) 440–1. See also Bebchuk and
Tallarita, ‘The Illusory Promise of Stakeholder Governance’ (n
Andrew Keay, ‘Tackling the
Issue of the Corporate Objective: An Analysis of the United
Kingdom’s “Enlightened Shareholder Value Approach”’
[2007] SydLawRw 23
(2007) 29(4)
Sydney Law Review
586–7, citing Margaret M Blair and Lynn A Stout, ‘A Team
Production Theory of Corporate Law’
(1999) 85(2)
Virginia Law Review
See also William W Bratton Jr, ‘The “Nexus of
Contracts” Corporation: A Critical Appraisal’
(1989) 74(3)
Cornell Law Review
Sir Ian Davis and Daniel Litvin,
‘CEOs Need a Much Sharper Focus on Social Challenges,
Argue Ian Davis and Daniel Litvin’,
The Economist
(online, 16
<https://www.economist.com/by-invitation/2023/05/16/ceos-need-a-much-sharper-focus-on-social-challenges-argue-ian-davis-and-daniel-litvin>.
Justice KM Hayne,
‘Directors’ Duties and a Company’s Creditors’ (2014)
University Law Review
795, 799–802; Susan Glazebrook,
‘Meeting the Challenge of Corporate Governance in the 21
(2019) 34(2)
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Andrew Keay, ‘The Director’s Duty To Take into Account the Interests
of Company Creditors: When Is It Triggered?’
[2001] MelbULawRw 11
(2001) 25(2)
University Law Review
[2024] AC 211.
Austin and Ramsay (n
490 [8.120].
See, eg, Rosemary Teele Langford,
‘Social Licence To Operate and Directors’ Duties: Is There a Need
for Change?’
(2019) 37(3)
Company and Securities Law Journal
200–2; Vivienne Brand and Rosemary Teele Langford, ‘“Doing the
Job That’s Required”?: Social Licence
Operate and Directors’ Duties’
[2022] SydLawRw 4
(2022) 44(1)
Harlowe’s Nominees Pty Ltd
v Woodside (Lakes Entrance) Oil Co NL
[1968] HCA 37
(1968) 121 CLR 483
, 493 (Barwick CJ,
McTiernan and Kitto JJ).
Corporations Act
) s 180(1).
Ibid s 180(2)(d).
Ibid s 180(2).
Royal Commission into Misconduct
in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services
(Final Report, 1 February 2019) vol 1, 403.
See, eg, Walker and Ng (n
) 3 [7], 12–13 [31], 15–16
[40]; Australian Institute of Company Directors,
Directors’ ‘Best
Interests’ Duty in Practice
(Practice Statement, July 2022) 4
AICD Best Interests Duty
Practice Statement
Longo, ‘Chair’s Remarks at the AICD Australian Governance Summit
2023’ (Speech, Australian Institute
of Company Directors’ Australian
Governance Summit, 2 March 2023) <
https://asic.gov.au/about-asic/news-centre/speeches/chair-s-remarks-at-the-aicd-australian-governance-summit-2023/
archived at <https://perma.cc/Z4NW-LNAT>.
Shelley Marshall and Ian Ramsay,
‘Stakeholders and Directors’ Duties: Law, Theory and
[2012] UNSWLawJl 12
(2012) 35(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 295, 304.
See Rosemary Teele Langford,
‘Purpose-Based Governance: A New Paradigm’
[2020] UNSWLawJl 34
(2020) 43(3)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Companies Act
) s 172(1)(d).
Corporations Act
) s 180(1).
American Law Institute,
Restatement of Corporate Governance (Tentative Draft)
Environment Protection Act
; Victoria,
Victoria Government Gazette
March 2021.
Environment Protection Act
s 25(4)(b).
, (3) item 1.
[2016] FCA 1023
(2016) 336 ALR 209
[482]–[483] (emphasis in original).
698 A 2d 959
[3–5]–[10] (Allen C) (Del Ch, 1996)
Ibid 970 [10].
212 A 3d 805, 809 (Strine CJ for
the Court en Banc) (Del, 2019) (‘
’), quoting ibid
) 810–15 (Strine CJ for the Court
Ibid 822–3 [12].
Ibid 823 [12], citing
) 824 [12] (Strine CJ
for the Court en Banc), discussing
) 824 [12] (Strine CJ for the Court en
822 [10, 11].
See, eg, ASX,
Disclosure: Listing Rules 3.1–3.1B
(Guidance Note 8, 5 June 2021)
93–4, citing
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v
[2002] NSWSC 171
(2002) 168 FLR 253
, 346–7 [372] (Santow J)
Australian Securities
Investments Commission v Rich
[2009] NSWSC 1229
(2009) 236 FLR 1
, 151 [7278] (Austin J)
’), citing American Law Institute,
Principles of
Corporate Governance: Analysis and
Recommendations
(American Law Institute Publishers, 1994) vol 1, 175
) 151 [7277] (Austin J), citing
) 356 [406] (Santow
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 19
(2011) 190 FCR 364
427 [197]–[198] (Keane CJ, Emmett J agreeing at 431 [216], Finkelstein J
agreeing at 431 [218]);
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v
Mariner Corporation Ltd
[2015] FCA 589
(2015) 241 FCR 502
, 589 [485] (Beach J). See also
Justice Geoffrey Nettle, ‘The Changing Position and Duties of Company
[2018] MelbULawRw 13
(2018) 41(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
UK Companies Act
) s 172(1)(a).
Australian Council of
Superannuation Investors,
Australian Asset Owner Stewardship Code
(Report, May 2018) (‘
’). While primarily directed to
superannuation funds, the
) is intended to apply to asset owners,
including endowments and sovereign wealth funds: at 5.
Ibid 12 (principle 5) (emphasis
added). See also Financial Services Council,
Principles of
Internal Governance and Asset Stewardship
(FSC Standard No 23, July
2017) 4; Financial
Reporting Council,
The UK Stewardship Code
(Report, 23 October 2019)
which states that ‘[s]ignatories’ purpose, investment beliefs,
strategy, and culture enable
stewardship that creates long-term value for
clients and beneficiaries leading to sustainable benefits for the economy, the
environment
and society’: at 8 (principle 1).
Natania Locke, ‘Australian
Investor Stewardship and Global Themes in Stewardship Regulation’
Company and Securities Law Journal
, 44–5; Tim Bowley and
Jennifer G Hill, ‘Stewardship and Collective Action: The Australian
Experience’ in Dionysia
Katelouzou and Dan W Puchniak (eds),
Shareholder Stewardship
(Cambridge University Press, 2022) 417,
The British Academy,
& Practice for Purposeful Business
See ibid 26.
See, eg, Senate Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Directors’ Duties: Report on the Social and Fiduciary Duties and
Obligations of Company Directors
(Report, November 1989) 43–4
[4.23]–[4.24], 61–99 [5.1]–[6.56].
Corporations and Markets Advisory
Committee, Parliament of Australia,
The Social Responsibility of
Corporations
(Report, December 2006) (‘
CAMAC Report
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia,
Responsibility: Managing Risk and Creating Value
(Report, June 2006)
See Rosemary Teele Langford,
‘Best Interests: Multifaceted but Not Unbounded’
(2016) 75(3)
Cambridge Law Journal
, 521–2 (‘Best Interests’);
Austin and Ramsay (n
Ibid 52 [4.32].
CAMAC Report
Ibid 81, 85, 107.
Judith Fox, ‘Shareholder
Primacy: Is There a Need for Change?’ (Discussion Paper, Governance
Institute of Australia,
2014); Australian Institute of Company Directors,
‘Forward Governance Agenda: Lifting Standards and Practice’
(Consultation
Paper, April 2019).
Walker and Ng (n
Ibid 15–16 [40].
Ibid 9 [25] (emphasis added).
AICD Best Interests Duty
Practice Statement
Noel Hutley and Sebastian
Hartford-Davis, ‘Climate Change and Directors’ Duties’
(Memorandum of Opinion, Centre for Policy Development and Future Business
7 October 2016) 2 [1] (‘2016 Hutley Opinion’).
Noel Hutley and Sebastian
Hartford-Davis, ‘Climate Change and Directors’ Duties’
(Supplementary Memorandum of Opinion,
Centre for Policy Development, 26 March
2019) 9 [22].
Noel Hutley and Sebastian
Hartford-Davis, ‘Climate Change and Directors’ Duties’
(Further Supplementary Memorandum
of Opinion, Centre for Policy Development, 23
April 2021)
18–19 [49].
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Prospective Financial Information
(Regulatory Guide No 170, April 2011) 1 (‘
Regulatory Guide
Ibid 15 [RG 170.39].
Ibid 15 [RG 170.41].
ASX Corporate Governance
Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations
) 27 (recommendation 7.4). The ASX
Corporate Governance Council recommends that, where an entity has material
exposure to climate
change risk, they make the disclosures recommended by the
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures: at 28. In addition,
Governance Institute of Australia has produced a guide for entities to make
climate change risk disclosures in accordance with
Corporate Governance
Principles and Recommendations
): see Governance Institute of
Climate Change Risk Disclosure: A Practical Guide to Reporting
against ASX Corporate Governance Council’s Corporate Governance
and Recommendations
(Report, February 2020) 2 (‘
GIA Climate Change
Risk Disclosure Guide
ASX Corporate Governance
Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations
) 27 n 63 (emphasis added).
Ibid 27 (emphasis added).
Regulatory Guide 247
) 19 [RG 247.64] (emphasis in original).
Companies are required
to make operating and financial review disclosures in annual reports:
Corporations Act
s 299(1). Annual reports are required to ‘contain information that
members of the listed entity would reasonably require to
make an informed
assessment of’, among other things, ‘the business strategies, and
prospects for future financial years
of the entity reported
on’: at s 299A(1)(c). Reporting entities are required to comply with
Australian accounting
standards: at s 296(1).
Regulatory Guide 247
) 19–20 [RG 247.65].
Ibid 22 [RG 247.78].
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission, ‘How To Avoid Greenwashing when Offering or
Promoting Sustainability-Related
Products’ (Information Sheet 271, June
https://asic.gov.au/regulatory-resources/financial-services/how-to-avoid-greenwashing-whe​n-offering-or-promoting-sustainability-related-products/
archived at <https://perma.cc/5V​6B-5FNE>.
TCFD Recommendations
Treasury (Cth),
Climate-Related
Financial Disclosure
(Consultation Paper, December 2022).
Ibid 5. For example, New Zealand
and the UK recently passed legislation which made climate-related financial
disclosures mandatory
for certain businesses:
Financial Sector
Related Disclosures and Other Matters) Amendment Act 2021
Markets Conduct Act 2013
The Companies (Strategic Report)
(Climate-Related Financial Disclosure) Regulations 2022
(UK) SI 2022/31. The
US, Switzerland and Singapore are
developing similar mandatory disclosure requirements: ibid 5.
Treasury (Cth),
Climate-Related
Financial Disclosure
SH Hartford-Davis and K Dyon,
‘Advice Regarding Potential Liability of Directors under the ISSB Draft
Standards for Forward
Looking Statements’ (Advice, Australian Council of
Superannuation Investors, 16 December 2022), discussing
Climate-Related
Disclosures Exposure Draft
See also Australian Council of Superannuation Investors, ‘ISSB Standards
“Consistent with Existing Requirements”
for Company Directors, Legal
Opinion Confirms’ (Media Release, 6 February 2023)
<https://acsi.org.au/media-releases/issb-standards-consistent-with-existing-requirements-for-company-directors-legal-opinion-confirms/>,
archived at <https: ​//perma.cc/7N67-JP3B>.
See above n
Hartford-Davis and Dyon (n
) 1–2 [4] (emphasis in original),
Climate-Related Disclosures Exposure Draft
See, eg, ASX Corporate Governance
Corporate Governance Principles and
Recommendations
GIA Climate Change Risk Disclosure Guide
Regulatory Guide
Regulatory Guide
General Requirements
Exposure Draft
Climate-Related Disclosures Exposure Draft
By way of example, compare the
following sources:
General Requirements Exposure Draft
Climate-Related
Disclosures Exposure Draft
TCFD Recommendations
Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures,
2022 Status Report
October 2022) 54–67.
See, eg, Hutley and Hartford-Davis,
‘2016 Hutley Opinion’ (n
) 22 [51]; Walker and Ng
) 9 [25], 15–16
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Rich
[2003] NSWSC 85
(2003) 174 FLR 128
145–7 [68]–[72] (Rich J);
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Healey
[2011] FCAFC 717
(2011) 196 FCR 291
[192]–[208] (Middleton J).
See generally Treasury (Cth),
Climate-Related Financial Disclosure
Workplace Gender Equality Act
; Workplace Gender Equality Agency (Cth),
A Roadmap to
Closing the Gender Pay Gap
(Explainer FAQ, September 2023)
<https://www.wgea.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/March_2023-WGEA_REFORMS-A_Roadmap_to_Closing_the_Gender_Pay_Gap.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/TWU8-2SWM>.
Corporations Act
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) sch 2
Australian Consumer Law
Corporations Act
) s 769C(1)(b);
) s 12BB(1)(b);
Australian Consumer
) s 4(1)(b).
See, eg, Harvard Business Review
Analytic Services,
The Business Case for Purpose
(Report, 2015) 5; Claudine Gartenberg, Andrea Prat and George Serafeim,
‘Corporate Purpose and Financial Performance’
(2019) 30(1)
Organization Science
1, 13; Anette von Ahsen and Kevin Gauch,
‘Opportunities and Challenges of Purpose-Led Companies: An Empirical Study
Expert Interviews’ (2021) 25(3)
Corporate Reputation Review
198, 203–4.
Increased costs of directors’
and officers’ insurance is one example: see, eg, Domini Stuart,
‘Straighten Up and
Fly Straight’, Australian Institute of Company
Directors (Web Page,
1 February 2023)
<https://www.aicd.com.au/board-of-directors/duties/directors-and-officers-insurance/straighten-up-and-fly-straight.html>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/45TK-7NV9>.
See Langford, ‘Best
Interests’ (n
) 523, citing
Australian Institute of Company Directors,
The Honest and Reasonable Director
(Report, 2014).
Rosemary Teele Langford, Ian Ramsay
and Michelle Welsh, ‘The Origins of Company
Directors’ Statutory Duty of Care’
[2015] SydLawRw 23
(2015) 37(4)
, 511. See also Justice Wallace and J McI Young,
Company Law and Practice
(Law Book, 1965) 393.
Companies Act 1958
See, eg, Enriques, Romano and
Principles of Company
(Butterworths, 1974).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (329 KB)
PDF format (371 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter