URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2018/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Croucher, Rosalind; MacKenzie, Julie --- "Framing Law Reform to Address Elder Abuse" [2018] MqLawJl 2; (2018) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 5
FRAMING LAW REFORM TO ADDRESS ELDER ABUSE
I INTRODUCTION
II WHAT IS ELDER ABUSE?
A Description
B Difficulties of Definition
2 Relationship with Family Violence
3 Definition and Measurement
III FRAMING LEGAL RESPONSES
A Federal and State Responsibilities
B Framing Principles for this Inquiry
1 Dignity and Autonomy
2 Protection and Safeguarding
IV CONCLUSION
FRAMING LAW REFORM TO ADDRESS ELDER ABUSE
ROSALIND F CROUCHER AM* AND JULIE MACKENZIE**
In the inquiry that led to the final report,
Elder Abuse—A National
Legal Response
, the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) had to balance
two key ideas: the principle of autonomy – promoting and supporting
people’s ability to participate equally in their community and access
services and advice – and the challenge of
ensuring that laws and legal
frameworks provide appropriate protections and safeguards for older Australians
against misuse or advantage
taken of informal and formal supporter or
representative roles. This article provides insights into the challenges of
framing law
reform responses within this conceptual setting, and locating those
solutions within a federal system where relevant laws sit either
federal or state and territory domains. The article also provides a summary of
the conclusions reached as reflections
of the conceptual framework set for the
I INTRODUCTION
The ALRC’s Elder Abuse Inquiry was most timely – given the
problem, the challenge, and indeed the opportunity, of an ageing
demographic.
The Australian population, like other developed countries, is an ageing one. The
statistics are quite confronting however
they are approached: whether in terms
of the numbers of workers that will be needed to support an ageing population,
or the extent
to which health services, aged care services and disability
services will be needed, an ageing demographic presents an intense focus
public policy. It is not surprising that a 2007 parliamentary report referred to
the ‘inescapable demographic destiny’
of an ageing
population.
In the Elder Abuse Inquiry, the ALRC was asked to consider reform to existing
Commonwealth laws and frameworks that seek to safeguard
and protect older
persons from misuse or abuse by formal and informal carers, supporters,
representatives and others. The main areas
of interest concerned financial
arrangements and superannuation, enduring documents and powers of attorney, aged
care, guardianship,
social security, and aged care arrangements.
The ALRC was also asked to examine the interaction and relationship of
Commonwealth laws in areas such as aged care and social security
with state and
territory laws. This involved considering guardianship and administration, laws
dealing with ‘private’
appointments of substitute decision makers
through enduring powers of attorney and enduring guardians, as well as
considering the
adequacy of existing criminal laws for responding to elder
abuse. A great deal of the work therefore involved state and territory
and agencies who were willing participants in shared aspirations for reform.
On 15 June 2016, coinciding with World Elder Abuse Awareness Day, the ALRC
released the first consultation document for the Inquiry,
an Issues Paper, and
on 15 June 2017 the Final Report was launched by the Attorney-General.
As stakeholders observed, elder abuse is ‘complex and
multidimensional’ and thus requires a ‘multi-faceted
The ALRC contributed to that response with a set of 43
recommendations aimed at achieving a nationally consistent response to elder
abuse. The ALRC also developed a conceptual template to guide future reform
through a National Plan to combat elder abuse. In February
Attorney-General announced that the Australian Government would implement this
key recommendation of the Inquiry, and develop/implement
a National Plan to
address elder abuse.
The Australian Government has also announced that it will implement another
set of key recommendations from the report: the introduction
of a serious
incident response scheme in aged care to respond to abuse and neglect of aged
care recipients.
Law reform writing is a particular form of policy work, the conclusions being
expressed as recommendations for reform. Terms of Reference
are often an
expression of a particular policy objective, usually contained in the preamble
words of the Terms of Reference themselves.
Therefore, in working out what is
required for a particular project – determining the scope of the Terms of
Reference –
one needs to know the public policy context. As the Law
Commission of England and Wales observed in a 2011 report, ‘law reform
must operate within the broader context of Government
Nonetheless, in any Inquiry the ALRC must do considerable work in
contemplating how its suite of reform recommendations represent
response to a policy issue, within the broad policy direction set by the Terms
of Reference. An Inquiry also offers the
opportunity to reflect critically on
the principles underpinning policy objectives. In this case, the ALRC devoted
particular attention
to critically considering how best to achieve the broad
goal of promoting the ‘autonomy’ of older Australians.
This essay provides a brief outline of a number of conceptual or framing
issues for the Inquiry, all of which shaped the ALRC’s
approach to reform.
First, defining elder abuse. Second, the question of how to frame law reform
responses to a problem with fragmented
legal responsibilities. And third, how
the ALRC conceptualised the principles underpinning the Inquiry –
promoting the dignity
and autonomy of older people, and protection and
safeguarding of older people.
II WHAT IS ELDER ABUSE?
Description
Elder abuse usually refers to abuse by family, friends, carers and other
people where there is a relationship or expectation of trust.
While there is not
a universally accepted definition, a widely used one is that of the World Health
Organization (WHO), describing
elder abuse as
a single, or repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring within any
relationship where there is an expectation of trust
which causes harm or
distress to an older person.
This description is used across a range of government and non-government
bodies in Australia.
Elder abuse
may take a number of forms, including physical, psychological, financial and
sexual abuse, as well as
The definition of elder abuse does not include all abuse of older persons,
but is limited by the relationship between the abuser and
the older person
– that is, when they are in a relationship where there is an expectation
of trust. This will include an expectation
of trust as a result of an
‘affective relationship’, such as family members, friends, and
informal carers, and those
in a ‘functional position of trust’, such
as paid carers and some
professionals.
Throughout the course of the Inquiry, it became clear that abuse and neglect
in the context of the provision of aged care was a particular
concern. In this
area, what is termed ‘institutional’ or ‘system’ abuse
was also an issue that required consideration
by the ALRC. Institutional abuse
has been described as occurring when the ‘routines, systems and regimes of
an institution
result in poor or inadequate standards of care and poor practice
which affects the whole setting and denies, restricts or curtails
the dignity,
individuals’.
A number of the
concerns raised in the Elder Abuse Inquiry about aged care could be
characterised as about this form of abuse, particularly
in relation to adequate
levels of staffing. Recognising systems or institutional abuse has consequences
for how to ascribe responsibility
and to prevent further abuse:
‘Accountability for system abuse lies in the organisation and culture of
care ... A multilevel
approach is needed in which the implications of
people’s behaviour are seen as set in organisational
practices’.
While commonly used, the terminology of ‘elder abuse’ may not be
appropriate, particularly for some communities. For example,
in the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander community, in addition to referring to the age of a
person, ‘elder’ is also
Similarly, in
culturally and linguistically diverse communities there may be difficulties in
translating the term elder abuse. Ethnic
Communities’ Council of Victoria
has developed material for particular communities that refers instead to what
can go wrong
in families, and to respect and dignity in
Difficulties of Definition
A number of complexities exist in describing elder abuse, particularly in
relation to the concept of
Additionally,
a range of conduct is captured by the WHO definition, from intentional
mistreatment and neglect to unintentional conduct
that causes harm or distress
to an older person. It has been said that the term elder abuse ‘does not
represent a single problem,
but many different
There are some difficulties in designating old age as a distinguishing
feature for a form of abuse. As the ALRC also noted in its
2013 Report into
barriers to work for older Australians, the concepts of ‘old age’
and ‘ageing’ are not self-evident,
but have different meanings
according to their social and historical
Broader shifts, such
as the normalisation of a ‘retirement age’ and subsequent
disengagement from the labour market have
contributed to understandings of old
age, and of older persons as a definable social group – that is, to the
assumption that
older persons are in some way separate from those who are not
Withdrawal from
the labour market also contributed to an assessment of older people as of
declining capability and increased
dependency,
‘particular characteristics of helplessness, vulnerability and frailty
assigned to the older
population’.
With increasing diversity over the life course, distinguishing older people
as a distinct group and experiencing a distinct form of
abuse has some
challenges. Elder abuse may also overlap with or share similarities with the
mistreatment of other groups, such as
people with disability.
However, some factors associated with ageing, and particularly with entering
into very old age, mean that a person is more at risk
of a specific kind of
abuse although it may be that this elevated risk is the result of an
interrelationship between ‘personal,
interpersonal and systemic
Some of these distinct risks have been summarised by Thomas Goergen and Marie
Beaulieu: while the very old ‘generally have a
reduced exposure to risks
of becoming a victim of violent acts in public spaces and by strangers’,
the increased prevalence
of functional limitations, and the need for assistance
with activities of daily living, may heighten the risk of abuse by those in
relationship of trust with an older
There are advantages to retaining a focus on elder abuse as a distinctive
social problem that requires targeted research, prevention
and response
strategies. However, overall, the ALRC generally avoided making recommendations
for legal reforms that were targeted
at ‘older’ people
in this Inquiry. Instead, it recommended that a National Plan be developed to
combat elder abuse. This
broader policy document would provide a vehicle for
national leadership and coordination of strategies, including legal reform, to
prevent and respond to elder abuse.
Relationship with Family Violence
Elder abuse is often committed by a family member of the older person,
notably by adult children but also the older person’s
spouse or partner.
The essence of elder abuse in the WHO definition is the harm or distress caused
by a person in a position of trust.
The WHO definition is wider than the concept
of ‘family violence’, in that the relationships of trust extend more
than ‘family’.
However, elder abuse is closely related to family violence and therefore
abuse of an older person may often also be considered family
The Victorian Royal
Commission into Family Violence specifically examined violence against older
people and noted that elder abuse
and family violence are often used
interchangeably in policy documents and
statistics.
‘Elder abuse’ is usually committed by a family member and
available research suggests that women are more likely to experience
elder abuse
Some instances of
elder abuse may be a continuation of family violence that began when the
perpetrator and victim were not old. In
other cases, while the abuse may occur
within a family relationship, other factors such as attitudes toward older
people, social
isolation or a relationship of dependence may be
An Australian Institute of Family Studies (AIFS) Report into elder abuse has
[p]rogress towards understanding elder abuse and developing effective response
and prevention measures, are recognised to be considerably
less well developed
than in other areas of interpersonal violence, including family violence and
child abuse.
Moreover, the nature and dynamics of abuse experienced by older people may be
influenced by their being part of one or more particular
communities. This may
be the case, for example, for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people,
people from culturally and linguistically
diverse communities, and people with
disability.
However, there has
been limited research about the dynamics of abuse in particular communities.
A particular manifestation of elder abuse is financial abuse, which appears
to be one of the most common forms of elder abuse. Social
attitudes to
intergenerational wealth transfer in families are important considerations in
developing an understanding of elder financial
abuse. As the AIFS Report
[G]enerational attitudes and expectations in relation to asset transfers before
or after death, and the broader question of attitudes
and expectations in
relation to mutual or non-mutual intergenerational support in terms of material
resources and care, form an important
part of the backdrop to the social and
economic dynamics that may influence the conditions in which elder abuse
Whether abuse of an older person is described as elder abuse or family
violence can have an impact on services available to the older
person to respond
to the abusive behaviour. For instance, family violence services such as crisis
accommodation that largely cater
for women and children may not be suitable for
older people who have experienced
Definition and Measurement
Consensus on a definition of elder abuse is important for developing an
evidence base about it. A 2007 report on a study of prevalence
of elder abuse in
the UK noted that ‘[v]ariation in prevalence estimates is heavily
influenced by differences in methodology’,
including differences in
definition.
Since the conclusion of the Inquiry, progress towards both an accepted
definition and an estimate of prevalence in Australia has been
made. AIFS is
leading an Elder Abuse National Research project, to be completed in June 2018,
to develop an Australian definition
of elder abuse, to develop and test
instruments to measure elder abuse against the Australian definition and to
develop a data analysis
plan and conduct secondary data analysis to answer key
research questions on elder
III FRAMING LEGAL RESPONSES
Federal and State Responsibilities
Laws relating to elder abuse exist across Commonwealth, state and territory
financial institutions,
social security, superannuation and aged
Laws relating to
substitute decision-making, including guardianship, powers of attorney and most
criminal laws, lie with the states
and territories.
This poses some challenges for responding to elder abuse in a cohesive
fashion, as
responses to the management and prevention of elder abuse sit within a range of
complex policy and practice structures across different
levels of government,
and various justice system frameworks within the private sector and across
non-government
organisations.
The ALRC was well placed to consider reforms in this fragmented legal
landscape, given that its legislative functions include considering
for uniformity between state and territory laws, as well as proposals for
complementary Commonwealth, state and territory
In the ALRC’s 2010
Family Violence Inquiry, the ALRC considered the complex interactions across the
federal landscape, particularly
between the
Family Law Act 1975
state and territory family violence and child protection
In that context the ALRC
identified the aspiration of ‘seamlessness’ as a key policy goal. In
the Elder Abuse Report
too, the ALRC made recommendations directed at both
Commonwealth, state and territory laws and legal frameworks, in order to
comprehensively
address the range of legal mechanisms available to safeguard
older people from abuse.
In the Elder Abuse Inquiry, the ALRC recommended that a National Plan to
combat elder abuse be developed to establish a national policy
framework, act as
a vehicle for coordination, and to promote a long-term approach for the
protection of older people from
The Australian Government
has accepted this key recommendation, and signalled that it will develop a
National Plan with the goals
identified by the ALRC:
• promoting the autonomy and agency of older people;
• addressing ageism and promoting community understanding of elder
• achieving national consistency;
• safeguarding at-risk adults and improving responses; and
• building the evidence
A draft is expected by the end of
The Age Discrimination
Commissioner, the Hon Dr Kay Patterson AO, has also indicated that
implementation of the recommendations from
the Elder Abuse Report will be one of
her advocacy priorities.
Principles for this Inquiry
The ALRC used two key principles to frame the recommendations in the Elder
Abuse Report: dignity and autonomy, and protection and
safeguarding. Elder abuse
clearly undermines dignity and autonomy. Concerning autonomy and intimate
partner violence, Professor Marilyn
Friedman has written that ‘abuse
denies to the abused person ... the safety and security she needs to try to live
as she thinks she ought to’ or ‘according to her values and
commitments’.
However, protection from abuse is sometimes seen as infringing on autonomy
– that is, protection and autonomy are sometimes
seen as opposing
considerations that need to be balanced or traded off against each other when
issues of whether and how to intervene
to protect a person from abuse arise.
There is particular concern about overly interventionist or paternalist
approach to protecting older people. In its 2014 Report,
Equality, Capacity
and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
, the ALRC had cause to consider how to
effect, for people with disability, the shift toward full recognition of their
equal right
to make decisions that affect their lives. This shift, from others
making decisions based on a judgement about a person’s ‘best
interests’ to recognising that a person’s will, preferences and
rights should guide decisions that affect their lives,
was operationalised
through the National Decision-Making
Principles.
This also involved
conceiving of autonomy as not only involving a sphere of non-interference, but
also in terms of considering what
support is needed for a person to exercise
their autonomy and decision-making
In a related sense, protecting older people from abuse can be seen to support
and enable their ability to live autonomous and dignified
lives. Jonathan
Herring has expressed this as meaning that any intervention to protect a person
should occur with the aim to ‘restore
Where possible,
in the Elder Abuse Inquiry, the ALRC sought to recommend changes to the law that
uphold autonomy and provide protection from harm. Where this was not
possible, greater weight was generally given to the principle
of autonomy.
However, in limited cases, where there is serious abuse of vulnerable people,
protection was given additional weight.
Dignity and Autonomy
Some recommendations were particularly targeted at empowering people to
protect themselves from abuse and seeking to ensure that they
are supported to
make decisions that reflect their rights, will and preferences.
Reforms related to enduring documents – that is, enduring powers of
attorney, enduring guardianship and advance care directives
improving safeguards against misuse of an appointment by a substitute decision
maker. Such reforms would promote
people’s ability and confidence in
planning for a time in the future when they may require substantial
decision-making support.
The ALRC recommended reforms that would ensure that a
person can determine the scope and extent of their enduring appointments and
be required to give broader or unlimited powers to be able to effect certain
transactions. It also recommended that appointed
decision makers be required to
support and represent the will, preferences and rights of the
In a similar vein,
the ALRC also recommended safeguards in relation to wills and superannuation. It
recommended reviewing the rules
in relation to binding death benefit nominations
in APRA-regulated superannuation
and planning for the
possibility of cognitive impairment in the context of self-managed
superannuation funds.
also recommended that national best practice guidelines be developed for legal
practitioners in relation to the preparation
and execution of wills and other
advance planning documents to improve the understanding of legal practitioners
of the dynamics of
elder abuse, risk factors for undue influence, and safeguards
against them in the making of wills and other advance planning
In relation to court and tribunal appointed decision makers, recommendations
were directed towards maximising the possibilities for
involving the person who
may be the subject of a guardianship and administration order in the application
process, and ensuring that
guardians and financial administrators understand
their obligations to promote the autonomy and wellbeing of a person who is
to a guardianship and administration
The ALRC also sought to promote autonomy by making avenues for redress easier
and more accessible. It recommended that the jurisdiction
of state and territory
civil and administrative tribunals be expanded to allow it to deal with misuse
of powers by enduring attorneys/guardians,
as well as guardians and financial
administrators appointed by a court or tribunal, and to enable them to order any
remedy that the
Supreme Court could order in relation to
It also recommended that
civil and administrative tribunals be given jurisdiction to deal with family
disputes involving residential
property under an ‘assets for care’
arrangement.
The ALRC also made
a recommendation designed to encourage formalisation of these agreements, and
thus aid enforceability, and concluded
that, for the purposes of calculating an
entitlement to the Age Pension, the
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) should
be amended to require that a ‘granny flat interest’ be expressed in
Protection and Safeguarding
Two areas of the Inquiry particularly engaged with questions of protection
and safeguarding – aged care and adult safeguarding.
The ALRC’s recommendations in aged care focused on buttressing the move
towards greater consumer control for older people in
aged care with suitable
regulatory oversight to ensure accountability and transparency in the provision
of quality care, including
protections and safeguards against abuse or
In relation to aged care, the ALRC needed to reflect on how the issues raised
that could be classified as ‘institutional’
or ‘system’
abuse overlapped with systemic considerations about the quality of care. The
line between an issue that goes
to quality assurance and one that goes to elder
abuse was at times difficult to draw – after all, gross quality failures
produce outcomes that are abusive or neglectful. But, overall, the ALRC
did not see its role in the Inquiry as one of systematically
reviewing the
adequacy of quality standards and processes for auditing quality in aged care in
our Inquiry. Instead, the ALRC concentrated
on safeguards against abuse. Since
the ALRC Inquiry, there has been considerable interest in inquiring into quality
processes in
aged care, including:
• a review of aged care quality regulatory
• a Senate Standing Committee on Community Affairs Inquiry into quality
assessment and accreditation framework (to report in
November 2018); and
• a Senate Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care and Sport Inquiry
into the Quality of care in residential aged care facilities
in Australia
(ongoing at the time of writing).
These reviews are opportune, in that they have allowed the ALRC’s
recommendations to be situated within a broader examination
of aged care quality
processes, and provided added momentum for government action to implement
reform. The ALRC’s recommendations
for a serious incident response scheme
in aged care involved rethinking the aged care system’s response to abuse
and neglect.
In doing so, the emphasis was shifted from requiring aged care
providers to
the occurrence of an alleged or suspected assault, to
requiring an
investigation and response
to incidents by providers, along
with independent oversight of that investigation and response. The ALRC also
made recommendations
in relation to a range of other safeguarding strategies,
including enhanced employment screening processes, regulating the use of
restrictive practices in aged care, and national guidelines for the community
visitors scheme regarding abuse and neglect of care
recipients.
The ALRC’s recommendations about adult safeguarding involved perhaps
the finest negotiation of the relationship of autonomy
and protection. The ALRC
recommended that adult safeguarding agencies have a role in safeguarding and
supporting ‘at-risk’
Protecting these people from abuse will serve to support their autonomy and
show respect for their dignity, because living in fear
of abuse can prevent a
person from making free choices about their lives and pursuing what they
Most state and territory public advocates and guardians already have a role
in investigating abuse, particularly abuse of people with
decision-making ability by their guardians, financial administrators or those
with powers of attorney. However, there exists
a cohort of vulnerable adults,
many of whom are old, who do not fall within the purview of this investigative
function. The ALRC
recommended that these other vulnerable adults should be
better protected from abuse.
Rather than extending the jurisdiction of state and territory public
advocates or guardians to all older adults, the ALRC made two
1. It recommended that adult safeguarding laws be introduced, without
recommending that they be situated in a particular body. The
ALRC did not
suggest that the recommended adult safeguarding function should necessarily be
given to public advocates, but rather
that the states and territories decide
which of their agencies might perform this role, or whether a new agency might
2. It recommended that safeguarding laws apply not to older people, but to
‘at-risk adults’, defined as adults who: (a)
need care and support;
(b) are being abused or neglected, or are at risk of abuse or neglect; and (c)
cannot protect themselves from
The ALRC concluded that
this ‘functional’ approach to vulnerability was preferable to
providing safeguarding services
to all people over a certain age. This allows
recognition that most people over 65 are not particularly vulnerable and will
safeguarding services, while some people under 65 will need these
Adult safeguarding is envisaged as an intervention to support autonomy,
operating in the main with the person’s consent. Most
often, safeguarding
and support would involve working with the at-risk adult to arrange for health,
medical, legal and other services.
In some cases, it might also involve seeking
court orders to prevent someone suspected of abuse from contacting the at-risk
Where necessary, the ALRC considered that adult safeguarding agencies
should lead and coordinate the work of other agencies and services
at-risk adults from abuse.
However, in particularly serious cases, the safety of an at-risk person may
need to be secured, even against their wishes. The ALRC
concluded that, although
consent should always be sought, it should not be required in serious cases of
physical abuse, sexual abuse
This may be necessary
to secure people’s long-term autonomy interests and their immediate
dignity. The ALRC also recommended
that consent should not be necessary where
safeguarding agencies cannot contact the at-risk adult, despite extensive
efforts to do
so, or where an adult lacks the decision-making ability to give
this consent.
IV CONCLUSION
The Elder Abuse Inquiry is one of a series of inquiries the ALRC has
completed that have required it to consider how the law can respond
social policy issues – these include inquiries into family violence,
barriers to work for older people, decision-making
for people with disability,
and incarceration rates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Comprehensive responses to all
of these issues require broader changes than
simply legal reform, but, in this Inquiry, as in the others, the ALRC has
blueprint for reform that can support and shape broader social
Emeritus Professor, Macquarie University. The material in this
article is drawn from the Australian Law Reform
Commission&#82
s work that culminated in the
Elder Abuse—A National Legal Response
, Report No 131
(2017). Professor Croucher led the inquiry and was the President of the
Australian Law Reform Commission until the
end of July 2017, then taking up the
position of President of the Australian Human Rights Commission.
Dr Julie MacKenzie is Acting Principal Legal Officer at the
Australian Law Reform Commission.
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Older People and the Law
(2007) vii.
Christian Porter,
Attorney-General (Cth), ‘National Plan to Address Elder Abuse’
(Media Release, 20 February 2018)
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Media/Pages/National-Plan-to-address-elder-abuse.aspx>.
Ken Wyatt, Minister for Aged
Care (Cth), ‘Powerful New Reforms to Ensure Safe, Quality Aged Care’
(Media Release, 18
April 2018)
http://www.health.gov.au/internet/ministers/publishing.nsf/Content/health-mediarel-yr2018-wyatt048.htm
Law Commission (UK),
Social Care
, Report No 326 (2011) 4 [1.14].
World Health Organization,
The Toronto Declaration on the Global Prevention of Elder Abuse
November 2002).
See, eg, My Aged Care,
Elder Abuse Concerns
(22 June 2015)
<www.myagedcare.gov.au/financial-and-legal/elder-abuse-concerns>; Elder
Abuse Prevention Unit,
Elder Abuse: Definition
<www.eapu.com.
au/elder-abuse>.
Jolanda Lindenberg et al,
‘Elder Abuse an International Perspective: Exploring the Context of Elder
Abuse’ (2013) 25
International Psychogeriatrics
1213, 1213.
Thomas Goergen and Marie
Beaulieu, ‘Critical Concepts in Elder Abuse Research’ (2013) 25
International Psychogeriatrics
1217, 1224.
Rochdale Borough Safeguarding
Adults Board,
Institutional Abuse
<https://www.rbsab.org/the-public/what-is-abuse/institutional-abuse.aspx>.
Yuliya Mysyuk et al,
‘Listening to the Voices of Abused Older People: Should We Classify System
Abuse?’ (2015) 350
National Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Legal Services, Submission No 135 to Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Inquiry into Protecting the Rights of Older Australians
, August 2016, 2.
See, eg, Health
Translations,
http://healthtranslations.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcht.nsf/PresentEnglishResource?Open & x= & s=Abuse
However, it has been argued
that ‘definitional conformity’ of elder abuse has developed:
Lindenberg et al, above n 7,
Joan Harbison et al,
‘Understanding “Elder Abuse and Neglect”: A Critique of
Assumptions Underpinning Responses
to the Mistreatment and Neglect of Older
People’ (2012) 24
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Access All Ages—Older Workers and Commonwealth Laws
Report No 120 (2013) 40.
Martha Fredvang and Simon
Biggs, ‘The Rights of Older Persons: Protection and Gaps under Human
Rights Law’ (Social Policy
Working Paper No 16, Brotherhood of St Laurence
and University of Melbourne Centre for Public Policy, August 2012) 6.
Harbison et al, above n 14,
Simon Biggs and Ariela
Lowenstein,
Generational Intelligence: A Critical Approach to Age
(Routledge, 2013) 100.
Goergen and Beaulieu, above
John Chesterman,
‘Taking Control: Putting Older People at the Centre of Elder Abuse
Response Strategies’ (2016) 69
Australian Social Work
Victoria, Royal Commission
into Family Violence,
Summary and Recommendations
Rae Kaspiew, Rachel Carson and Helen Rhoades,
‘Elder Abuse: Understanding Issues, Frameworks and Responses’
Report No 35, Australian Institute of Family Studies, February 2016)
Ibid 12–13.
Victoria, above n 22,
Madeleine O’Keeffe et
al, ‘UK Study of Abuse and Neglect of Older People: Prevalence Survey
Report’ (Research
Report, National Centre for Social Research and King's
College London, June 2007) 11.
Australian Institute of
Family Studies,
Elder Abuse National Research Strengthening the Evidence
Base—Stage One
<aifs.gov.au/projects/elder-abuse-national-research-strengthening-evidence-base-stage-one>.
The Commonwealth’s
powers to make laws relating to aged care arise from its legislative power to
make laws regulating corporations
providing aged care, funding programs
administered by states and territories, and its powers relating to age pensions,
carer pensions
and other welfare regimes: Wendy Lacey, ‘Neglectful to the
Point of Cruelty? Elder Abuse and the Rights of Older Persons in
[2014] SydLawRw 4
Sydney Law Review
Commonwealth’s powers in relation to taxation, financial institutions,
social security and superannuation arise from
the banking, social welfare and
powers respectively:
Constitution
, (xiii), (xxiii),
(xxiiiA). The Commonwealth does not have an enumerated power to legislate with
regard to the welfare of adults
Kaspiew, Carson and
Rhoades, above n 23, 1. See also Lacey, above n 31.
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act
ss 21(1)(d)
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Family Violence—A National Legal Response
, Report No
114 (2010).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse—A National Legal Response
, Report No 131
(2017) 9 [rec 3-1].
Ibid [rec 3-3].
Porter, above n 2.
Kay Patterson, Age
Discrimination Commissioner, ‘Rights of Older Australians: Ageing and
Advocacy’ (Speech, 13 February
Marilyn Friedman,
Autonomy, Gender, Politics
(Oxford University Press, 2003) 142.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
Report No 124 (2014) 11 [rec 3-1].
See Martin Stevens et al,
‘Social Workers’ Power of Entry in Adult Safeguarding Concerns:
Debates over Autonomy, Privacy
and Protection’ (2017) 19
Adult Protection
312, 318–19; Jonathan Herring,
Vulnerable Adults
and the Law
(Oxford University Press, 2016) 34–5.
Jonathan Herring,
Vulnerable Adults and the Law
(Oxford University Press, 2016) 35.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 35, 12 [rec 5-1].
Ibid 13 [rec 7-1].
Ibid [rec 7-2].
Ibid 14 [rec 8-1].
Ibid [rec 10-1], [rec
Ibid 12 [rec 5-2].
Ibid 13 [rec 6-1].
Ibid [rec 6-2].
Kate Carnell and Ron
Paterson, ‘Review of National Aged Care Quality Regulatory
Processes’ (Report, Department of Health
(Cth), 25 October 2017).
See Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 35, ch 4.
Ibid 15 [rec 14-1].
Ibid 15 [rec 14-3].
Ibid [rec 14-4].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (346 KB)
PDF format (196 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter