URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2009/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Freeland, Steven --- "Prosecuting Heads of State" [2009] ALRS 25
Prosecuting Heads of State
Professor Steven Freeland, School of Law, University of
Western Sydney
Introduction
On 3 March 2009, Pre-Trial Chamber I (PTC) of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) issued an arrest warrant for President Omar Al
Bashir, the current
Head of State of Sudan, having concluded that there were reasonable grounds to
believe that he is criminally
responsible for five counts of crimes against
humanity and two counts of war crimes. This represents the first time that the
has indicted a sitting Head of State and marks an important development in
the activities of the Court.
In handing down its decision, the Chamber (by a 2-1 majority) concluded that,
at this stage, there were not reasonable grounds to
also include charges of
genocide, although it left open the possibility for the Prosecutor to submit
further evidence in the future
to support such a charge. At the time of writing
this article, the PTC decision is the subject of an appeal to the Appeals
of the ICC.
At the time, the PTC decision was met with a mixture of strong support from
large sections of the international community and disappointment
from various
Arab and African countries and from a number of aid agencies. Indeed, a few days
after the PTC decision, the Government
of the Sudan expelled 13 humanitarian
international NGOs and three local NGOs from Darfur on the grounds that they had
communicated
information to the ICC. No doubt, actions such as these will only
further exacerbate the suffering of the people in the Darfur region.
Bashir remains defiant in the face of the arrest warrant and has vowed that
Sudan will not cooperate with the ICC in respect
of the charges against himself,
as well as those in relation to arrest warrants previously issued by the ICC
against two other Sudanese
Meanwhile, the member States of the African Union (AU) have resolved not to
cooperate with the ICC in respect of the arrest and surrender
of President
Bashir to the ICC. In addition, both the AU and the Organization of Islamic
States have made several representations
to the United Nations Security Council
(UNSC), asking that it defer the work of the ICC in Darfur (the UNSC has the
power to defer
investigations / prosecutions under article 16 of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (Rome Statute)).
These events highlight once again the complications associated with the more
recent trend under criminal law of prosecuting Heads
of State, both at the
international but also at the national level. There is no doubt that this is a
complex issue, which raises
many questions and has many dimensions, some of
which are discussed below.
Issues associated with Prosecuting Heads of State
Historical Dimensions
Contrary to assertions made by some commentators, the prosecution of a Head
of State is certainly not without precedent. In 1642,
Charles I of England was
tried and sentenced to death for various ‘crimes’ he had perpetrated
while King. This was the
first time that a (former) Head of State was prosecuted
in a court of law in relation to (alleged) crimes committed while in such
position. (When asked how he would plead, Charles stated that he did not
recognize the legitimacy of the court – this was
then regarded as a plea
of ‘guilty’. This should be contrasted with more recent prosecutions
– Slobodan Milosevic
also stated that he did not recognize the legitimacy
of the War Crimes Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, but this was deemed by
Tribunal to constitute a plea of ‘not guilty’).
At the conclusion of the First World War, the Treaty of Versailles provided
for the prosecution of persons accused of having committed
acts in violation of
the laws and customs of war. More specifically, the Allied and Associated Powers
publicly arraigned William
II of Hohenzollern, formerly the German Emperor,
‘for a supreme offence against international morality and the sanctity of
treaties’, although some commentators argued at the time that this
proposed trial lacked a firm legal basis. Nonetheless, the
Treaty of Versailles
provided for a special international tribunal to be constituted, comprising
Judges from the United States of
America, Great Britain, France, Italy and
Japan, to try the Emperor.
However, by the time the Treaty of Versailles was in force, the Emperor had
already sought refuge in the Netherlands, which did not
agree to surrender him
for prosecution, on the basis that the Netherlands regarded itself as a land of
refuge for the vanquished
in international conflicts. A trial in absentia was
considered to be futile, and, as a result, the international tribunal was not
established and the proposed trial never took place.
This situation changed following the end of the Second World War.
International Military Tribunals were established in Nuremberg (the
Military Tribunal) and Tokyo (the Tokyo Military Tribunal) by the victorious
powers. The agreement among the Allies to
establish these Tribunals to try
senior military and political leaders from the defeated German and Japanese
war-time regimes only
came late in the piece. The Allies, with the exception of
the United States, had initially been of the opinion that an international
judicial process was not appropriate. This was only partially due to the fact
that such an approach was largely unprecedented; it
also stemmed from their more
‘extreme’ views as to how such persons should be brought to account.
The British Government
had, for example, instituted a formal policy of
‘summary execution’ of enemy leaders in 1943, which remained in
until the end of the war. In the end, however, the viewpoint of the United
States – that a transparent international judicial
process was the most
appropriate mechanism to deal with such persons – prevailed, and these
Tribunals were established with
a mandate and procedural framework that largely
reflected western notions of justice.
At Nuremberg, senior Government officials were put on trial. There is little
doubt that, had he survived the war, Hitler himself would
have also been brought
before this legal process. The situation was somewhat different in the Tokyo
Military Tribunal where, essentially
for political reasons, the decision was
made not to indict Emperor Hirohito. Some commentators have gone so far as to
the failure to charge the ultimate Head of State in that case has
given rise to the perception that Japan has never really ‘come
terms’ with its actions during the war.
A number of important and fundamental principles of international criminal
justice emerged from the jurisprudence of these International
Tribunals. Moreover, what was perhaps most striking about this entire process,
particularly when compared to any earlier
practical attempts to criminalize acts
committed during warfare, was that these Tribunals applied
international
doctrines and concepts to judge the acts of those accused of such
crimes. Although they were not in identical terms, the respective
Charters of
these two Military Tribunals specified the definitions of a number of
‘international crimes’. These were
very significant steps in the
development of international criminal justice, including for crimes committed by
Heads of States. Yet,
with the advent of the Cold War in the 1940s, a
‘black’ period followed, in which a culture of impunity prevailed
However, the situation has changed dramatically since the early 1990s. At
that time, the shackles of the Cold War were loosened, and
the UNSC was able to
play a more active role in addressing these crimes, albeit after the fact. The
world saw the creation of new
international criminal Tribunals. Faced with
genocides in Rwanda and in the Former Yugoslavia – both of which took
place under
the watch of the UNSC and United Nations peacekeepers – the
UNSC, acting under its powers pursuant to Chapter VII of the United
Charter, eventually established two
Tribunals to prosecute the
perpetrators of serious crimes committed during those conflicts. Various other
international and ‘internationalized’
criminal Tribunals and Courts
have subsequently also been established by the international community over the
past decade.
Thus, the past 15 years has been marked by the development of a diverse range
of mechanisms intended to address international crimes
and promote and protect
fundamental human rights, specifically in response to both international and
(increasingly) internal conflicts.
The establishment and operation of these
various mechanisms of international justice - commencing with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (established in
1993) and culminating (thus far) with a permanent Court,
the ICC - marks a
landmark shift in international legal regulation and jurisdiction, from an era
of impunity towards a recognition
of the need for legal accountability for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international community as a whole.
The underlying element in this evolving process of the
‘internationalization’ of justice is the widely expressed
determination
of the international community to ‘put an end to impunity
for the perpetrators of these crimes’. This is predicated on
elements. The first of these is the establishment of these various international
and internationalized legal mechanisms as
a means of contributing to the
prevention of such crimes in the future. Each of these Tribunals /Courts
involves differing structures
and jurisdictional mandates, depending upon the
particular circumstances involved. Yet, as is noted below, each allows for the
prosecution
of Heads of State where appropriate.
The development of these mechanisms co-exists with the other important
element in this process of internationalization. As the international
criminal justice evolves, national governments can no longer ignore the moral
imperative to recognize these crimes within
their own domestic legal systems.
Over 60 parties to the Rome Statute, including Australia, have recently
their domestic criminal codes to ensure that their
national courts have competence and jurisdiction in relation to the crimes of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, as defined in the Rome
Statute. In many cases, this in itself represents a very
significant step
forward in the reinforcement of fundamental international legal norms. Moreover,
some countries are currently considering
extending their domestic laws even
further, in order to provide for universal jurisdiction within their national
criminal justice
legal system.
Among many things, one very important consequence of this process has been
with respect to the accountability of Heads of State. International
justice is principally directed towards those ‘most responsible’ for
the commission of gross violations of human
rights. In many cases, these crimes
could never have been perpetrated without the support, organization and
resources of the State
itself – lead by a Head of State.
Indeed, over recent years, whereas Heads of State would have once regarded
themselves as above the law, this is no longer the case.
Some examples include;
Augusto Pinochet (Chile), Jean Kambanda (Rwanda), Slobodan Milosevic (Serbia),
Saddam Hussein (Iraq), Alberto
Fujimori (Peru), Charles Taylor (Liberia),
Hissene Habre (Chad) and Radovan Karadzic (Serbian Republic of
Bosnia-Herzegovina, renamed
Republika Srpska). No doubt other leaders are
currently within the sights of the mechanisms of international justice.
While each of these processes have had varying degrees of
‘success’ – part of the evolution of this process requires
appropriate procedural safeguards to ensure an absolutely fair trial (which has
not always been carried through in practice) - the
point is that it would have
been unthinkable even 15 years ago that leaders or former leaders such as these
would ever have faced
trial in such a public forum.
It is therefore important to recognize that the particular case with which
ICC is currently involved – that of President Bashir
of Sudan - is not
unique. On the contrary, there is an undeniable and irreversible trend towards
recognizing and facilitating the
accountability of Heads of State and
prosecuting them in appropriate circumstances. The culture of absolute impunity
that had prevailed
for decades no longer exists.
Philosophical Dimensions
All of these developments follow from the answers that have emerged to a
fundamental philosophical question:
a Head of State be held
criminally responsible for actions done as a leader? How does this fit in with
the basic principles of Head
of State immunity that have long been recognized at
international law? More fundamentally, what is the basis for the criminal
responsibility
of a Head of State, since he/she should perhaps be regarded
simply as the practical representation of an abstract entity known as
and is recognized as representative of State solely by virtue of his/her office?
Does the prosecution of a Head of State
in reality equate to an assumption of
collective guilt?
Whilst at first glance these may seem like vexing questions, the approach
that has emerged is both entirely logical and surprisingly
simple. International
criminal law has, at least thus far, developed on the basis that
individuals
(rather than States) commit crimes. The prosecution of an
individual, no matter what his/her official capacity may be, relates to
actions of that person. Despite the claims of some Heads of State who have faced
courts of law, it is not a trial of the State
or even particular elements of the
community, but rather a question of the guilt or innocence of the individual(s)
facing the charges.
In relation to the commission of international crimes, the judgment of the
Nuremberg Military Tribunal represents the traditional
view in this regard,
rejecting as it did the argument submitted by the accused that individuals could
not be held responsible for
‘acts of state’. In an oft-quoted
passage, the Nuremberg Military Tribunal stated:
... that international law imposes duties and liabilities upon individuals as
well as upon States has long been recognized ... Crimes
against international
law are committed by men, not abstract entities, and only by punishing
individuals who commit such crimes can
the provisions of international law be
enforced ...
Legal Dimensions
As noted above, general principles of international law recognize a well
established principle of Head of State immunity. However,
like much of
international law, this principle continues to evolve in reaction to changing
circumstances and approaches to international
crimes. In the
Arrest Warrant
the International Court of Justice made it clear that, to the extent
that Head of State immunity from jurisdiction did apply to incumbent
officials (in that case a Foreign Minister), this did not amount to impunity in
respect of any crimes they may have committed.
Moreover, in the House of Lords decision in
, several of the
Law Lords expressed the strong (and in my opinion correct) view that there are
certain actions – for example
torture - perpetrated by individuals in the
position of a Head of State that could never be regarded as something to which
State immunity would apply.
Both of these cases involved situations where one State was attempting to
prosecute a senior official or Head of State from another
State. It is in this
context that the concept of Head of State immunity had emerged in the first
place, as a consequence of the respect
for a State’s sovereignty. Even
then, these cases illustrate that this principle would not represent an absolute
bar to such
prosecution.
The position is, if anything, even more straightforward in the case of the
prosecution of a Head of State by an international / internationalized
Tribunal or Court. Here, the reciprocal basis for State sovereignty is not
applicable. Any notion of Head of State immunity
is simply not relevant, given
the express mandate that these institutions have been given.
In December 1946, the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) affirmed the
principles of international law recognized by the Nuremberg
Military Tribunal
and used in its judgment, and directed the United Nations International Law
Commission (ILC) to formulate those
principles for the purposes of codification.
The ‘Nuremberg Principles’ were adopted by the ILC and presented to
UNGA in 1950. They were soon considered to reflect customary international
law. Principle III provides that:
[t]he fact that a person who committed an act which constitutes a crime under
international law acted as Head of State or responsible
government official does
not relieve him from responsibility under international law.
This has been mirrored in respective Statutes of most of the international /
internationalized Tribunals and Courts. In the case of
the ICC, article 27 of
the Rome Statute provides as follows:
1. This Statute shall apply equally to all persons without any distinction
based on official capacity. In particular, official capacity
as a Head of State
or Government, a member of a Government or parliament, an elected representative
or a government official shall
in no case exempt a person from criminal
responsibility under this Statute, nor shall it, in and of itself, constitute a
reduction of sentence.
2. Immunities or special procedural rules which may attach to the official
capacity of a person, whether under national or international
law, shall not bar
the Court from exercising its jurisdiction over such a person.
Furthermore, the gradual development of concepts such as command
responsibility and joint criminal enterprise in the jurisprudence
international criminal Tribunals makes it possible for persons to be
directly prosecuted for committing the relevant crimes (as opposed
aiding and abetting the commission) even though they may have not ‘pulled
the trigger’ – which will typically
be the case of a Head of State.
Political Dimensions
As mentioned above, the issue of prosecuting Heads of State is a highly
sensitive one and, by its very nature, is heavily influenced
by politics.
Despite the (generally) positive steps made by the Nuremberg Military Tribunal
(in particular) and the Tokyo Military
Tribunal regarding the formulation of
principles of international criminal law and the foundations towards a process
of judicial
accountability at the international level – including for
Heads of State - it would take almost 50 years until the next international
criminal Tribunals were to be established.
Instead, the spectre of
Realpolitik
emerged, as the onset of the
‘Cold War’ meant that it was no longer possible for the
international community to find
the common will to build upon the foundations
laid by the Nuremberg and Tokyo Military Tribunal processes. There were also
very strong political forces at work, as States sought to cling to the
international law principle of non-intervention, as specified
in article 2(7) of
the United Nations Charter.
It was thus that an era of impunity for the perpetrators of these
international crimes took hold, which would not be challenged to
any significant
degree until after the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989. Atrocities took
place in countries around the globe
during this period – including in the
Soviet Union, Uganda, Nigeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, East Timor, Algeria,
Cambodia and
Iraq to name but a few examples. However, none of these were either
investigated to any significant degree, let alone punished, by
a court of law.
Indeed, it has been estimated that approximately 170 million people were killed
during the period 1945 to 1990, with
little if any accountability. In certain
respects, it was as if the important treaties developed during this time, such
as the 1948
Genocide Convention, were treated as an end in themselves - sitting
on the shelf - with little tangible action to address these gross
violations of
human rights in a practical sense.
There were only relatively minor steps taken in this regard by the
international community during this lengthy period of (virtual)
inaction. A
treaty was finalized specifying that statutory limitations under national law
were inappropriate and should not be applicable
to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Yet, there was an almost total lack of political will by most
countries to prosecute,
within their respective national court systems,
individuals suspected of committing such crimes. The prosecution and subsequent
of Otto Adolf Eichmann by the Israeli District Court in 1961
(affirmed by the Israeli Supreme Court in the following year) was one
very few exceptions to this failure to act.
Even where discussions had commenced during this period, the results were
slow and the implementation of ‘delayed justice’
has been highly
unsatisfactory. This is illustrated by the situation in Cambodia, where a
criminal prosecution process has only recently
begun in relation to the
‘killing fields’ of the mid-1970s (a timeframe that, by analogy,
would have seen the Nazi war
leaders prosecuted only in 1975). In the meantime,
a whole generation of Cambodians have been born, many of whom have been lead
believe that the genocide perpetrated by the Khmer Rouge was instead committed
by the Vietnamese or the Chinese – misinformation
that has been encouraged
by the current Government, many of whom are former Khmer Rouge cadres. Equally
disconcerting are the reports
that have emerged of corruption and Government
influence that are further hindering the work of the internationalized Tribunal
was finally established.
Practical Dimensions
Of equal significance, and perhaps the most challenging of all, are the
practical issues associated with a prosecution of a Head of
State, particularly
an incumbent, or one that still retains heavy local support among elements
within his/her State even when no
longer in power. How can any indictment /
arrest warrant be executed in these circumstances? Who is going to take
responsibility
for the actual arrest of the individual and his/her surrender to
the relevant Tribunal / Court?
These questions become even more complex if the legal process has been
implemented in the context of an ongoing conflict within the
relevant State.
This gives rise to the very difficult issue of what some have referred to as the
‘Peace v Justice dilemma’.
Some commentators (wrongly in my view)
argue that while peace is ‘forward looking’ and
‘positive’, justice
is ‘backward looking’, incompatible
with peace negotiations and having a tendency to open up tensions rather than
to heal old (or not so old) wounds. In these circumstances, they argue
that justice should be ‘sacrificed’ for the sake
of reaching some
form of peace settlement, and that if this means that a despot who has committed
very serious crimes whilst in power
is left alone to live a long a comfortable
life (often with ill-gotten gains hidden in secret bank accounts), then that is
an unfortunate
but necessary consequence.
Views such as these are largely simplistic and naïve, and misunderstand
the nature and meaning of
peace. They also demonstrate a lack of
insight into the goals of justice – particularly international criminal
justice (see
below). However, they are surprisingly widely held views, not only
among those with a vested interest in not being held accountable,
but also by
NGOs and even some aid agencies. Clearly there is much work to be done to change
this perspective.
The International Criminal Court
Establishment
As is well known, the ICC was established on 1 July 2002 following the
necessary 60 ratifications of the Rome Statute (there are currently
Parties). The Court has been given the mandate to play a role when international
crimes have (allegedly) been committed.
As a permanent court, it differs from
international criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, which were set up as United Nations subsidiary organs in response
specific events and were always intended to have a limited life-span, as is
indicated by the formulation by the UNSC of the Completion
Strategy that each is
currently operating under.
By contrast, the ICC is a permanent institution, established under a treaty
and, as such, independent of the United Nations, although
there is clearly an
ongoing relationship between the two institutions on several key issues (see
below). The ICC has the power to
exercise its jurisdiction with respect to
circumstances that may occur
in the future
– that is, at any time
after the Rome Statute came into force. Unless the Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute decides
to completely alter its nature or focus, the ICC will
remain in place for the long-term. By its very nature, therefore, the ICC will
often operate within the context of an ongoing conflict, which heightens the
likelihood that it will be confronted with arguments
related to the peace v
justice debate.
In this sense, the ICC represents an important guardian of those values and
norms that are accepted universally among the international
community. As the
then United Nations Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, put it following the
agreement of delegates at the 1998 Rome
Conference to adopt the Rome Statute,
the Court’s creation is:
a gift of hope to future generations, and a giant step forward in the march
towards universal human rights and the rule of law.
Not only is this important in and of itself; it also reaffirms the
interrelationship between the maintenance of international peace
and security
– one of the principal purposes of the United Nations - and the respect
for fundamental human rights. Indeed,
the UNSC has acknowledged that:
peace and security, development and human rights are the pillars of the
United Nations system and the foundations for collective security
well-being, and ... in this regard ... development, peace and security and
human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing
It is important to note that the ICC, like any specifically established
court, can only operate within the confines of the jurisdiction
that it has been
granted. The Rome Statute provides that the following crimes, when committed
after 1 July 2002, fall within the
when committed ‘with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national,
ethnical, racial or religious group,
(often referred to as
dolus specialis
Crimes against
Humanity – when committed ‘as part of a widespread or systematic
attack directed against any civilian population,
with knowledge of the
– which usually involves a breach of 1949 Geneva Conventions and/or the
laws and customs of armed conflict, ‘in
particular when committed as part
of a plan or policy or as part of a large-scale commission of such
The [as yet
undefined] Crime of Aggression.
Articles 12 and 13 of the Rome Statute specify the
‘[p]reconditions to the exercise of jurisdiction’ and
of jurisdiction’ by the Court respectively. In summary,
the Court can exercise its jurisdiction in relation to these crimes
following circumstances:
(alleged) crime has been committed on the territory of a State Party to the Rome
national(s) of a State Party to the Rome Statute is alleged to have committed a
situation in which a crime(s) ‘appears to have been committed’ has
been referred to the Prosecutor of the ICC
by the UNSC acting under Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter; or
non-State Party to the Rome Statute lodges a declaration with the Registrar of
the ICC, accepting the jurisdiction of the
Court with respect to the
‘crime in question’.
The jurisdiction of the Court is subject to the principle of
‘complementarity’ that has been established under the Rome
In essence, this means that primary responsibility for the prosecution of these
crimes lies with States and that the ICC
therefore operates as a ‘court of
last resort’. This in itself demonstrates a shift in emphasis from the
culture of impunity
that had existed before the 1990s, during which time it was
evident that States were very reluctant to try their own nationals (let
Heads of State) for war crimes, and even more so where crimes against humanity
or genocide were concerned.
Goals / Mandate
In the context of whether the ICC should be involved in the prosecution of
Heads of State in appropriate circumstances (remembering,
as noted above, that
the official capacity of a person is not relevant to the Court), it is relevant
to recall its mandate and the
context within which it has been established, as
set out in the preamble of the Rome Statute. These include:
Affirming that the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole must not go unpunished and that their
effective prosecution
must be ensured by taking measures at the national level and by enhancing
international cooperation,
Determined to put an end to impunity for the perpetrators of these crimes and
thus to contribute to the prevention of such crimes,
Recalling that it is the duty of every State to exercise its criminal
More generally, the whole concept of international justice is itself a very
complex issue. The ICC represents another (albeit significant)
development in
the ongoing evolution of this process of justice. In this regard, it is of vital
importance that those involved in
this evolutionary process understand precisely
what it is that the international community and civil society are trying to
as we develop the various tools of international justice. Although far
too simplistic, one could perhaps think of the ‘goals’
international justice in terms of ‘micro’ and ‘macro’
criteria as follows:
Micro Goals
Responsibility
A voice for
/Satisfaction
Macro Goals
Reconciliation
Retribution
Deterrence /
A Transparent
Naturally, there may be other goals, and some of those suggested
above may themselves not be appropriate for certain situations. Yet,
it is clear
that the prosecution of a Head of State would, in appropriate circumstances,
fall within the general and specific goals
of Courts like the ICC. Or put
another way, such a prosecution would certainly not be inconsistent with the
role that the international
community has given to the ICC.
Relationship between the ICC and the UNSC
This aspect of the structure within which the ICC operates is important in
the context of the prosecution of a Head of State and is
particularly relevant
in Darfur situation. A consideration of the relationship between the ICC and the
UNSC raises a number of complex
legal and practical questions. Many of these are
due to a combination of factors, including the
sui generis
nature of the
two institutions, the fact that the ICC is a relatively new institution, and the
particular powers given, and role
ascribed to the UNSC under the terms of both
the United Nations Charter and the Rome Statute. Some relevant provisions of the
Statute are as follows:
Article 13(b) of
the Rome Statute provides for the
of a situation to the ICC by
the UNSC acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter – this
referral mechanism was
implemented by the UNSC in relation to the situation in
Sudan since 1 July 2002 (UNSC Resolution 1593, 31 March 2005)
Mechanisms exist
for the ICC to inform the UNSC about the failure of a non-State Party or State
Party to cooperate with the Court
in respect of its activities in a case that
has been referred to the Prosecutor of the ICC by the UNSC under article
Article 16 of
the Rome Statute provides for the
of an investigation or
prosecution by the ICC upon the request by the UNSC acting under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter.
This deferral is for a 12 month period, subject to
renewal by the UNSC under the same conditions. The deferral mechanism has been
implemented in the past in reaction to concerns about the Court raised by the
United States in particular, but it has not been used
for several years. As
noted above, both the AU and the Organization of Islamic States are calling for
it to again be used in relation
to the Bashir case, ‘in the interest of
peace, justice and reconciliation’. In the meantime, the Council of the AU
reiterated its call for all AU Member States not to cooperate with various
ICC processes, in particular those concerned with the
arrest and surrender of
President Bashir. It should be noted that a failure to cooperate may, among
other things, represent a violation
of UNSC resolutions, as well as the Rome
Criteria of ‘Success’
Coupled with the goals of international justice is the question of how
history will judge whether this ongoing process of the internationalization
justice has been, is and will be a ‘success’, particularly in view
of the various challenges that the ICC faces. Both
of these issues have been
discussed in previous articles in
Legal Studies – Lifeline
[WAYNE – PLEASE ADD A FOOTNOTE REFERENCE HERE TO THE PREVIOUS
, and the points raised in those articles are also relevant for the
question of prosecuting Heads of State.
Whatever the most appropriate criteria for success might be in order to
satisfy the goals of justice, a simple question must be asked:
would these
criteria and goals be satisfied simply by the prosecution of ‘foot
soldiers’, rather than those ‘most
responsible’ for the
commission of international crimes, whoever they may be and whatever their
official capacity is?
The Road Forward
In the end, the effectiveness of international criminal justice will largely
depend on the efforts of States to demonstrate the requisite
political will
– backed by tangible resources and action – necessary to allow for
proper accountability for those who
commit gross violations of human rights.
Courts like the ICC have a vital role to play in this process, but their
creation is not
the panacea that will stop these atrocities from taking place.
The ICC is just one (albeit very important) cog in an ever more complex
of mechanisms that must be implemented if, in the future, the world is to see
justice, in the broader sense, for all.
Yet it is clear that progress has been made and the prosecution of Heads of
State is an important element in the internationalization
of justice. This is
something to be applauded. Indeed, international criminologists now talk about
the emergence of a ‘Pinochet
syndrome’ – where the senior
political and military leaders of today and tomorrow can no longer ignore the
rule of law
and the reach of this system of internationalized criminal justice,
by assuming that they will never be brought to account.
In this sense, the prosecution of Heads of States in the proper circumstances
is entirely appropriate. It is clearly consistent with
the goals of national and
international justice. It is clearly within the principles of international law.
It is clearly within the
mandate of the various international and
internationalized Courts and Tribunals (including the ICC) that have been
established. It
is clearly in keeping with the desire of civil society to ensure
that the culture of impunity that had existed for many years and
countless deaths does not re-emerge. And, despite what some may argue, it not an
isolated occurrence, but rather is part
of a growing and irreversible trend.
Perhaps most poignant of all are the words from a current Head of State. In
quoted Libya’s President Muammar Qaddafi
– who just happens to be the current Chairperson of the AU – when he
responded to the arrest of his former protégé Charles
Taylor in the following terms: ‘This means that every head
of state could
meet a similar fate. It sets a serious precedent’.
Let us all keep our fingers crossed that President Qaddafi is indeed
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (168 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter