URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2023/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davies, Chris; Dunbar, Neil --- "Contracts Between Sporting Clubs" [2023] JCULawRw 9; (2023) 29 James Cook University Law Review 139
Contracts Between Sporting Clubs
Chris Davies
Neil Dunbar
I Introduction
There is no doubting the significance of contracts in professional team
sports, the most common being employment contracts between
players and clubs.
There can also be contracts between clubs and the leagues that, for instance,
provide guarantees to the clubs
that they have a place in the competition for a
certain period of time. In
Australian Rugby Football League
it was held that if
there is no such contract then an implied one-year contract exists between the
leagues and the clubs. Less common
are contracts between the clubs themselves,
though they do exist in European football due to the loan and transfer systems
subsequent moving of contracted players between clubs.
This research note will examine two such contracts, one involving Leeds
United and RasenBallsport Leipzig (‘RB Leipzig’),
the other between
Cardiff City and Nantes. While these are European based clubs, they are still of
relevance to Australian football
as players from the A-League can, and are,
transferred to these clubs. Former Australian national players Harry Kewell and
Mark Viduka,
for instance, both played for Leeds United during their careers.
This note will examine the general contract aspects relating to
the cases, as
well as the impact of circumstances such as Covid-19. It will also discuss the
potential significance of the judgments
for football and other Australian team
II Leeds United and RB Leipzig
Background Facts
On 25 January 2020 Leeds United entered into a loan agreement with RB Leipzig
to obtain the services of its contracted player, Jean-Kevin
Augustin, until 30
June 2020. Included in this agreement were both a purchase option and purchase
obligation, the latter of which
required Leeds United to purchase the
player’s rights if it was promoted to the English Premier League
from the English Football League (‘EFL’).
Consequently, the effect of these two agreements was that Leeds United had
option not to purchase the player if it was not promoted to the EPL, though it
could still purchase the player if it was not
promoted by relying on the
purchase option.
The key issue was whether the purchase obligation was triggered by Leeds
United’s promotion to the EPL by I July 2020, or by
the end of the
2019–20 season which was delayed due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The FIFA
Players’ Status Committee (‘FIFA
PSC’) upheld RB
Leipzig’s claim that the purchase obligation had been triggered at the end
of the 2019-2020 season and
that Leeds United were required to pay RB Leipzig
the agreed transfer fee. Leeds United then appealed this decision to the Court
of Arbitration for Sport (‘CAS’).
The CAS Hearing
In the CAS hearing Leeds United’s main argument was that the date of 1
July was crucial to the agreement as the parties agreed
that unless the purchase
option was exercised or the purchase obligation triggered, the employment of
Augustin by RB Leipzig would
be reinstated with effect from 1 July
That is, it argued that , the
parties clearly intended that the purchase obligation would need to be triggered
prior to 1 July 2020.
On the other hand, RB Leipzig argued that the loan
agreement showed that the only condition precedent was the promotion of Leeds
United to the EPL at the end of the 2019–20
Leeds United also argued that if the CAS held that there was more than one
possible interpretation of the Agreement, the
contra proferentem
should apply.
It provides that
where any provision is unclear in its meaning, the unclear wording will be
interpreted against the author of the
However, RB Leipzig argued
that there was no ambiguity so there was no need to invoke the
proferentem
Further, Leeds United argued that there was no scope for the application of
complementary contractual interpretation
because the meaning of the
agreement was clear and reflected the intentions of the
RB Leipzig then argued
that it did apply, stating if the parties had been aware that the season would
be extended by the Covid-19
pandemic, they would have agreed to postpone the
actual dates.
Leeds United’s final argument was that completion of the transfer of
the player could not be met by 1 July 2020 as a result
of the Covid-19 pandemic,
with the principle of
force majeure
arising and the purchase obligation
being extinguished.
maintained that
force majeure
did not apply to the effects of the
Covid-19 pandemic, referring to the Fédération Internationale de
Football Association
(‘FIFA’) Covid-19 Guidelines which do not
specify that any clause in a valid loan agreement would automatically become
null and void after its original expiry
The CAS Judgment
The CAS Panel pointed out that the key to the dispute was what the parties
had actually agreed about when the purchase obligation
was to arise. Leeds
United maintained it was 1 July while RB Leipzig submitted that it was at the
end of the 2019–20 season.
The Panel held that the issue was to be resolved by considering the intentions
of the parties, noting that neither of the interpretations
that the parties had
put forward were perfect. This was because either the 1 July 2020 date had to be
read into the condition precedent,
or the condition precedent did not align with
the other clauses in the loan agreement which referred to 30 June or 1
The Panel also stated that the parties’ aim when they executed the
purchase obligation was to allow Leeds United to utilise
the services of the
player in the 2020–21 EPL
This would only have
been possible if the condition precedent was valid until the end of the season,
and not 1 July 2020. It then
held that, had the parties known that the EFL
competition would not be finished until 22 July 2020, the clubs would have
the terms of the loan agreement to enable the player to register with
Leeds United before the start of the 2020–21 EPL
The use of the
contra proferentem
rule was not required, but the Panel
did state that if it had had to be applied it would be against Leeds United as
it had not expressed
the relevance of 1 July when first expressing an interest
in purchasing the player. It had simply referred to its promotion to the
The Panel also held that Leeds United’s argument that
complementary
contractual interpretation
could not apply to the purchase obligation
because it interlocked with other contracts, was incorrect in that the other
were concluded by parties different to those involved in the current
dispute and therefore they had ‘no direct bearing on the
outcome of the
present proceedings.’
In regard to the
force majeure
argument, the Panel was of the opinion
that this did not apply since Leeds United had not provided any evidence to show
Covid-19 pandemic had made it impossible, or difficult, to meet its
purchase obligation
commitment.
Thus, the CAS found in favour of RB Leipzig in relation to this contractual
dispute with the purchase option being triggered and Leeds
United being obliged
to pay the first instalment of the transfer fee plus
III Cardiff City and Nantes
Background Facts
On 20 July 2015 Emiliano Raul Sala Taffarel had entered into a five-year
employment contract with French club, Nantes. Cardiff City
made approaches to
Nantes regarding a possible transfer for Taffarel in December 2018, and on 18
January 2019 he travelled to Wales
and signed a three and a half-year contract.
The following day Cardiff City and Nantes entered into a Transfer Agreement, the
fee being EUR17m, spread over a number of payments, the first being
EUR6m, due within five days of Taffarel being registered with
Cardiff City. The
contract included a number of conditions precedent in Clause 2.1. Clause 2.1.1
required that Taffarel pass a medical,
2.1.2 required a mutual termination of
the contract of employment with Nantes while 2.1.3 required that this mutual
termination be
registered with Ligie de Football Professional
(‘LFP’). Clause 2.1.4 then required that the LFP and the Football
Association
of Wales (‘FAW’) confirm to both clubs that Taffarel had
been registered as a Cardiff City player ‘and that the
International Transfer certificate has been
Clause 2.2 then required the parties to ‘take all reasonable endeavours
to ensure that the conditions are satisfied by 22 January.’
conditions were not met by this date, the agreement was null and void. On 21
January the FAW confirmed receipt of Taffarel’s
International Transfer
Certificate (‘ITC’) and registered him with Cardiff City. The
transfer status in FIFA’s
Transfer Matching System (‘TMS’) was
then changed to ‘Closed – awaiting payment.’ It was at this
that Nantes claimed Taffarel had become a Cardiff City player ‘and
all conditions precedent in the Transfer Agreement had been
satisfied.’
However, on
the same day Cardiff City reopened negotiations with Taffarel’s agent and
a set of proposed changes were made to
the contract in order to make it
acceptable to the EPL. These changes were sent by email to the EPL, but Taffarel
was never registered
Sometime on the night of 21–22 January, Taffarel, together with his
pilot, died when their plane crashed into the English
On 26 February Nantes
lodged a claim with FIFA for the first instalment of EUR6m, plus
determined that the conditions precedent in the Transfer Agreement had been
complied with and that Cardiff City
was therefore required to pay the first
installment of the transfer fee plus 5%
Cardiff City
challenged the decision before the CAS.
CAS Judgment
The first thing to note was that the Panel allowed Cardiff City and Nantes to
mutually agree to extend time limits due to problems
relating to Covid-19 and
the resulting difficulties in liaising with expert
As a consequence, an
appeal lodged with CAS in November 2019 did not have a final ruling until 26
August 2022.
The Panel noted that the main issue that needed to be resolved was whether,
at the time of his death, Taffarel had ‘definitively
transferred’ which then triggered a payment obligation from Cardiff City
to Nantes of EUR6m.
Cardiff City
tried to argue that if the payment obligation existed, Nantes was liable for
Taffarel’s death as the return flight
was organised by agents of Nantes
‘and that this tort claim is to be set off against any payment
obligation.’
The Panel, however, held that it was ‘only empowered to decide upon the
substance of the tort claim if the FIFA PSC was competent
to do so.’ This
was because the mandate of the Panel in appeal arbitration proceeding,
‘cannot, in principle, exceed
the mandate of the first
It was noted by
the Panel that ‘the set of claims is not linked to the breach of contract.
The only arguable nexus is the crude
and obvious causal one: if there had been
no transfer link, then there would not have been a plane
It was therefore
concluded that Cardiff City was ‘procedurally precluded from availing
itself of the alleged set-off claim,’
further noting however that it was
not precluded ‘from bringing its set-off claim in an ordinary arbitration
proceeding before
CAS’ or in a national
Cardiff City then argued that while it accepted that clause 2.1.1 of the
Transfer Agreement had been complied with, it disputed whether
clauses 2.1.2,
2.1.3 and 2.1.4 had been. In regard to clause 2.1.2, the Panel considered that
this condition precedent had been fulfilled
since Nantes and Tarrafel had
mutually agreed to terminate their employment
In regard to 2.1.3 it
was held that it was ‘undisputed’ that the LFP had registered the
Termination Agreement and ‘whether
such registration was correct or not,
is immaterial, since it is the registration that was provided for under the
Transfer Agreement,
Thus, this condition precedent was also held to have been satisfied.
In regard to Clause 2.1.4 the Panel noted that ‘a transfer is
considered executed and finalised once a player is registered
with the new
association,’ stating that it interpreted the word
‘registered’ in this clause ‘a referring
to registration by
the FAW.’ It therefore held that ‘clause 2.1.4 did not provide any
basis to suggest that the Player
was to be registered by the Premier League as
well as by the FAW.’
Panel further noted that as ‘both Parties are experienced stakeholders in
the world of football, it is reasonable and fair
to interpret objectively that
clause 2.1.4 of the Transfer Agreement refers to the factual matrix and the
standing practice of the
Since Taffarel
could have played in other competitions such as the FA Cup, even if the EPL
would not register his contract, there
was a ‘clear indication’ that
he had become a Cardiff City
condition precedent in clause 2.1.4 of the Transfer Agreement had also been
satisfied.’
Therefore, as the transfer and the conditions precedent in the Transfer
Agreement had been fulfilled, the Panel upheld Nantes claim
to the first
instalment, plus 5% interest.
IV Discussion
The CAS decision regarding Leeds United and RB Leipzig followed the standard
approach to the interpretation of contracts with the
Panel considering the
parties’ intentions at the time the contract was made in January 2020. The
contract was drawn up to provide
Leeds United with a significant degree of
certainty and flexibility as it did not have to proceed with its obligation to
Augustin’s registration rights if it was not promoted to the EPL,
but, on the other hand, the option provided in the contract
still gave Leeds
United the opportunity to purchase the player’s contract even if it was
not promoted. However, if it was promoted
the purchase obligation would be
There is no doubt, however, that Leeds United’s desire to purchase
Augustin’s contract subsequently declined. In April
2020 Leeds United
sought an extension in time to pay the instalment payments for the player. By
June 2020 its position had changed
even further with it clearly being concerned
for ways to withdraw from its contractual obligation which is why it
sought to argue that 1 July 2020 was an operative date, but,
as the Panel
determined, the parties’ intention was that Augustin would join Leeds
United if it was promoted to the EPL. Thus,
while Leeds United was looking for a
technicality in order to get out of a contractual agreement by which it no
longer wished to
be bound, the CAS Panel enforced the agreed terms of the
contract. While the contract was entered into at a time during which Covid-19
was affecting European football, this did not affect enforcement of the
contract. It did not prevent it from being performed, but
merely delayed its
performance. This is why the
force majeure
argument failed.
While the contractual situation involving Cardiff City and Nantes actually
pre-dated the Covid-19 pandemic, it was still indirectly
affected by it since it
caused considerable delays in the proceedings, resulting in a decision not being
handed down until, literally,
years after the application was lodged.
Like Leeds United, Cardiff City was seeking to be relieved of its contractual
obligations. With Leeds United it was because it was
no longer interested in
acquiring the services of a player it viewed as being unfit and out of form, but
with Cardiff City it was
due to the fact that the player had been tragically
killed before even playing a single game for the club. This left Cardiff City
owing Nantes EUR17m without the benefit of obtaining a player who could assist
its on-field performances. This was unquestionably
an unfortunate outcome for
Cardiff City, but it should also be remembered that Nantes may well have begun
making arrangements and
undertaking potential commitments with other clubs in
order to find a replacement player during football’s January transfer
It is understandable that Cardiff City would try to argue that it was no
longer obligated to pay Nantes the transfer fee, but it was
never going to be a
strong argument, given the clear wording of the contract and the fact that, as
the Panel pointed out, both parties
were experienced stakeholders in the
business of football. It was also an expensive decision by Cardiff City as the
appeal to CAS
involved many expert witnesses and, while the normal procedure in
a CAS hearing is for the parties to cover their own legal costs,
in this case
the Panel held that, given the circumstances, the costs ‘shall be borne in
full’ by Cardiff City.
The main Australian rules football competitions, up until the 1980s, had a
transfer system under which, as in European football,
money could be transferred
between clubs when players moved. This no longer occurs. However, what does take
place in the Australian
Football League (‘AFL’) during the early
part of the off-season is the exchange of draft selections in the annual
draft for players already playing in the AFL. For example, the club
finishing last in a particular season may decide to exchange
its number one
draft selection for a very good, well-established player from another club. The
analogous situation to that involving
Cardiff City and Nantes would be that the
day after any such this exchange has been agreed to by the clubs, the player
being traded
is tragically killed, for example, in a car accident. The question
then arises: which club has the right to the number one selection.
CAS decision indicates that it should be the club that had traded the player.
The next question would then be whether the club that had traded away its
selection should be compensated. While there was no means
of providing
compensation in the Cardiff City case, there is in the AFL as it could be
decided that the affected club be compensated
by being given the next selection
in the draft. In the hypothetical situation suggested here, it would be the
number two selection.
While this would adequately compensate the affected club,
it would also impact on the other clubs which would all drop down one place
the draft order. This could mean that some clubs will not be able to obtain the
services of players they had earmarked as being
essential to the club needs or,
depending on the quality of the draft affected, may not be able to draft a
player of AFL standard.
It is suggested that while legal action is unlikely to prevent the
possibility of this occurring, the AFL could include in its draft
will happen if this unlikely, but not unforeseeable event, should take place.
The solution that would appear to have the
least impact on the integrity of the
draft is to grant the affected club the next draft selection to the one that it
had traded away.
This is also consistent with AFL rules regarding free agency
when a club loses a very good player. In such circumstances it receives
compensation selection immediately after its first-round selection.
V Conclusion
Conditions precedent are standard clauses that can be included in contracts.
If performed, they will trigger obligation clauses within
agreed contracts. In
regards to Leeds United it became obligated to purchase the registration rights
to Augustin whenever it was
promoted to the EPL. It would appear that the club,
in taking legal action, was trying to get out of the contract on a technicality
due to the fact it no longer wanted the player, owing to fitness concerns.
Perhaps the legal action could have been prevented by
having standard clauses in
such agreements that not only expressly refer to a specific date, but also
contain a term that covers
any need to expand the season due to unforeseen
circumstances such as a pandemic. Thus, it could, for instance, read ‘by I
July or any later date required to complete the season due to unforeseen
circumstances.’
Cardiff City was, likewise, still liable for the transfer fee for Taffarel,
even though he had been tragically killed on the night
when all the contractual
obligations had been fulfilled. The reason for taking legal action was to ensure
it did not have to pay
a transfer fee for a player who never played for the
club. Unlike the Leeds United case, there is no further clause that could be
incorporated into an agreement to help resolve any issues as it will always be a
situation as to which club had the registration
rights to the player at the
relevant time. Any solution would therefore have to lie outside the agreement
with insurance being one
possibility. This, in Cardiff City’s case, would
have involved taking out life insurance immediately which, given the fact
negotiations had been on-going for some time, was feasible. What would make it
impractical is the likely high premiums involved.
It should also be noted that
there are risks in any transfer as the player may not fit into the team as well
as expected or may not
display the same level of performance as prior to the
transfer. Cardiff City’s case was never a strong one and hopefully CAS
provided a clear indication as to how such a situation will be decided should it
ever arise again.
Associate Professor, College of Business, Law and Governance,
James Cook University
Senior Lecturer, College of Business, Law and Governance, James
Cook University
[1996] FCAFC 870
(1996) 64 FCR 410
CAS 2021/A/82229
United Football Club Limited v RasenBallsport Leipzig GmbH
Ibid, [74].
Ibid, [72].
HDI Global Specialty SE v
Wonkana No 3 Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 296
(2020) 104 NSWLR 634
Ibid, [74].
Ibid, [72]. The term
‘complementary contractual interpretation' is recognised under German and
Swiss law. It arises when the
parties to a contract failed to consider an issue
that later occurred. In this situation it is necessary to examine what the
would have agreed if they had considered the issue.
Ibid, [74].
Ibid, [72].
Ibid, [74].
Ibid, [87].
Ibid, [105].
Ibid, [110].
Ibid, [111].
Ibid, [132].
Ibid, [131].
Ibid, [133].
Ibid, [149].
CAS 2019/A/6504
City Football Club Limited v SASP Football Club de Nantes
Ibid, [28].
Ibid, [31].
Ibid, [33].
Ibid, [35].
Ibid, [102].
Ibid, [104]
Ibid, [130].
Ibid, [172].
Ibid, [190].
Ibid, [353]
Ibid, [362].
Ibid, [376].
CAS 2019/A/6504
City Football Club Limited v SASP Football Club de Nantes
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (40.6 KB)
PDF format (406 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter