URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sharma, Paribhasha; Hamilton, Gemma --- "Police Responses to Rape in Metropolitan India" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 29; (2025) 14(3) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 91
Police Responses to Rape in Metropolitan India
Paribhasha Sharma
Indian Institute of Forest Management, India
Gemma Hamilton
RMIT University, Australia.
Police; rape; sexual violence.
Introduction
Gender-based
crime, particularly sexual assault in India, has captured national and
international media attention in recent times.
The Park Street rape in Kolkata,
the Nirbhaya gang rape in New Delhi, the Shakti Mills gang rape in Mumbai, and
the Unnao and Hathras
are some of the incidents that have created headlines in the last decade and are
still fresh in the public memory. It
was the brutal gang rape and death of a
college student in Delhi (rechristened Nirbhaya by the media) that generated
nationwide protest
and called for reforms in rape laws. It also brought the
issue of sexual violence into the public discourse; previously, it had largely
remained confined to the women’s movement in India. It situated
gender-based violence as a governance issue, highlighting the
provision of a
safe environment for women as the obligation of the government (Verma et al.,
Recent statistics highlight that 21.6 million women in India have suffered
sexual violence in their lifetime (McDougal et al., 2021).
These statistics,
paired with the extant literature, highlight the pervasiveness of sexual
violence, the profound trauma faced by
victim-survivors and the need for
effective justice responses (Suri & Khan, 2013). The police play a major
role in the governance
of crimes against women, as they are often both the first
responders to encounter survivors and the gatekeepers to criminal justice.
perceptions of deserving or undeserving cases have a significant impact on
victim-survivors’ experiences of the criminal
justice system (Jordan,
2004). Police responses—especially in the case of sexual
violence—require an in-depth understanding
from the victim-survivor
perspective as well as the police perspective. This can provide insights into
how current policing systems
can be improved with respect to women’s
This article first examines research on
under-reporting and police responses to rape, both globally and in the Indian
context. It
then moves to discuss the methodology used in the study, which
outlines a thematic analysis of interviews with both victim-survivors
personnel. Findings are presented, along with a discussion of how police
responses are interlinked with patriarchy and
broader socio-cultural ways of
understanding rape. The terms “victim”, “survivor” and
“victim-survivor”
are used throughout this article to reflect the
language used in various studies, as well as the different identities of people
have experienced sexual violence. For the participants in the study, we use
“victim-survivor” to indicate the continuum
of identities with which
people might identify, depending on time, experiences, and their journeys in the
aftermath of sexual violence.
The Case of Underreporting
Violence against women—particularly sexual assault—remains one of
the most under-reported crimes worldwide (Brooks-Hay
2020; Daly & Bouhours
2010). In India, there is general agreement that violence against women is
under-reported (McDougal et
al., 2021; Mukherjee et al., 2001), and this is even
more the case with sexual violence (Sharma & Gupta, 2004). Bhat and Wodda
(2013) point out that 70 per cent of all sexual crimes in India are not
reported. This trend is thought to be even worse for
(lower caste)
women, with official rape statistics likely a significant underestimation (Pal,
2018). There are numerous factors influencing
the decision not to report rape. A
wide range of socio-cultural factors, such as illiteracy, unemployment, social
status, class,
race, social stigma, feelings of shame, pervasive myths
associated with rape, fear of retaliation by the accused, issues of family
honor, chastity and virginity, stop a survivor or her family from speaking up
and reporting the incident to the police (Bhat &
Wodda, 2013; Mukherjee et
al., 2001). Additionally, a significant barrier to reporting rape is a lack of
confidence in the criminal
justice system (Rajan, 2013). The fear of not being
believed or being ridiculed by law enforcement agencies can silence rape victims
from speaking up (Lorenz et al., 2019).
Global Police Responses to Rape Victims
Across the world, the police response to rape has been significantly lacking.
In England and Wales, for example, only 1.3 per cent
of 63,136 reported rapes
resulted in a suspect being charged by police in the 12 months prior to
September 2021 (ONS, 2022). In the
United States, it is estimated that there are
over 100,000 untested rape kits, with studies showing that further rapes could
been prevented if kits had been sent by police to crime labs for testing
(Curington, 2021). This has prompted many advocates to question
whether rape and
sexual assault are being taken seriously by police. Indeed, it is well
documented that victim-survivors often experience
victimisation”
criminal justice system, including the police, as a result of indifferent and
victim-blaming attitudes (Campbell et al., 2001;
Maier, 2008). In a recent
survey of over 2000 victim-survivors in England and Wales, 75 per cent of
respondents reported that their
mental health had declined as a direct result of
the police response they had received. One victim-survivor stated, “I am
afraid of the police than being raped again” (Hohl et al., 2023, p.
Widespread failings have prompted developments in the policing of rape and
other crimes against women. For example, women’s
police stations have
spread across the world as a specialist response to gender-based violence
(Amaral et al., 2021; Carrington et
al., 2020; Natarajan & Babu, 2020).
While the structures of women’s police stations differ across countries,
they are generally
staffed by female officers to respond to and prevent gendered
violence, and may involve collaboration with other professionals such
workers, lawyers and psychologists (Carrington et al., 2020). Women’s
police stations have had varying levels of
success in responding to gendered
violence, depending on their structure, resourcing and location (Natarajan &
Babu, 2020). In
Brazil, for example, the establishment of a women’s police
station in a metropolitan area was associated with a 17 per cent
decrease in the
female homicide rate—a marker of intimate partner violence (Perova &
Reynolds, 2017). The impact on reports
of rape is less clear, although scholars
argue that women’s police stations can empower women and widen access to
justice (Carrington
et al., 2020).
Police Responses to Rape Victims in India
Research in the Indian context has also indicated problems with police
responses to rape cases. Prasad (1999), in a study on medico-legal
responses to
violence in India using semi-structured interviews, found that rape victims in
Delhi complained of mishandling of their
cases by the police in terms of
doubting their credibility, delaying medico-legal authorisation and erring in
documenting evidence.
In another study on rape victims in Kerala,
Venkitakrishnan and Kurien (2003) demonstrated the lax attitude of the police in
to rape victims, coupled with issues of corruption (bribe-taking from
accused) and a police–criminal–political nexus.
This nexus was
pointed out in a report by N.N. Vohra, who headed the government-appointed
committee to study the problem of criminalisation
of politics and corruption
among politicians, criminals, bureaucrats and the police in India (Ministry of
Law and Justice, 2010).
Such a nexus emboldens perpetrators, who then continue
their crimes with impunity.
More recently, a survey of 190 police officers in Uttar Pradesh indicated
that officers often held patriarchal and sexist attitudes
towards women
(Tripathi, 2020). For example, 81 per cent of the police respondents
believed it was acceptable for a man to physically
reprimand his wife, and over
60 per cent believed that housework and child-care was the responsibility of
women. Damania and Singh
(2022) also found that police and legal professionals
in India agreed with various rape myths, including that women often lie about
rape and that women’s clothing and behaviour contribute to rape. Similar
findings were echoed in qualitative interviews with
police officers in Uttar
Pradesh (Tripathi & Azhar, 2021). Moreover, research in three Eastern Indian
states has indicated that
police often do not comply with rape laws and
victim-friendly provisions, with a lack of uniformity in responses across the
(Swetapadma et al., 2023).
In recognition of such police failings, a range of gender-targeted police
reforms have been introduced across India. For example,
the Telangana State
Police Department’s “SHE Teams” were launched in 2014, with a
focus on responding to public
sexual assault and harassment (Raman &
Komarraju, 2018). The initiative aims to map perpetration hot-spots and empower
to report such crime through apps and social media. At least 60 SHE
teams are said to be in operation across Hyderabad City, headed
by police with
covert surveillance to collect evidence. While the initiative claims success in
curbing sexual harassment, scholars
have pointed out several critiques,
including a large focus on victim responsibility rather than perpetrator
behaviour; a lack of
interventions for rapes and sexual assaults that occur in
private locations; and contingencies that claim concern for women –
only if women present and behave in certain ways in public (Raman &
Komarraju, 2018).
Another gender-targeted initiative is Women’s Help Desks in police
stations across Madhya Pradesh. This intervention involves
private spaces for
female victim-survivors within police stations, policies for registering rape
cases, officer training, routine
monitoring of police procedures and outreach to
community safety networks. The Women’s Help Desks are run by female
at the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector or higher (Sukhtankar et al.,
2022). In a recent evaluation of this initiative (involving
a randomised
controlled trial of 180 police stations servicing 23.4 million people),
researchers found that officers in stations
with Women’s Help Desks were
significantly more likely to register cases of gender-based violence, especially
when those desks
were run by female officers (Sukhtankar et al., 2022). The
authors concluded that the Women’s Help Desks worked to mainstream
gender-responsive policing practices and “ascribe value to work on
women’s cases, rather than casting such work as peripheral
important] than other crime prevention tasks” (Sukhtankar et al., 2022, p.
The Current Study
Much of the published literature on police responses to rape
victims-survivors is located in the West. Literature with a feminist
this issue in a developing country like India with high rates of sexual violence
is sparse. Moreover, there is a lack of
in-depth qualitative research that
elevates Indian women’s voices and explores their experiences of reporting
rape to police.
Extant research often analyses women’s experiences
indirectly – for example, through cases studies, official data or
reports (e.g. Pal, 2018; Simon-Kumar, 2014; Tripathi, 2023). There is a lack of
empirical research that directly asks Indian
women about their experiences of
reporting rape to inform police responses.
The current research adopts an intersectional feminist lens to examine
interviews with three victim-survivors and 15 police personnel
in Kolkata,
India. Intersectional feminism considers how multiple forms of oppression are
experienced by marginalised groups and
contribute to injustice (Crenshaw, 1989;
Sen, 2023). As described by Tripathi (2023, p. 953), “the framework of
intersectionality
draws a reflection of reality by visualising associative ways
of uneven social divisions that create diverse forms of disadvantage”.
the Indian context, variables such as gender, class, caste, religion and
geography are thought to be particularly pertinent in
understanding
people’s identities and experiences, as they relate to privilege and
oppression (Dey, 2019; Pal, 2013; Tripathi,
2023). For example, in an
intersectional analysis of gender violence in India, Dey (2019) highlights how
class, caste and religion
played a role in the public outrage following the
Nirbhaya rape case. They discuss how the case garnered significant media
and swift criminal justice action because it was considered a
“real rape” with “ideal” victims and perpetrators:
middle-class, higher-caste, educated Hindu student who resided in the city,
raped by slum-dwelling, lower-caste, stranger perpetrators
“monsters”.
As India is a very socio-culturally diverse country, an intersectional
feminist framework was deemed to be most suitable for understanding
women’s experiences of reporting rape in the current study. While the
study also examined police perspectives, it did so through
a critical feminist
lens, also considering how variables such as patriarchy, misogyny, class and
caste-bias intertwined to shape
police responses in rape cases.
Methodology
This article draws on data collected as part of the lead author’s
current research on gender-based violence against women and
police governance in
the metropolitan city of Kolkata. The research was conducted in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki
ethical research principles. The research included
in-depth semi-structured interviews and follow-up questions with three rape
victim-survivors
and 15 police personnel of Kolkata Police across its hierarchy.
The names of all the respondents have been changed to maintain anonymity.
victim-survivors were contacted through acquaintances while the police personnel
of Kolkata Police were recruited through official
permission. Getting access to
people, especially in the Police Department was not an easy task. It involved
long periods of waiting
and consistent follow-up. Right from the beginning of
the lead author’s visit to the Kolkata Police Headquarters, she was
to the Women’s Grievance Cell
The explanation offered was
that as she was working on women’s issues, WGC was the place for her. This
ghettoisation is largely
symptomatic of our patriarchal governance system, where
“women’s concerns become metonymic of gender and are consigned
women’s specific department” (Sharma, 2008, pp. 46–47). After
repeated requests, she was finally given permission
for police interviews in
only three police stations of the department’s choice.
Participants
The three victim-survivors were women in different life situations: a
40-year-old middle-class woman, previously self-employed, with
two children; a
17-year-old economically disadvantaged girl with limited formal education; and a
33-year-old economically disadvantaged
housemaid living with her husband,
daughter and other relatives. The victim-survivors were interviewed for a total
of three to five
hours each in a series of two to three in-home sittings
conducted over a period of three months. The victim-survivor interviews were
designed to gather two complementary types of information: (1) a first-person
lived experience of reporting rape to police; and (2)
contextual details of the
victim-survivors’ lives and environment. Following feminist ethical
principles (Campbell et al.,
2009), participants were able to take breaks and
skip any questions they did not feel comfortable answering. After the research
the lead author stayed in touch with them for a year to check on
their well-being.
Additionally, 15 police personnel participated in individual interviews with
the lead author. The sample included newly trained constables
and more senior
police positions (titles are removed to protect participants’ identities).
All the interviews were conducted
at the offices/police stations of Kolkata
Police. Interviews lasted from 30 minutes to two hours. The police interviews
were designed
to gather information about: (1) views and perceptions on gendered
violence; (2) their response to sexual violence in terms of their
processes and challenges involved; (3) their networking with other
agencies/public/civil society in cases of rape and sexual
assault; and (4) their
idea of a safe environment for women.
The interviews were conducted in English, Hindi or Bengali (vernacular
language), depending on the interviewee’s preference.
All the interviews
were audiotaped, transcribed and translated into English, and analysed
qualitatively for salient themes. Reflexive
thematic analysis (Braun &
Clarke, 2021a) was carried out to analyse the interview transcripts along with
other supplementary
material (e.g. notes taken during interviews). Braun and
Clarke’s reflexive thematic analysis aligned well with the dataset
it rejects positivism and acknowledges the importance of rich and relevant
experiential data rather than simply sample size
(Braun & Clarke, 2021b).
Accordingly, the transcribed data were coded, actively interpreted through an
intersectional feminist
perspective and organised into themes and sub-themes.
All the transcripts were read by the lead author and manually coded for topics
relating to the police response. These codes were then collated into themes,
which form the study’s findings. The themes in
the victim-survivor
interviews are largely semantic and descriptive, while the themes from the
police interviews are latent with
interpretation of inferred meaning (Braun
& Clarke, 2021a). This distinction was made because victim-survivors were
their experiences, so we wanted to represent their intended meanings
accurately. With the police interviews, we applied a feminist
lens, which
required us to deduce the themes. For example, we interpreted some police quotes
as victim-blaming, which resulted in
the key theme
socio-political
environment
Victim-Survivor Experiences of the Police Response
This first section presents the themes appearing in the interviews with
victim-survivors. These include police responses when a victim-survivor
approached a police station with a complaint of rape. Responses are focused
primarily on interactions and action/inaction by
the police, with two
overarching themes found in survivors’ narratives: insensitive and
sensitive police responses. The police
response was categorised as sensitive
when the survivor found the police supportive and active, and as insensitive
when the survivor
found the police to be hostile and inattentive. Each theme,
along with the related sub-themes, is discussed below.
Insensitive Response
As one of the first responding agents of the criminal justice system, the
police are required to respond to a sexual assault victim
in accordance with the
law. In 2008, the Supreme Court of India, in
Lalita Kumari v Government of
Uttar Pradesh and others
, clearly reiterated that registration of a First
Information Report (FIR) for a cognizable offence is mandatory without any
preliminary
inquiry. In other words, rape is a cognizable offence and an FIR
indicates the police are taking action and “bringing the criminal
into motion” (Swetapadma et al., 2023, p. 15).
A negative experience of the police system (i.e. an insensitive response) ran
through two of the victim-survivors’ interviews.
The participants differed
in their personal and socio-cultural contexts. Here, three sub-themes are
outlined, in which the construction
of insensitive responses were evident as:
(1) humiliation and derision; (2) disbelief and intimidation; and
(3) indolence and corruption.
Humiliation and Derision.
Two victim-survivors identified a police
occupational context in which they were humiliated and derided by the same
police who were
meant to help keep them safe. When Sarah went to the police
station for the first time three days after her rape, she was mindful
unsupportive environment. Her family members had warned her of the
“repercussions” of reporting the incident to
the police. They were
scared that the police would use the fact that she was drinking at a club
against her. All her fears materialised
when Sarah went to lodge the police
I was humiliated. Every cop who came on duty asked, have you been raped? The
first question I was asked after submitting the written
complaint was, ‘Is
beer your favorite drink?’
When I went to collect my FIR, I was welcomed with taunts. The investigating
officer asked his junior officer, let’s go to Tantra.
Today is 14th
February, it’s Valentine Day. You don’t go to disco and clubs
that’s why you are single. Let’s
have a cold beer today. He was
looking at me and laughing while he spoke to his junior. My aunt was also livid,
but I calmed her
When Simmi went with her aunt, Banu Begum, to file a complaint about her rape
to the police station, she too faced ridicule. The police
ridicule made her more
uneasy. Simmi recalled the day she went to the police station:
When my aunt told the cop at the counter that Alam had raped me, he started
laughing. He said, Alam is a nice person; he can’t
do such a thing.
Fear of being humiliated and mocked by the police for reporting rape is not
unfounded. Previous research has found this fear often
dissuades women from
reporting rape to the police (Lorenz et al., 2019).
Disbelief and Intimidation.
Another sub-theme was disbelief and
intimidation by the police. The characteristics of being poor, illiterate,
lower-caste and vulnerable
appeared to compound in experiences of not being
believed. This was evident in the case of Simmi, who was mocked and viewed with
Another cop on hearing him laugh came and enquired. He said, you are lying,
concocting the story. The police did not listen to us.
They think of us as
‘zahil’ (illiterate and ignorant).
Simmi’s use of the word
indicates her powerlessness
compared with people who are educated, higher-caste and “know the
rules”, including the police.
Class and caste bias is apparent in this
case where a poor, powerless girl is rebuked for alleging rape against a
wealthy, higher-caste,
influential accused, named Alam, who was close to the
All the four cops were standing close to me. Guddu bhai
[Victim-survivor’s neighbour] was seated on the next table. He was given
pen and paper to record my complaint. They asked me what happened. I was very
nervous surrounded by so many cops. All the while
they (including the lady cop)
kept saying, you are lying. Speak the truth otherwise there will be action
against you. I was very
scared and ashamed to express myself. With Guddu bhai
and other men around how could I utter the word rape? I said, Alam took my
friend to a room and did something dirty with her. He keeps teasing me as well.
The entire experience was very intimidating.
As Simmi answered police questions, they dictated the answers to Guddu (her
male neighbour), who then helped her lodge the FIR. Due
to the shame and taboo
of speaking about rape in the presence of men, the FIR lodged did not include
the word rape but mentioned
molestation. The case was registered only when the
male neighbour, Guddu, accompanied them and urged them to take the complaint.
Simmi and Banu needed a “male guarantor to verify the case” (Prasad,
1999, p. 484). This case demonstrates how filing
rape in close-knit communities
can be complicated in India due to class and neighborhood dynamics, whereby some
members of the community
have more power than others. In Simmi’s case, it
is clear how multiple forms of oppression such as gender, class, and caste
intersected to contribute to injustice, especially when the perpetrator was in a
position of power and higher social standing.
Indolence and Corruption.
While Sarah and Simmi pointed towards
negative police attitudes, their narrative accounts also described police
inaction and their
connection with the criminal. Sarah described police inaction
and hopelessness:
I did not see any hope. They were not taking my case seriously. They had
asked for nothing. They were very relaxed about the whole
thing. Whether they
knew the guys and wanted to protect them or what I don’t know. The
investigating officer at [de-identified
station] had mentioned that he knew one
of the men. I don’t know if he knew the actual culprit or the person whose
used, as fake names were used. But at least he could have investigated.
The negative response of police compelled Sarah to seek the media’s
being wronged and the
lax attitude of the police were so deep that Sarah felt she had no choice but to
go public about her rape in
the hope of getting justice. She said:
If I had resorted to seeking media’s help, you could very well imagine
how disappointed I was with the police attitude. Which
girl in her right senses
will stand in front of the camera and say that I have been raped? I was trying
to pull up anything that
could help me. I knew that once this news becomes
public, I should be ready for my character assassination.
Similar accounts of police indolence and corruption were evident in
Simmi’s case. After the case of rape was filed against the
accused rapist,
Alam, a counter-case of robbery was filed by Alam’s relatives against
Guddu. This was done to harass Guddu
and put pressure on Simmi to withdraw the
case. Simmi and her family were getting constant threats from Alam and his
family. Alam
was still not arrested, and the police were trying everything to
protect him. Subsequently, Guddu ended his own life, becoming a
victim of police
apathy and inaction.
After Guddu’s suicide, the local police came to action. Guddu’s
death drew the media’s attention to the case. Alam
was arrested the very
next day, and Simmi was taken for medical examination and a charge-sheet filed
in the court. Three of the police
officers were suspended and criminal cases of
abetting suicide and erring in their duties filed. Given Guddu’s death and
media’s attention the case had generated, Simmi’s rape trial was
completed within six months.
Sensitive Response
A positive (i.e. sensitive) police response also ran through two
victim-survivors’ narratives. Banu’s example and Sarah’s
police interactions reflect how they both experienced elements of a sensitive
police response. Here, the sub-themes focus on
accounts of (1) diligence
and (2) promptness.
When Sarah’s rape suddenly attracted the media
spotlight, she received a call from the Police Headquarters. The Women’s
Grievance Cell (WGC) at the Police Headquarters took up Sarah’s case and
immediately began the investigation in an attentive
manner. Three of the accused
were arrested within two days after the WGC took up the case. Sarah
When I saw how diligently, honestly, and quickly the officers at the Police
Headquarters worked, I saw a ray of hope. Female officers
surrounded me and it
felt so comforting. Even the male officers present there treated me with
respect. Nobody made fun of me. They
were interested in finding the culprits and
getting to the bottom of the case.
Promptness.
Banu went to the police station the same night Alam raped
her. She went to the same police station where Simmi’s rape complaint
filed. Two women who found her on the streets in torn clothes helped her reach
The police reacted immediately.
Banu narrated:
When I told the cops that I was abducted and raped, they immediately took me
to the hospital for medical examination. During Simmi’s
time, the cops
stationed there were not good. They had good relations with Alam. After
Guddu’s death, they were removed from
here. The new cops are good.
The police responded to Banu’s complaint without any delay. They
followed the procedure of depositing her clothes for forensic
examination. Alam
and his accomplices were arrested a month after the incident. By the time of the
author’s interview with
Banu, her case had gone to court for trial. It is
worth noting here that Banu’s experience with the police was different
the others. She was prompt in reporting the case—unlike the others,
who faced delays in reporting. The rape occurred at night
in a non-domestic
setting, and Banu presented to police with torn clothes and injuries.
Additionally, Banu had witnesses who accompanied
her to the police station and
corroborated her account of being raped. In many ways, her case satisfied
elements of the “real
rape” stereotype (Dey, 2019). As she was raped
by Alam (the perpetrator who was accused of raping Simmi) and Simmi’s
had already garnered media attention, the police were prompt in responding to
Banu’s complaint. Unlike Sarah (who had
been victim-blamed for drinking at
a nightclub), Banu’s credibility was not questioned by the police. While
Banu’s circumstances
may have contributed to the positive outcome of her
interactions with the police, changes in the police personnel following
incident also likely played a role.
Factors Impacting Police Responses to Rape
This section presents the findings from interviews with police personnel. The
concerns raised by the police while responding to rape
victim-survivors are
discussed with reference to four sub-themes: (1) police occupational culture;
(2) socio-political environment;
(3) the police–criminal nexus; and (4)
the media spotlight. Each sub-theme is presented with interview data, then
synthesised
to explore the impact of sexual violence on victim-survivors.
Police Occupational Culture
Police occupational culture guides and helps frontline officers to shape
their interactions with the public. However, informal norms
and values often
take precedence over legal rules and may also reinforce stereotypes based on
gender, caste, class and race (Marhia,
2012). In the current study, police
officers’ ideas of deservedness guided their decision-making about which
cases were to
be reported and investigated. This is evident in the police
descriptions of their various roles and interactions in dealing with
rape cases.
In one interview, a police officer talked about the predicament of police in
general. Sanjeev (Officer-in-Charge) referred
to the lack of resources and
workload as a reason for police reluctance to register rape cases. According to
We are so overburdened with work. There is lack of manpower and increased
workload. Sometimes we have to work in long shifts. We don’t
have so many
police personnel to devote them to deal with rape cases.
Another police officer, Devika (senior member of police), remarked:
Rape cases are considered to be tough cases which require considerable time
and lots of investigation including forensics. So, the
police officer on duty
usually tries either to delay the reporting to shirk her/his responsibility to
the next person on duty or
simply denies registering the FIR. Another reason for
reluctance is their lack of training in dealing with rape cases as it often
requires dealing with traumatised survivors.
It is highlighted here how police attitudes and resource constraints impact
the handling of sexual violence cases. It appears rape
cases are often thrown
into the “too hard basket” and considered less deserving of police
time and resources compared
with other crimes. This then becomes part of the
broader occupational culture and approach to responding to rape.
Socio-Political Environment
The police are a part of larger society. The general social conditions shape
their upbringing, education, values and opinions. Even
though the police should
treat every case seriously, the management of rape cases is also guided by
socio-cultural perceptions. The
victim-blaming and socio-cultural prejudices
against women are evident in many of the interviews with the police personnel,
irrespective
of their gender. For example, many of the police subscribed to the
rape myth that women often lie about rape. Indeed, an officer
of the Kolkata
Police roughly estimated this as accounting for 60 per cent of all rape cases
and explained that this was a common
reason for not investigating every rape
case. Islamophobia and prejudices against young women in rural communities were
also apparent.
For example, a female inspector remarked:
I have worked in many of the police stations as officer-in-charge. I found
that wherever they ... never mind me saying this, wherever
the percentage of
Muslim population is much, the rape is much there. I mean the number of rapes is
on the increasing trend there.
Rape cases happening in rural areas.
Meanwhile, while talking about women’s safety in the city, a senior
female officer exemplified a victim-blaming attitude:
If you wear short dresses, would you be worshipped? If a woman wears short
dresses, dances, and drinks, she is prone to be raped.
Another reason for not investigating rape cases, though mentioned quietly, is
political. One police officer (Abir) mentioned that
the administration wants
criminal cases such as rape to be kept low for “image management”.
Another officer remarked:
West Bengal politics in the last few years had seen the use of rape as a
weapon to settle scores with the opposing political party.
So, cases of rape are
looked at with suspicion, of getting motivated by the party in opposition. In
some cases, the accused have
some connection with the ruling party, so that
there is someone who is protecting the culprits at that level, and the police
not willing to act.
Police–Criminal Nexus
The police–criminal nexus refers to perpetrators and crime groups
forming collaborative relationships with police in order to
exploit systems and
avoid punishment. The police might benefit from such relationships through money
and information (Godson &
Olson, 1997). The police–criminal nexus and
nepotism make governance a difficult task. It results in compromising the rule
of law and shaking people’s trust in law-and-order agencies. One police
officer, on the condition of maintaining anonymity,
narrated that every police
station has its own way of running the
(an Indian police station).
Police use the services of some local person, usually known as a police
informer, to get information.
Alam was one such informer. But he also ran an
illegal construction business and paid bribes to the police. His closeness to
police prompted three of the officers to deny filing a rape case against him
and abetting Guddu’s suicide.
Media Spotlight
With increased media coverage of sexual assaults in India, the police often
come into the spotlight for not responding in the prescribed
legal way. In two
cases presented in this article, the media played a major role in generating the
much-delayed positive response
from the police. In Banu’s case, where the
police response was positive from the beginning, it was also because of the
attention that Guddu’s suicide had garnered. In most of the
interviews with the police, it was evident that media attention
to rape cases
has resulted in increased investigative responses. As one inspector
acknowledged:
With increasing media of different kinds, media coverage of rape has also
increased. This sometimes puts pressure on the police to
be on tenterhooks.
Often media reports highlight police inaction in rape cases but they fail to
report the follow up. They put police
in the line of fire. Media creates
sensation and panic amongst people but hardly follows up the case. Many times,
after investigation,
we have found that the case was baseless, rape did not
happen. But those reports are not covered by the media.
Here the officer is acknowledging the role of the media in prompting police
action, but the sentiment indicates criticism of the media
and continued
scepticism about victims’ reports. This suggests that the media can prompt
police action, but there is still
a long way to go when it comes to changing
deeper attitudes and perceptions.
This research has provided unique insight into police responses to rape in
metropolitan India through the lens of both victim-survivors
personnel. The interviews with victim-survivors indicated both insensitive and
sensitive responses. Insensitive responses
were marked by disbelief,
intimidation, humiliation, indolence and corruption. Sensitive responses
featured diligence and promptness.
Interviews with police personnel indicated
that insensitive responses were influenced by police occupational culture,
socio-political
environments and a police–criminal nexus. Sensitive
responses, on the other hand, were often prompted by the media spotlight.
Consistent with other research (e.g. Damiana & Singh, 2022; Tripathi,
2020; Tripathi & Azhar, 2021), patriarchal police attitudes
were on display
in both the victim-survivor and police interviews, likely contributing to the
insensitive police responses. For instance,
police made certain judgements about
Sarah’s personhood (partying, drinking), and did not seriously investigate
the case. The
deep-seated misogyny against women who fail to adhere to societal
norms is reflected in the police response. The response also reflects
victim-blaming attitudes, which see the woman as a party to the crime. The
position that women have invited sexual assault on themselves
either by their
dress or mannerism is not uncommon (Simon-Kumar, 2014) and seems to be embedded
in institutions of governance, including
the police. Such an attitude also
stereotypes rape victims as good victims and bad victims, and rapes as genuine
or false. This stereotyping
is based on rape myths prevalent in police
attitudes, including that victims often lie about rape, that the survivor
provoked the
accused, or that an attack by a stranger is more serious than one
by a person known to the victim (Brereton, 2019; Damania &
Singh, 2022).
Importantly, as Tripathi (2023) points out, victim-blaming can be exacerbated
when a victim-survivor also has characteristics
that intersect with and
contribute to their marginalisation. For example, there was significant
victim-blaming in the
case when the victim was a young
(lower-caste) woman who lived in a rural location and was raped by
higher-caste men. Such a case bears a resemblance to Simmi’s
characteristics and experiences in the current study.
Through an intersectional feminist lens, it was evident that the police
responses were biased towards people depending upon their
gender, caste, class,
and socio-economic status. Indeed, it has been argued that police often treat
people who are low in class and
caste with disregard, viewing their reports of
crime with suspicion (Dey, 2019; Pal, 2018; Reiner, 2010). A woman belonging to
marginalised sector of society is doubly disadvantaged, being a woman as well
as economically marginalised. Simmi, in this research,
was trebly disadvantaged
– she was a young woman, poor, lower caste and the victim of a crime such
as rape. In her view, the
police look at people like her as
term means illiterate, ignorant, unladylike (for women) and uncivilised.
Although Simmi did not raise religion in the interviews,
it is possible that her
identity as a Muslim woman also played a role in the police response. One police
officer indicated Islamophobic
attitudes in their interview, and previous
research has highlighted that a person’s religion can impact how they are
by the community (Dey, 2019; Tripathi, 2023). For example, Dey (2019)
discusses how upper-caste Hindu women are often considered
Indian women while lower-caste Muslim women might be less likely to receive
media attention, generate public
outrage and attract swift criminal action
following a rape case. The insensitive police response to Simmi likely stemmed
from a bias
coupled with the police–perpetrator nexus. Patriarchal and
institutional police bias against economically disadvantaged women
such as Simmi
has been documented in other research in India (Marhia, 2012; Tripathi &
Azhar, 2021). Broader public prejudice
against marginalised women could also
impact whether media can be used to enact a police response. As we have seen,
some victim-survivors
may be able to use media to their advantage to prompt
police responses, but this might be more difficult for marginalised women who
are often less likely to receive public outrage and media attention (Dey, 2019).
The findings indicate that standard procedures for registering a rape
complaint were not followed by the police in accordance with
the law (Verma et
al., 2013). The Indian Supreme Court’s judgment regarding mandatory
registration of a ‘First Information
Report’ for cognizable offences
such as rape without any preliminary inquiry was openly flouted. In two of the
cases, the police
failed to follow the standard procedures of registering rape
complaints – like mandatory registration of an FIR, conducting
investigation in the presence of a female police officer/female relative,
charging the perpetrator with the proper sections
of the Indian Penal Code,
timely medical examination, forensic examination, timely investigation and
arrests of the accused. If police
follow even these basic procedures, rape
survivors might feel some sense of procedural justice (Hohl et al., 2022). On
the contrary,
the discretionary practices of the police took precedence over the
law and as a result the survivors suffered.
The findings also add to discussions on women’s police stations, which
are present in India and other countries across the world
(Carrington et al.,
2020; Natarajan & Babu, 2020). This research demonstrated that the mere
presence of women police does not
necessarily guarantee gender-sensitive
responses to rape when women keep imbibing the masculine culture and reproducing
(Mirchandani, 2006). Police organisations in India are often
patriarchal institutions with very few women. In fact, women in the
police account for less than 2 per cent of the total strength (based on data
provided by the erstwhile Joint Commissioner,
Crime Branch, Kolkata Police).
Women officers tend to adopt several adaptation strategies for gaining
acceptance into the masculinist
occupational police culture (Marhia, 2012). One
of these is to be like the male police officers. In such a role, women police
respond insensitively to rape victims as in Simmi’s case, where the
woman police officer was no different from her male counterparts
in threatening
and dissuading Simmi from filing the complaint. However, the women police
officers at the Women’s Grievance
Cell (WGC) were sensitive to Sarah and
performed their professional duty. WGC, located at the Kolkata Police
Headquarters, is constituted
primarily of women police to focus on women-centric
crimes. Any concrete claims about the gender-sensitive attitude of WGC would
require a detailed study. In the meantime, however, it is argued that all
officers need to be sensitised to the handling of rape
cases, regardless of
their gender. While women’s police stations may hold promise in responding
sensitively to victim-survivors,
male police must also be held accountable for
their response to rape victims instead of shirking the responsibility of dealing
gender-based crimes. Women’s Help Desks (discussed in the
introduction) may be another promising model that balances a gender-responsive
and mainstreamed approach to rape cases in India (Sukhtankar et al., 2022). To
reiterate, they have helped to increase police responsiveness
in rape cases in
Madhya Pradesh. Several elements seem to be key to their success: their location
in regular police stations, training
of both male and female police officers,
regular monitoring of procedures and being led by female officers of senior
ranks (Sukhtankar
et al., 2022). Tripathi and Azhar (2021) further emphasise
that with greater representation of female police officers, we need to
that they are present at every rank of the organisation and have equal
participation in decision-making.
Limitations
The interviews in this study were conducted in 2014–2015, which means
the data are somewhat dated. Nevertheless, the interviews
were conducted after
major changes to rape laws in India (Verma et al., 2013) and the findings are
still relevant for understanding
police responses to rape moving forward,
especially in the light of more recent research that highlights similar trends
(e.g. Swetapadman
et al., 2023; Tripathi, 2020). The qualitative analysis is
based on interviews with three victim-survivors of rape and 15 police
Future research should seek to garner a wider array of victim-survivor stories
and experiences, across metropolitan, regional
and rural areas.
Conclusion and Future Directions
It has been shown that police responses to rape in metropolitan India were
guided by both internal and external factors, such as media
coverage, police
culture, workload, prejudice and corruption. Through victim-survivors’
narratives, coupled with police perspectives,
it was evident that rape
complaints were not often prioritised as police work, unless there was a form of
external “nudging”
(e.g., attention to a case in the media).
Positive police responses seemed to be knee-jerk reactions rather than following
prescribed by law. This is concerning for both victim-survivors and
alleged perpetrators. Police decisions to investigate an allegation
of rape also
appeared to be tainted by victim-blaming attitudes, which reflect patriarchal
attitudes held by the criminal justice
system and society more broadly (Damiana
& Singh, 2022).
It was clear that victim-survivors were not guaranteed a consistent or
sensitive response from police when reporting rape. Indeed,
victim-survivors in this research were subjected to judgement and humiliation
from police, likely contributing to secondary
trauma (Campbell et al., 2001;
Maier, 2008). The findings signal how the police response can affect the morale
of rape victims and
advocates fighting for their cause. An insensitive response
can lead to circumstances of despair, even resulting in loss of life—as
was shown in one of the cases. Conversely, sensitive responses might help to
bring about a sense of procedural justice (see also
Hohl et al., 2022) and
impact the reporting decisions of victim-survivors (Amaral et al., 2021).
The police responses in this research indicated a tension between de jure and
de facto law in action. In other words, police practices
did not match what is
required by law (Verma et al., 2013). There is an urgent need to address police
responses to rape survivors
through coordinated efforts of various stakeholders
in governance. The state government needs to bring about police reforms based
the recommendations of various commissions, such as the West Bengal Police
Commission and Supreme Courts directive in 2006. For
example, West Bengal
constituted the State Police Complaints Authority in 2010, but it is still not
operational. This recommendation
would help members of the public make
complaints against police and should be a priority moving forward. This
recommendation would
reform and enhance police accountability.
Gender-sensitisation training might also help to promote a supportive, lawful
and positive police response to victim-survivors of
sexual violence (UN Women,
2019). Some research suggests that gender-sensitive modules are helpful in
promoting police responsiveness
in rape cases in India; however, the research
also found that it was mostly female officers who benefited from the training
(Sukhtankar
et al., 2022). Other research has found that while police might
agree with the general principles of gender-sensitive training, they
struggle to operationalise it in appropriate ways (Raman & Komarraju, 2018).
As Tripathi and Azhar (2021) contend, criteria
for gender-sensitive policing
should be developed through community-participatory research that involves both
police organisations
and victim-survivors. We hope our dual-sample research
Victim-survivors who choose to report rape to police should be met with
timely, diligent and supportive responses. There is also an
increasing need to
look beyond the criminal justice system to support victim-survivors and prevent
sexual violence from occurring
in the first place (Daly, 2022; Henry et al.,
2015). We need to continue to listen to Indian women’s experiences and
in shaping prevention efforts and appropriate responses to sexual
Correspondence:
Dr Gemma Hamilton, Senior Lecturer in Criminology
& Justice Studies, RMIT University, Melbourne Australia.
gemma.hamilton@rmit.edu.au
S., Bhalotra, S., & Prakash, N. (2021). Gender, crime and punishment:
Evidence from women police stations in India.
SSRN Electronic Journal
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3827615
Bhat, M., & Wodda, A. (2013). Examining legal responses to sexual
violence: A review of court systems in India. In N. P. Unnithan
and Justice in India
(pp. 269–300). Sage.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2021a).
Thematic analysis: A practical
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2021b). To saturate or not to saturate?
Questioning data saturation as a useful concept for thematic
analysis and
sample-size rationales.
Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and
(2), 201–216.
https://doi.org/10.1080/2159676X.2019.1704846
Brereton, Z. (2019). Perpetuating myths of women as false complainants in
rape cases in India: Culture v. the law.
International Journal of Comparative
and Applied Criminal Justice
(1–2), 41–62.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01924036.2016.1233442
Brooks-Hay, O. (2020). Doing the ‘right thing’? Understanding why
rape victim-survivors report to the police.
Feminist Criminology
(2), 174–195.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1557085119859079
Campbell, R., Adams, A. E., Wasco, S. M., Ahrens, C. E., & Sefl, T.
(2009). Training interviewers for research on sexual violence:
A qualitative
study of rape survivors’ recommendations for interview practice.
Violence Against Women, 15
(5), 595–617.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1077801208331248
Campbell, R., Wasco, S. M., Ahrens, C. E., Sefl, T., & Barnes, H. E.
(2001). Preventing the ‘second rape’: Rape survivors’
experiences with community service providers.
Journal of Interpersonal
(12), 1239–1255.
https://doi.org/10.1177/088626001016012002
Carrington, K., Guala, N., Puyol, M. V., & Sozzo, M. (2020). How
women’s police stations empower women, widen access to
justice and prevent
gender violence.
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social
(1), 42–67.
https://doi.org/10.5204/ijcjsd.v9i1.1494
Curington, M. (2021). The injustice of America’s rape kit backlog.
The Arkansas Journal of Social Change and Public Service
https://ualr.edu/socialchange/2021/03/31/the-injustice-of-americas-rape-kit-backlog
Crenshaw, K. (1989). Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A
Black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist
antiracist politics.
University of Chicago Legal Forum
http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/uclf/vol1989/iss1/8
Daly, K. (2022).
Remaking justice after sexual violence: Essays in
conventional, restorative, and innovative justice
. Eleven International.
Daly, K., & Bouhours, B. (2010). Rape and attrition in the legal process:
A comparative analysis of five countries.
Crime and Justice
(1), 565–650.
https://doi.org/10.1086/653101
Damania, M. H., & Singh, R. M. (2022). An exploratory qualitative
analysis of rape myths in India.
Analyses of Social Issues and Public
(3), 989–1016.
https://doi.org/10.1111/asap.12323
Dey, A. (2019). ‘Others’ within the ‘others’: An
intersectional analysis of gender violence in India.
Gender Issues
(4), 357–373.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12147-019-09232-4
Godson, R., & Olson, S. L. (1997).
Political–criminal nexus:
Trends in organized crime.
US Department of Justice.
Henry, N., Powell, A., & Flynn, A. (Eds.). (2015).
Rape justice:
Beyond the criminal law
. Springer.
Hohl, K., Johnson, K., & Molisso, S. (2022). A procedural justice theory
approach to police engagement with victim-survivors of
rape and sexual assault:
Initial findings of the ‘Project Bluestone’ pilot study.
International Criminology
(3), 253–261.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43576-022-00056-z
Hohl, K., Reid, A. K., Molisso, S., & Pullerits, M. (2023).
sexual assault survivors’ experience of the police in England and Wales.
Survey Report I: June 2023
. University of London.
Jordan, J. (2004). Beyond belief? Police, rape and women’s credibility.
Criminology and Criminal Justice, 4
(1), 29–59.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1466802504042222
Lorenz, K., Kirkner, A., & Ullman, S. E. (2019). A qualitative study of
sexual assault survivors’ post-assault legal system
experiences.
Journal of Trauma & Dissociation
(3), 263–287.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15299732.2019.1592643
Maier, S. L. (2008). ‘I have heard horrible stories...’: Rape
victim advocates’ perceptions of the revictimization
of rape victims by
the police and medical system.
Violence Against Women
https://doi.org/10.1177/1077801208320245
Marhia, N. (2012).
Everyday (in)security/(re)securing the everyday:
Gender, policing and violence against women in Delhi
[Doctoral dissertation,
London School of Economics and Political Science] LSE Thesis Online.
https://etheses.lse.ac.uk/759/
McDougal, L., Krumholz, S., Bhan, N., Bharadwaj, P., & Raj, A. (2021).
Releasing the tide: How has a shock to the acceptability
of gender-based sexual
violence affected rape reporting to police in India?
Journal of Interpersonal
, 36(11–12), NP5921-NP5943.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260518811421
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India. (2010).
Background paper
on electoral reforms
https://adrindia.org/sites/default/files/BACKGROUND%20PAPER%20ON%20ELECTORAL%20REFORMS.pdf
Mirchandani, R. (2006). Hitting is not manly: Domestic violence court and the
re-imagination of the patriarchal state.
Gender & Society, 20
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243206292002
Mukherjee, C., Rustagi, P., & Krishnaji, N. (2001). Crime against women
in India: Analysis of official statistics.
Economic and Political Weekly
(43), 4070–4080.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260520967147
Natarajan, M., & Babu, D. (2020). Women police stations: Have they
fulfilled their promise?
Police Practice and Research
https://doi.org/10.1080/15614263.2020.1809827
ONS. (2022).
Crime in England and Wales: Year ending September 2021.
Office for National Statistics.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/crimeinenglandandwales/yearendingseptember2021
Pal, G. C. (2018). Caste–gender intersectionality and atrocities in
Haryana: Emerging patterns and state responses.
Journal of Social Inclusion
(1), 30–50.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2394481118774476
Perova, E., & Reynolds, S. A. (2017). Women’s police stations and
intimate partner violence: Evidence from Brazil.
Social Science &
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.12.008
Prasad, S. (1999). Medicolegal response to violence against women in India.
Violence Against Women
(5), 478–506.
https://doi.org/10.1177/10778019922181338
Rajan, S. (2013). Crime against women in India. In N. P. Unnithan (Ed.),
Crime and justice in India
(pp. 249–268). Sage.
Raman, U., & Komarraju, S. A. (2018). Policing responses to crime against
women: Unpacking the logic of Cyberabad’s ‘SHE
Feminist Media Studies
(4), 718–733.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14680777.2018.1447420
Reiner, R. (2010).
The politics of the police
Oxford University Press.
Sen, R. (2023). Intersectional feminist activism and practices of
transformation: Perspectives from Indian feminisms.
Journal of Women,
Politics & Policy
(4), 422–431.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1554477X.2023.2247630
Sharma, A. (2008).
Logics of empowerment: Development, gender, and
governance in Neoliberal India
. University of Minnesota Press.
Sharma, B. R., & Gupta, M. (2004). Gender-based violence in India: A
never ending phenomenon.
Journal of International Women’s Study,
(1), 114–123.
https://vc.bridgew.edu/jiws/vol6/iss1/8
Simon-Kumar, R. (2014). Sexual violence in India: The discourses of rape and
the discourses of justice.
Indian Journal of Gender Studies, 21
https://doi.org/10.1177/0971521514540711
Sukhtankar, S., Kruks-Wisner, G., & Mangla, A. (2022). Policing in
patriarchy: An experimental evaluation of reforms to improve
responsiveness to women in India.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abm7387
Suri, S., & Khan, S. (2013). An analytical study of rape in Delhi.
International Journal of Education and Psychological Research
(3), 60–68.
https://ijepr.org/panel/assets/papers/50ij10.pdf
Swetapadma, S., Subudhi, R. N., & Chattoraj, P. (2023). Are reporting and
investigation of rape cases victim friendly? Responses
of the police from a
cross-sectional study conducted in three states of eastern
International Review of Victimology
https://doi.org/10.1177/02697580231185156
Tripathi, P. (2023). Cartographies of sexual violence from Delhi to Hathras:
An intersectional feminist understanding.
Gender, Place &
(7), 946–968.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0966369X.2022.2085674
Tripathi, S. (2020). Patriarchal beliefs and perceptions towards women among
Indian police officers: A study of Uttar Pradesh, India.
International
Journal of Police Science & Management
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461355720905612
Tripathi, S., & Azhar, S. (2021). ‘No one blames men in our
society’: Indian police officers’ perceptions of
complainants.
The British Journal of Criminology
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azab021
UN Women. (2019).
Policing and Gender, in Gender and Security Toolkit.
DCAF, OSCE/ODIHR, UN Women.
Venkitakrishnan, U., & Kurien, S. G. (2003).
Rape victims in
. Kerala Research Programme on Local Level Development. Centre for
Development Studies.
Verma, J.S., Seth, L., & Subramaniam, G. (2013).
Report of the
committee on amendments to criminal law
https://prsindia.org/policy/report-summaries/justice-verma-committee-report-summary
Park Street rape case in 2012
reported in
Indian Express
, February 19, 2012;
The Times of India
February 22, 2012;
The Times of India
, August 4, 2014
Nirbhaya Delhi gang rape case in 2012 reported in
, December 23,
New York Times
, January 3, 2013;
The Times of India
July 14, 2014; Shakti Mills gang rape case in 2013, reported in
, August 23, 2013;
The Times of India
, August 23, 2013;
refer also to Unnao rape case in 2017, reported in
The Indian Express
April 12, 2018,
India Today
, March 13, 2020; refer Hathras gang rape case
in 2020, reported in
India Today
, September 29, 2020;
, December 18, 2020.
Secondary victimisation refers
to “victim-blaming attitudes, behaviour, and practices engaged in by
community service providers,
which further the rape event, resulting in
additional trauma for rape survivors” (Campbell et al., 2001, p.
The Women’s Grievance
Cell (WGC) is a special cell under the Detective Department used to address
crimes against women, situated
at the Kolkata Police Headquarters.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (647 KB)
PDF format (445 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter