URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2020/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Purser, Kelly; Cockburn, Tina; Crawford, Bridget J --- "Wills Formalities Beyond Covid-19: An Australian United States Perspective" [2020] UNSWLawJlF 5; (2020) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 5
I INTRODUCTION
II TRADITIONAL FUNCTIONS OF THE FORMALITIES AND MODERN WILL-MAKING
III ‘IN THE PRESENCE OF’ – AN INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE
IV POST COVID-19 – WILLS AND THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY
V CONCLUSION
WILLS FORMALITIES BEYOND COVID-19:
AN AUSTRALIAN–UNITED STATES PERSPECTIVE
KELLY PURSER,
TINA COCKBURN
BRIDGET J CRAWFORD
I INTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic has increased focus on death and its consequences,
highlighting both human mortality and the need to prepare
for it, particularly
for those at an increased risk, such as older persons.
It has also
highlighted the important role of technology in enabling remote access to
justice and the legal system.
In the context of estate planning,
particularly valid will-making, the legal system has an important role to play;
however, executing
a valid will during a pandemic can be difficult given the
various economic and public health restrictions, including social distancing
Accordingly, COVID-19 has focused attention on the need
to increase access to valid will-making, including through the use of
technology.
Talk of death and estate planning inevitably includes
discussion of both the practicalities and formal requirements for making a
will, such as the traditional need for a physical gathering of lawyers,
will-makers and witnesses, and the inevitable compliance
* BA/LLB (Hons) (UNE), PhD (UNE), Senior Lecturer, Australian Centre for
Health Law Research, Faculty of Law, Queensland University
of Technology.
** BCom (UQ), LLB (Hons) (UQ), LLM (QUT), Grad Cert Higher Ed (QUT),
Associate Professor, Co-Director Australian Centre for Health
Law Research,
Faculty of Law, Queensland University of Technology.
*** BA (Yale), JD (University of Pennsylvania Law School), PhD (Griffith),
Professor, Elisabeth Haub School of Law, Pace University.
1 Annemarie B Docherty et al, ‘Features of 20,133 UK Patients in
Hospital with COVID-19 Using the ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation
Prospective Observational Cohort Study’ (2020) 369(8250)
Medical Journal
m1985: 1–2.
2 For example, by shifting to electronic filing systems and conducting entire
hearings online through audiovisual platforms: for a
discussion, see Michael
Legg and Anthony Song, ‘Commercial Litigation and COVID19: The Role and
Limits of Technology’
(2020) 48(2)
Australian Business Law Review
As to online courts generally, see Richard Susskind,
Online Courts
and the Future of Justice
(Oxford University Press, 2019). As to the
potential of technology to facilitate access to justice, see Productivity
Commission,
Justice Arrangements
(Inquiry Report No 72, 5 September 2014) vol 1,
Access to Justice Arrangements
’); Law Council
of Australia,
The Justice Project: Final Report
(Report, August 2018)
‘Overarching Themes’ 42–3, ‘Legal Services’
The Justice Project: Final Report
3 David Horton and Reid Kress Weisbord, ‘COVID-19 and Formal
Wills’ (2020) 73 (May)
Stanford Law Review Online
18, 19, 22.
4 Ibid 18–19.
challenges which arise given the COVID-19 responses. These conversations, in
turn, invite consideration of the traditional functions
that wills formalities
purportedly serve, including the protective function, which perhaps take on
greater significance given the
social isolation which necessarily results from
the COVID-19 public health responses, and which may have the unintended effect
heightening the risk of elder abuse.
Even prior to the pandemic, the utility of the formalities, especially the
requirement that two witnesses be ‘in the presence
of’ the testator,
had been questioned in light of informal will applications.
noted, during the pandemic, compliance with traditional presence requirements
has become impossible due to social distancing restrictions.
that reason, many states in Australia and the United States (‘US’)
have implemented emergency measures to facilitate
valid will-making during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
As societies begin to look forward, the question
is whether these temporary measures, which permit remote witnessing of wills,
become the ‘new normal’. Given the current practical
challenges associated with satisfying the traditional wills formalities
changing societal norms about the meaning of ‘presence’ in light of
modern technological developments, notably real
time audiovisual capabilities,
many jurisdictions may want to loosen the requirements for execution of a valid
will. Jurisdictions
like New South Wales and Queensland in Australia, with a
dispensing power to uphold informal wills, or a harmless error rule in some
states, are not immune from these issues either, particularly given the costs in
both time and money involved in making an application
to the appropriate court
for probate of an informal will.
Access to the ability to create a
valid legal document to
5 On the relationship between social isolation and elder abuse, see, eg,
Bridget Lewis, Kelly Purser and Kirsty Mackie,
The Human Rights of Older
Persons: A Human Rights-Based Approach to Elder Law
(Springer, 2020) 192.
6 See, eg, Bridget J Crawford, ‘Wills Formalities in the Twenty-First
Century’ [2019] (2)
Wisconsin Law Review
269, 271. See generally
Mahlo v Hehir
(2011) 4 ASTLR 515;
[2012] NSWSC 594
(2013) 11 ASTLR 490;
[2017] QSC 220
Weisbord v Rodny
[2018] NSWSC 1866
[2019] VSC 47
[2019] QSC 99.
Bridget J Crawford, ‘Executing a Last Will and
Testament During a Pandemic’,
The Faculty Lounge
(Blog Post, 6
April 2020)
<https://www.thefacultylounge.org/2020/04/executing-a-last-will-and-testamentduring-a-pandemic.html>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/Y4MU-PN6Z>.
New York Executive Order 202.14
(7 April 2020), archived at
<https://perma.cc/H3U7-F3X9>, permitting remote witnessing of wills under
certain circumstances
during the COVID-19 pandemic, as extended by
Executive Order
202.59 (28 August 2020), archived at
<https://perma.cc/4LWYSHZ7>. For the United States more generally, see
Horton and Weisbord
(n 3). For Australia, see, eg,
Electronic Transactions
Amendment (COVID-19 Witnessing of Documents) Regulation 2020
(NSW); COVID19
Emergency Response Bill 2020 (Qld);
Legislation (COVID-19
Emergency Response – Documents and Oaths) Regulation 2020
6–8; Supreme Court of Queensland,
Practice Direction No 10 of 2020:
Informal Wills/COVID-19
, 22 April 2020;
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency
Measures) Act 2020
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency Measures) (Electronic Signing
and Witnessing) Regulations 2020
9 Under the
Uniform Probate Code
, adopted in some United States
(‘US’) jurisdictions, a will that was not otherwise executed in
accordance with the requisite
formalities will nevertheless be treated as if it
had been in some circumstances; thus the will can nevertheless be considered as
valid and probate sought: Crawford (n 6);
dispose of one’s property at death is an issue of contemporary global
significance, with COVID-19 highlighting existing challenges.
One of the simplest answers to the problems with will-making generally
appears to be ‘
’, that is, the virtual witnessing
and electronic signing of testamentary documents through the use of a real-time
audiovisual
platform such as Zoom, Skype or FaceTime. This approach has been
adopted in a few Australian and US jurisdictions.
While technology
may be a short-term solution to the immediate problem during times of social
distancing, the question arises in
relation to whether these emergency measures
persist post-pandemic. Examination of these matters
raises associated concerns about reliance upon real-time audiovisual
technologies
to satisfactorily assess testamentary capacity, as well as the
importance of incorporating safeguards to adequately identify and
prevent undue
influence, the perpetration of fraud and/or elder abuse.
Addressing these challenges necessarily involves critical analysis and
empirical exploration of the efficacy of the wills formalities
and whether they
continue to meet their traditional evidential, protective, cautionary and ritual
Indeed, the role of these functions has already been
called into question, with some scholars arguing that only the evidentiary and
channelling functions retain strong relevance in modern society.
The protective function, although seemingly less valuable in terms of the
formalities, may continue to play a significant role in
the context of the
mental requirements of capacity and absence of undue influence, and as a
safeguard against elder abuse. Even so,
compliance with wills formalities does
not provide insulation from will challenges on the grounds of a lack of
testamentary capacity
or undue influence. To be sure, maximising the protective
function is an important goal when
Kelly Purser and Tina Cockburn, ‘Wills Formalities in the Twenty-First
Century: Promoting Testamentary Intention in the Face
of Societal Change and
Advancements in Technology’ [2019] (4)
Wisconsin Law Review Forward
10 For Australia, see, eg,
Electronic Transactions Amendment (COVID-19
Witnessing of Documents) Regulation 2020
COVID-19 Emergency Response
Legislation (COVID-19 Emergency
Response – Documents and Oaths) Regulation 2020
6–8; Supreme Court of Queensland,
Direction No 10 of 2020: Informal Wills/COVID-19
, 22 April 2020;
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency
Measures) Act 2020
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency Measures)
(Electronic Signing and Witnessing) Regulations 2020
information about the jurisdictions in the US, see Horton and Weisbord (n 3) 24.
11 Kelly Purser et al, ‘Alleged Financial Abuse of Those under an
Enduring Power of Attorney: An Exploratory Study’ (2018)
Journal of Social Work
887. See also Westlaw US,
American Jurisprudence
(online at 25 September 2020) vol 3 Agency § 26.
12 Crawford (n
6) 293. In relation to the dispensation of the formal
requirements, see also
Mellino v Wnuk
Mahlo v Hehir
(2011) 4 ASTLR 515. Cf
Yazbek v Yazbek
[2012] NSWSC 594
[2017] QSC 220
Radford v White
[2018] QSC 306
Hatsatouris v Hatsatouris
[2001] NSWCA 408
Lindsay v McGrath
[2016] 2 Qd R 160.
13 Purser and Cockburn (n 9) 53–5. See Bre McAdam, ‘Will Written
on Tractor 65 Years Ago Celebrated by Saskatchewan Law
(online, 26 October 2013)
<https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/10/26/will_written_on_tractor_65_years_ago_celebrated_by_sas
katchewan_law_college.html>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/F9QQ-73ME>.
viewed in the context of a socially distanced environment, particularly for
those people who live alone and who may be experiencing
heightened vulnerability
and risk of abuse because of social isolation.
This essay enters the discussion around the emergency responses to COVID-19
by bringing a new focus to the shape of post-pandemic
will-making.
examines the purpose of traditional wills formalities and their continued
efficacy (or inefficacy) in a modern world.
provides an overview of a
range of international emergency responses to the need to execute valid wills
during the pandemic.
then makes observations about will-making
post-pandemic, including pathways out of the current emergency responses into
that could inform the ‘new normal’.
II TRADITIONAL FUNCTIONS OF THE FORMALITIES AND
MODERN WILL-MAKING
To a certain extent, the law of will-making is in flux both in
Australia and the US.
New technologies invite questions about expanding will-making accessibility.
That has led, for example, to the promulgation in the
in July 2019.
Prior to the pandemic, it is not clear
how many states were moving to consider the adoption of similar provisions. In
international jurisdictions, there has been no real appetite for
technology-driven reform; there was definitely no sense of urgency.
For example,
in the recent review of the law of wills of the United Kingdom, the Law
Commission gave provisional support for adopting
a dispensing power rather than
undertaking the extensive legislative reform required to implement an
exclusively intention-based
model (and thus forsaking all formal
requirements).
In Australia, as in the US, the execution of wills could be much improved
upon, although rigorous data around will-making (pre-, during
and post-pandemic)
would offer valuable insights as to the prevalence of execution-related
The formal requirements to make a valid will can vary
significantly between and among international jurisdictions, and within one
country’s federalist system, as is true in Australia and the
Although the specifics of traditional will formalities vary,
their traditionally stated purposes, in both the US and Australia, are
14 Horton and Weisbord (n 3) 18–19; Purser and Cockburn (n 9)
Uniform Electronic
(Uniform Law Commission, 2019).
16 Law Commission, ‘Making a Will’ (Consultation Paper No 231,
2017) 13, 98–102
<https://s3-eu-west2.amazonaws.com/lawcom-prod-storage-11jsxou24uy7q/uploads/2017/07/Making-a-will-consultation.pdf>
(‘Making a Will’).
17 David Horton has already begun some of this excellent work. See, eg, David
Horton, ‘Partial Harmless Error for Wills: Evidence
from California’
(2018) 103(5)
Iowa Law Review
See also Cheryl Tilse et al,
‘WillMaking Prevalence and Patterns in Australia: Keeping It in the
(2016) 50(3)
Australian Journal of Social Issues
White et al, ‘Estate Contestation in Australia: An Empirical Study of a
Year of Case Law’
[2015] UNSWLawJl 31
(2015) 38(3)
University of New South Wales Law
18 Purser and Cockburn (n 9) 48–50.
designed to serve evidentiary, cautionary or ritual, protective, and
channelling functions.
Further, some general minimal formal
commonalities do emerge within the overarching functional framework. Wills, for
instance, must
generally be in writing
and signed by the testator
or someone ‘in the presence of’ (or ‘the conscious presence
of’) and directed
by the testator.
The testator’s
signature (or acknowledgement of that signature) must then take place ‘in
the presence of’ two or
more witnesses (or a notary, in some
The requirement of ‘presence’ is a clear theme running throughout
wills formalities and traditional functions across jurisdictions.
requirement of presence clearly serves the evidentiary function in providing
that at least two adults must attest to the fact
that they saw the testator sign
the will. Similarly, presence also meets the channelling function as the
presence of two witnesses
goes to ensuring the integrity (and regularity) of the
will-making process.
It also promotes the protective function in
that there should be two independent witnesses with nothing to gain from the
dispositions
contained in the testamentary document. Thus, there is a
theoretical buffer between, for instance, the testator and any undue influence
(although the utility of witnesses as a preventative measure, particularly in
the context of elder abuse, is questionable). The ‘presence’
requirement also helps to carry out the cautionary or ritual purpose, with the
solemnity of the occasion reinforcing the importance
of the will-making act
given that will-making can have a positive psychological effect.
There is therefore no doubt as to the role and importance of the presence
requirement in promoting valid will-making. This is not
to say that this is not
without its difficulties, given, for example, the frequency of wills failing to
meet this requirement. There
is also a danger that otherwise valid wills could
be held to be invalid for falling short of the required presence formalities if
a doctrine of strict compliance is adopted. However, in jurisdictions that have
a dispensing power, such as New South Wales and Queensland
in Australia and
Michigan in the US, there is arguably a solution, namely to make an application
for an informal will, although this
can be costly in terms of both time and
It is also important to note that even jurisdictions with
dispensing powers, such as New South Wales, Queensland and
19 Crawford (n 6) 286–90.
20 See, eg,
Succession Act 2006
Succession Act 1981
Uniform Probate Code
(Uniform Law Commission, 1969, rev
2019) § 2–502(a)(1).
21 See, eg,
Succession Act 2006
Succession Act 1981
s 10(2)(b)(i)
Uniform Probate Code
(Uniform Law
Commission 1969, rev 2019) § 2–502(a)(2).
22 See, eg,
Succession Act 2006
Succession Act 1981
Uniform Probate Code
(Uniform Law Commission 1969, rev
2019) § 2–502(a)(3)(A).
23 Purser and Cockburn (n 9) 55.
24 Ibid 51–4.
25 Ibid 62; Horton and Weisbord (n 3) 25. For dispensing legislation, see
Succession Act 2006
Succession Act 1981
Michigan, nevertheless implemented emergency provisions enabling the
electronic signing and audiovisual witnessing of wills to occur
as a result of
the pandemic.
It is also commonplace (but not mandatory) in various jurisdictions,
including in the US and Australia, to have an attestation clause
professionally drafted wills. Such a clause gives rise to the rebuttable
presumption of due execution, that is, the will is prima
facie regular and
complies with the requisite formalities thus fulfilling an evidentiary
This presumption is designed to promote cost and
timeeffective grants of probate (where appropriate), which traditionally
the production of the (sole) original will to the court for the will to
be proved as the last will and testament of the deceased.
The role of the attestation clause and the importance attached to the role of
the solicitor are significant. As will be seen below
in the discussion of the
emergency responses, in Queensland, for example, audiovisual witnessing has been
adopted but the categories
of people who can witness are
restricted.
Analogously, in the US, in the State of Connecticut,
remote will execution must be supervised by an attorney.
these examples raise the issue of accessibility. While prima facie, the ability
to more easily avail oneself of valid will-making
has been extended in many
outcome. If there is a requirement
of witnesses falling within designated
categories (as in Queensland) or attorney supervision (as in Connecticut), do
the emergency
provisions truly have the effect of widening participation and
access to quality will-making (and, in the case of jurisdictions with
dispensing power, thus reducing later court applications in relation to validity
and/or construction issues)? Or does the legal
reform just make will execution
more convenient and possible for those who already would have attended upon a
solicitor or engaged
an attorney but now cannot owing to COVID-19 restrictions?
In thinking about the ‘new normal’, this question requires
thought and, importantly, empirical research into the reasoning behind
people’s approaches to will-making.
Another common theme emerging from wills formalities across jurisdictions is
the traditional requirement that a witness cannot be
an interested beneficiary,
that is, traditionally a beneficiary cannot witness the will and, if they do,
they will be
26 Horton and Weisbord (n 3) 27;
Electronic Transactions Amendment
(COVID-19 Witnessing of Documents) Regulation 2020
COVID-19 Emergency
Response Bill 2020
Justice Legislation (COVID-19 Emergency Response
– Documents and Oaths) Regulation 2020
(Qld) ss 6–8;
Executive Order No 2020–74
(5 May 2020), archived at
<https://perma.cc/K36C-DGVJ>.
27 See, eg,
Succession Act 1981
; Westlaw US,
Jurisprudence 2d
(online at 25 September 2020) vol 79 Wills § 234
(attestation clauses in US wills generally). See also
Re Unsworth
8 SASR 312.
On rebutting the presumption, see, eg,
Burnside v Mulgrew
[2007] NSWSC 550.
28 Purser and Cockburn (n 9) 60.
COVID-19 Emergency Response Bill 2020
Legislation
(COVID-19 Emergency Response – Documents and Oaths) Regulation 2020
(Qld) s 5, which includes, for example, an Australian legal practitioner,
justice or commission for declarations or a notary public.
Connecticut Executive Order No 7Q
(30 Mar 2020), archived at
<https://perma.cc/MAV4-2NZ7>.
disqualified from taking as a beneficiary under the will.
is an overt protective function to this formality, although, again, the
theoretical intent and the practical reality can differ,
particularly when
considering undue influence and unconscionable conduct as well as the rates of
elder abuse.
The interested beneficiary rule was arguably a
catalyst behind the emergency provisions, given many people live with those they
name in their wills.
The current COVID-19 pandemic has therefore drawn the accessibility of valid
will-making sharply into focus. Social distancing restrictions
mean that people
may not be able to avail themselves of any, let alone two, witnesses in order to
make a valid will. COVID-19 has
thus served a two-fold purpose in relation to
will-making. Firstly, it has highlighted the practical shortcomings with
arguably antiquated
systems that have required emergency responses to ensure
valid documents evidencing clear testamentary intention can be made. Most
frequently these emergency responses have involved authorising electronic
signatures and real-time virtual or audiovisual witnessing
(discussed further in
the next Part). Secondly, there is a broader societal problem about will-making
accessibility which, now front
and centre, cannot be allowed to disappear,
especially given the general policy approach of favouring testacy over
In the context of the policy of favouring testacy, it is important to note
that there are fixed-share intestacy provisions in both
Australian and US
Intestacy is a default rule that roughly attempts to
effectuate the intent of the average decedent. However, while these provisions
are ideally a reflection of societies’ values, which informs the
differences in provisions within the various jurisdictions,
in reality they have
not kept pace with societal changes, cultural norms, nor the changing concept of
‘family’, which
reinforces the need to facilitate access to valid
will-making.
For example, in Queensland, a 2014 case determined
that a person recognised as a ‘child’ under Aboriginal culture is
not a ‘child’ for the purposes of intestacy (or family
Succession Act 1981
; Westlaw US,
Jurisprudence 2d
(online at 25 September 2020) vol 79 Wills § 264. Cf
Uniform Probate Code
§ 2–505(b) (Uniform Law Commission, 1969,
32 Purser and Cockburn (n 9) 53–5.
33 See, eg,
Succession Act 1981
Golden Pond Assisted Living Facility
905 So 2d 1002
, 1007 (Sawaya J) (Fla
Dist Ct App, 2005);
639 P 2d 400
, 406 (Richardson CJ) (Haw,
34 In Australia, see
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) ch 4;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
divs 4, 4A, 5;
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1919
(SA) pt 3A;
Intestacy Act
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
. In most US jurisdictions,
upon intestacy, typically the spouse will take some or all of the
descedant’s estate, with children,
parents, and other collateral blood
relations then in line to inherit: see
Uniform Probate Code
2–102, 2–103 (Uniform Law Commission 1969, rev 2019).
35 See Fiona Burns, ‘The Changing Patterns of Total Intestacy
Distribution between Spouses and Children in Australia and England’
[2013] UNSWLawJl 18
University of New South Wales Law Journal
On intestacy
provisions and Indigenous peoples in Australia, see Prue Vines, ‘Wills as
Shields and Spears: the Failure of Intestacy
Law and the Need for Wills for
Customary Law Purposes in Australia’
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2001) 5(13)
Indigenous Law
provision) legislation.
Similarly, in the US state of Georgia,
only children who are biologically related to the decedent or who are formally
adopted may
inherit under the laws of intestacy.
Accordingly, when
an African-American man died intestate, the woman he had equitably adopted as a
child and raised, whom he referred
to as his ‘daughter’, was not
permitted to inherit.
III ‘IN THE PRESENCE OF’ – AN
INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE
As identified above, the key formality affected by COVID-19 is the
requirement of witnesses being ‘in the (conscious) presence
testator. Whether that presence needs to be physical is not a new question.
Courts have long required that the presence
be physical, measuring traditional
presence by a ‘line of sight’ test.
New technologies
raise the issue of whether ‘presence’ can (and should) be virtual.
What COVID-19 has done is make this
an urgent issue that needs to be addressed
in order to facilitate valid will-making and to avoid not only intestacy, but
also sometimes
costly applications for recognition of informal wills.
Consequently, emergency responses have been introduced in a number of
worldwide including in, for example, the US, Australia, Canada and
New Zealand.
Some jurisdictions, such as Queensland, have stated
that the measures apply to not just making a will but also to alterations,
revocations
and the revival of wills.
The United Kingdom Ministry
of Justice has recently issued a press release
and guidance on
making wills using video
Succession Act 1981
Eatts v Gundy
[2014] QCA 309
2 Qd R 559.
Georgia Code
O’Neal v Wilkes
439 SE 2d 490 (Ga
39 See, eg,
Burney v Allen
34 SE 500 (NC
40 For the US, see Horton and Weisbord (n 3). For Australia, see, eg,
Electronic Transactions Amendment
(COVID-19 Witnessing of Documents) Regulation 2020
Emergency Response Bill 2020
Legislation (COVID-19 Emergency Response –
Documents and Oaths) Regulation 2020
6–8; Supreme Court of Queensland,
Practice Direction Number 10 of
Informal Wills/COVID-19
April 2020;
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency Measures) Act 2020
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency
Measures) (Electronic Signing and Witnessing) Regulations 2020
pt 5. Canada: British Columbia,
Minister of Public Safety and Solicitor General,
Ministerial Order No
(19 May 2020), archived at
<https://perma.cc/XU6X-TE3G>; Alberta, Minister of Justice and
Solicitor General,
Ministerial Order
(15 May 2020), archived at <https://perma.cc/9Z2T-FG6Y>.
New Zealand: Explanatory Note, Epidemic Preparedness (Wills Act 2007
Signing and Witnessing of Wills) Immediate Modification Order 2020
archived at <https://perma.cc/42QZ-K5SQ>.
COVID-19 Emergency Response Bill 2020
Legislation
(COVID-19 Emergency Response – Documents and Oaths) Regulation 2020
42 Ministry of Justice (UK), ‘Video-Witnessed Wills to Be Made Legal
during Coronavirus Pandemic’ (Press release, 25 July
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/video-witnessed-wills-to-be-made-legal-duringcoronavirus-pandemic>.
conferencing.
The press release states that legislation will be
enacted to amend the
Wills Act 1837
(UK) which will provide that where
wills must be signed in the ‘presence’ of at least two witnesses,
their presence can
be either physical or virtual, via video-link. Wills will
still need to be signed by two witnesses who are not beneficiaries and
electronic signatures will not be permitted. The legislation will apply
retrospectively to wills made since 31 January 2020
cases where a Grant of Probate has already been issued in respect of the
deceased person, and the application is already
in the process of being
administered) and apply to wills made up to two years from when the legislation
comes into force (that is,
until 31 January 2022). The duration can be shortened
or extended if deemed necessary, in line with the approach adopted for other
coronavirus legislative measures. Once the legislation ceases to be operative,
the physical witnessing requirements will resume.
Some jurisdictions that have adopted emergency measures for will executions
have chosen to restrict the witnessing role to specific
categories of witness
such as a lawyer, justice of the peace, commissioner for declarations and/or
notary public.
Generally, the witness is then required to certify
that the document was signed in accordance with the regulations either on the
document in question or in a separate certificate.
On the one hand,
this was done (presumably) with the intention of fulfilling the protective
function, particularly in light of providing
a safeguard in the context of
concerns about capacity, undue influence, fraud and elder abuse. However, the
restriction to being
or including a ‘special witness’ means that it
is questionable whether these provisions have widened participation in
will-making beyond those who would have availed themselves of it pre-COVID. This
is important when critically considering the utility
of these measures post
Individual jurisdictions have also taken the opportunity to include sunset
clauses. The New Zealand provisions, for example, will
cease when the
Preparedness (COVID-19) Notice 2020
(NZ) expires or is
while other
43 Ministry of Justice (UK), ‘Guidance on Making Wills Using Video
Conferencing’ (Press Release, 25 July 2020)
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/guidance-on-making-wills-using-video-conferencing>
(‘Guidance on Making Wills Using Video Conferencing’).
44 This is the date of the first registered COVID-19 case in England and
45 See, eg, British Columbia, Minister of Public Safety and Solicitor
Ministerial Order No M161
May 2020), archived at <https://perma.cc/XU6X-TE3G>;
COVID-19 Emergency
Response Bill 2020
Justice Legislation (COVID-19 Emergency Response
– Documents and Oaths) Regulation 2020
46 For specific provisions in Australia, see, eg,
Electronic Transactions
Amendment (COVID-19 Witnessing of Documents) Regulation 2020
COVID-19 Emergency Response Bill 2020
Legislation (COVID-19 Emergency Response – Documents and Oaths)
Regulation 2020
(Qld) ss 6–8, pt 4; Supreme Court of Queensland,
Practice Direction Number 10 of 2020:
Informal Wills/COVID-19
April 2020;
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency Measures) Act 2020
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency Measures) (Electronic Signing and Witnessing)
Regulations 2020
47 Explanatory Note, Epidemic Preparedness (Wills Act 2007 – Signing
and Witnessing of Wills) Immediate Modification Order 2020
(NZ), archived at
<https://perma.cc/VMH4-69SS>.
Such clauses are prudent given the emergency nature of the
measures which were implemented urgently, without widespread consultation
consideration of rigorous evidence in relation to their utility and potential
adverse consequences, and without the debate generally
associated with law
reform. What needs to happen now is the more careful consideration of what could
inform the post-pandemic ‘new normal’, including
whether the extension to virtual witnessing should become a permanent
alternative. This is particularly the case in geographically large countries
with widely dispersed populations, including in rural
and remote areas, such as
the US and Australia, wherein sheer physical distance from urban centres can be
an impediment to receiving
professional estate planning advice. Practical
implementation of technological solutions is, of course, predicated upon digital
and the appropriate technology being available and affordable, which is
not always the case.
Practical challenges will also arise, for example, in relation to the use of
copies when seeking probate where, traditionally, the
production of
(that is, only) original will was required. For example, most jurisdictions have
made provisions for the testator and each of the
witnesses to be able to sign
either their own copies or a scanned copy of the will when virtually witnessing
the document. Consequently,
there could be anywhere up to three versions of a
will if electronically signed and/or witnessed, with the testator and each of
two witnesses potentially ‘signing’ different
The questions therefore arise: if there are two remote
witnesses and three signed documents in total (including the testator’s
signed document), will all three documents be required to be produced for
probate to be granted, and what happens if one of those
copies is lost? The
(rebuttable) presumption of destruction thus warrants consideration. The
presumption is designed as a protective
mechanism for testamentary freedom
wherein the absence of the original will was presumed to equate to the
document’s destruction
by the testator.
However, rebuttal
evidence can be led
COVID-19 Emergency Response Bill 2020
Legislation
(COVID-19 Emergency Response – Documents and Oaths) Regulation 2020
(Qld) s 27;
New York Executive Order
(28 August 2020),
archived at <https://perma.cc/4LWY-SHZ7> (extending
New York Executive
Order No 202
to 27 September, 2020). See also the proposed UK legislation:
‘Guidance on Making Wills Using Video Conferencing’ (n
49 Julian Thomas, Chris K Wilson and Sora Park, ‘Australia’s
Digital Divide Is Not Going Away’
The Conversation
(online, 29
March 2018)
<https://theconversation.com/australias-digital-divide-is-not-goingaway-91834>.
50 Each jurisdiction has adopted their own process. For specifics in
Australia see, eg,
Electronic Transactions Amendment (COVID-19 Witnessing of
Documents) Regulation 2020
(NSW); COVID-19 Emergency Response
Bill 2020 (Qld);
Legislation (COVID-19
Emergency Response – Documents and Oaths) Regulation
(Qld) ss 6–8, pt 4; Supreme Court of Queensland,
Practice Direction Number 10 of 2020:
Informal Wills/COVID-19
April 2020;
COVID-19 Omnibus (Emergency Measures) Act 2020
Omnibus (Emergency Measures) (Electronic Signing and Witnessing)
Regulations 2020
(Vic) pt 5; British Columbia, Minister of Public Safety and
Solicitor General,
Ministerial Order No M161
(19 May 2020) s 3(5),
archived at <https://perma.cc/XU6X-TE3G>.
Curley v Duff
(1985) 2 NSWLR 716
Cahill v Rhodes
(2013) 11 ASTLR 379;
Re Middleton
[2020] QSC 200.
as to a lack of destruction or a lack of intention to destroy on behalf of
the testator.
The introduction of the emergency provisions gives
rise to the question as to what will now not only give rise to the presumption
(for example, is the loss of one of the signed documents sufficient or would all
copies need to be lost or presumed destroyed), but
also the types of rebuttable
evidence necessary to displace the presumption, as well as associated tracing
difficulties to try to
locate lost versions. Furthermore, could this, and other
as yet unforeseen practicalities, inadvertently serve to thwart the reason
the emergency responses were introduced: as a means of protecting testamentary
IV POST COVID-19 – WILLS AND THE ROLE OF
In post-pandemic will-making, it will be important to actively evaluate the
emergency measures and consider which of these, if any,
should inform the
‘new normal’. Even pre-pandemic, the increasing focus and dependency
on technology has arguably already
challenged the traditional notion of will
formalities and the fulfilment (or non-fulfilment) of the associated functions,
been seen in relation to other legal documents such as contracts and
affidavits.
In order to promote the accessibility of will-making
post-pandemic, it will be critical to examine the functions of the formalities
and the two main approaches to enforcing them. A formalist approach requires
strict adherence to the will formalities. Alternatively,
a functionalist
approach undeniably provides primacy to testamentary intention; it is embodied
in the intentionbased dispensing power
and harmless error rules.
Under those approaches, the lack of formal compliance will not defeat a clear
testamentary intention. These cases also have an element
of judicial oversight
which arguably, even absent the formal requirements, serves some of the
traditional functions of wills formalities.
However, as noted, not
all jurisdictions have a dispensing power or harmless error statute.
Furthermore, even where such a power or statute does exist, there is still a
52 In Australia generally five matters need to be established, including:
there was will; that will revoked all previous wills; the
presumption of
destruction is rebutted; evidence of the terms of the will; and evidence of due
execution or the testator’s
intention that the document constitute their
(2013) 11 ASTLR 379, 381 [14] (de Jersey CJ). For a
recent example of a case where the presumption was rebutted, and the evidence
relevant to rebuttal, see
[2020] QSC 200
, [14]–[22]
(Davis J). Under the laws of US states, there is a similar presumption that a
lost will has been destroyed with
the intent to revoke it: see
Restatement
(Third) of Property
(1999) § 4.1 cmt (j).
53 See, eg,
Stuart v Hishon
[2013] NSWSC 766;
Transactions Act 1999
Transactions Act 2001
Electronic Transactions Act 2000
Electronic Transactions (Northern Territory) Act 2000
Electronic Transactions (Queensland) Act 2001
Communications
Electronic Transactions Act 2000
Electronic Transactions (Victoria) Act 2000
Transactions Act 2003
(WA). 54 ‘Making a Will’ (n 16) 13.
55 Ibid. For recent informal will cases, see, eg,
[2017] QSC 220
Weisbord v Rodny
[2018] NSWSC 1866
[2019] QSC 99.
bring a court proceeding; this can be costly in terms of time and money; and
it occurs during a time when people are often grieving
the loss of a loved one.
Significantly, the main witness (the testator) is also deceased, so, as is
always the case with wills litigation,
there is a danger of not being able to
satisfactorily evidence the requisite testamentary intention.
The sometimes prohibitive costs involved with will-making and the fact that
making a will can be challenging for a multitude of other
reasons together
underscore the difficulties that can occur in ensuring compliance with the
formalities.
Both in Australia and in the US, one response to the
general accessibility issues involved with making a valid will is the increase
in ‘do-it-yourself’ wills, including ‘will-kits’ and
online wills, which frequently fail to meet the traditional
formal requirements.
The result therefore is that, although ostensibly permitting the exercise of
testamentary freedom, such documents
can have the practical effect of preventing
this freedom from being effectuated unless there is evidence of a clear
testamentary
intent as required for an application to dispense with the
formalities.
Thus, instead of promoting willmaking accessibility,
these types of wills likely often instead defer (and usually increase) the cost;
instead of paying for legal advice to make the will during their lifetime, the
decedent (or the decedent’s estate, more accurately)
for legal advice post mortem, through legal proceedings to determine the
validity of the document or to construe
its meaning.
The pre-eminence of the role of intention in will-making is indisputable.
Does this, however, mean the abolition of traditional formalities
anachronistic remnants from a different time? Or do they still have a valid role
to play in informing the ‘new normal’
post pandemic? Arguably the
answer remains yes: the formalities will play a role in a post-COVID society
where technology has crept
into the signing and witnessing psyche of valid
will-making under the emergency provisions implemented during the times of
This is because the formalities facilitate, through the use of the
various presumptions, the more expeditious and cost-effective
grants of probate
in a society that still promotes testate estates over fixed-share intestacy
provisions which can give rise to expensive
will contestations.
of us believe that the evidentiary, channelling and protective functions (when
considered in connection with the mental requirements,
most notably testamentary
capacity and undue influence) are served by formalities.
is less sanguine, but not ready to eliminate formalities entirely.
Technological innovations ideally promote will-making accessibility to people
who would otherwise not have been able to execute a
valid document evidencing
56 Crawford (n 6) 291.
57 See, eg,
Uniform Probate Code
§ 2–503 (Uniform Law
Commission, 1969, rev 2019).
58 Purser and Cockburn (n 9) 60–1. See also Re Standish
[2018] VSC 629
Radford v White
[2018] QSC 306.
59 White et al (n 17); ‘Making a
Will’ (n 16) 73–4.
60 Purser and Cockburn (n 9) 64.
61 Crawford (n 6) 293.
testamentary intentions. However, and this is why the use of sunset clauses
in the emergency provisions is so important, there are
serious issues that
require dedicated consideration before making the emergency responses permanent
measures. Notably, although the
intention is to increase will-making
accessibility, evidence is needed as to whether this, in fact, occurred. Were
people who made
wills under emergency provisions those who would have made a
will anyway, or did access to will-making increase? Was will-making
encouraged by emergency procedures themselves, or was it driven by the practical
(and real) fear of possible death during
a pandemic? Further, there is a real
risk that well-intentioned temporary measures or longer-term changes that make
use of technological
advancements could be used as vehicles for abuse,
particularly of vulnerable older persons and those who may be socially isolated,
and possibly obscure issues of capacity, undue influence and fraud.
Therefore, although it is arguable as to whether the formal requirements
themselves continue to fulfil a meaningful protective purpose,
important to recognise that the formalities can be useful for other
V CONCLUSION
COVID-19 has sharply highlighted the issues surrounding will-making
accessibility, particularly in light of the traditional formalities.
questions existed pre-COVID, but the questions now demand an immediate response,
as emergency provisions put in place during
the pandemic may not last
permanently. Generally speaking, some people are still choosing to die
intestate, do not want to make a
will, may not know how to begin or may be too
daunted by the process of will-making to begin. Furthermore, there has been a
in ‘home-made’ wills, including the use of readily available
will-kits and online wills. A focus on testate rather than
intestate estates
still dominates policy discussions of succession laws in both Australia and the
US. Another guiding force is testamentary
intention, as an exercise of
testamentary freedom, subject to some limitations such as family provision
legislation.
Although technologies may bring valid will-making to a wider audience, they
may (or may not) give effect to the testator’s testamentary
intentions.
This can be as a result of construction issues or failure to meet the formal
requirements for will execution. As can
be seen in jurisdictions such as New
South Wales and Queensland in Australia (which have dispensing powers) or US
states (that have
a harmless error statute), while offering an opportunity to
give effect to testamentary intentions that would otherwise fail, implementing
technological solutions and non-traditional will-making can also
62 See generally Australian Law Reform Commission,
Elder Abuse: A National
Legal Response
(Final Report No 131, May 2017) ch 8;
Access to Justice
Arrangements
The Justice Project: Final Report
Older People.
63 See Purser and Cockburn (n 9).
result in judicial proceedings that may be financially costly, far more so
than making a traditionally valid will at the outset. Further,
planning advice. Instead of increasing effective
testamentary dispositions, the
result of the use of non-traditional wills may inadvertently cause an increase
in costly litigation
and will challenges.
The advent of electronic signing and real time audio-visual witnessing in
response to the crisis thus leads to a simple question:
why cannot this be done
in non-crisis times, with the intention of increasing will-making accessibility?
Responding to such a question
requires careful and considered thought. This
essay has sought to address this question by considering the role of traditional
formalities
and whether those formalities are still ‘fit for
purpose’ in a modern society, particularly in relation to the presence
requirement for witnesses. Consequently, select global will-making responses to
the COVID-19 crisis illuminate the utility of considering
such responses in a
post-COVID world.
Future empirical research about will-making will help determine whether the
new measures have indeed increased access to will-making.
Regardless of the
findings, such measures should not be blindly adopted as the new normal.
Questions regarding assessments of the
testator’s capacity, as well as
safeguarding the testator against fraud and undue influence, will require
detailed and critical
thought, especially given the increasing rates of elder
abuse. Nevertheless, COVID-19 has demonstrated that while virtual wills may
possible, efforts to imagine the ‘new normal’ post-pandemic need to
critically engage with the issues raised here.
It may be that some of the
measures can be implemented permanently as a way to begin to address larger
issues in relation to widening
access to will-making.
64 Purser and Cockburn (n 9) 60–3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (373 KB)
PDF format (711 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter