URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blazey, Patricia; Connors, Benedict --- "Emissions Trading - Traps for New Players" [2008] MqJlBLaw 13; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 291
Trading –Traps For New Players
AND BENEDICT
The Australian Federal Government plans to commence a National Emissions
Trading Scheme (NETS) in 2010.
scheme falls within the Kyoto Protocol’s (the Protocol) framework now that
the Australian Federal government has ratified
the Protocol. This is an
important initiative for Australia which has lagged behind other countries in
providing a meaningful national
emissions trading scheme. Now that a national
framework is taking shape, stakeholders need to be aware that there are many
for new players as the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU-ETS)
demonstrates following the first trading period that ran
from 2005-2007.
This article examines the pros and cons of emissions trading by looking at a
number of schemes operating overseas and outlines the
traps that NETS needs to
avoid in order to ensure its success. In particular it analyses the problems
experienced by the EU-ETS in
its first phase and the measures it plans to take
in order to ensure the success of future trading periods. It also examines why
various emissions trading schemes in the United States, such as the Acid Rain
initiative, have been so successful. Because NETS will
be based on a cap and
trade model, the focus of this article is on existing cap and trade schemes.
While accepting that emissions trading cannot solve the problem of global
pollution it is acknowledged that such schemes assist in
the overall goal of
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions. In company with renewable energy
technologies and energy efficiency initiatives,
emissions trading can force deep
cuts in the industrial sector. Emissions trading facilitates pollution control
price signals through
the reporting of emissions and the establishment of
regulatory mechanisms organized at government levels. Emissions trading schemes
to date have been limited in scope to stationary energy emissions.
Non-stationary energy emissions are excluded because they present
challenge for accurate monitoring. However this will need to change in the
future as non stationary energy emissions are
growing rapidly thus contributing
significantly to overall greenhouse gas
As emissions trading
schemes become more sophisticated they will be extended so as to include road
and air transport.
Essentially emission trading schemes (ETS’s) are an alternative to
traditional environmental regulation. The term emissions
trading is somewhat
confusing because emissions are not actually traded but the schemes
facilitate a right to emit a particular quantity of greenhouse gas through
a permit, credit or allowance.
ETS’s are burden sharing arrangements designed as a cost effective method
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Environmental
objectives are achieved by
giving emitters the right to emit a quantity of specified substances over a
definite period of time. As
each country’s economic and industrial
position is unique, emissions trading schemes have to take into account the
number of polluting industries that need to be involved. Australia for
example relies on agriculture, mining and resource processing
industries which
are greenhouse gas intensive.
target is given to each emissions source by the regulator and not the market. If
an emitter undercuts its allowance, it can sell
surplus allowances in the market
place, but if it overshoots, it is required to buy allowances on the market and
in so doing is dependent
on the current market price. The Australian Task Group
investigating the introduction of emissions trading in Australia recommends
national framework for reducing greenhouse gases where the market sets the
carbon price.
As Australia is a
federation, such a scheme would have similar characteristics to that set up by
the European Union, though in Australia’s
case, each state would negotiate
its respective emissions
An optimum emissions trading scheme is a market based mechanism that ensures
there is a meaningful target and that the target is achieved.
emissions cap encompasses a pre determined group of emitters and allowances are
issued that equal the pre-determined cap.
Emitters must surrender allowances
equal to total emissions. An emitter will need to decide whether to buy or sell
allowances on
the market. This is a matter which individual emitters need to
address on a cost analysis basis.
Emitters generally endeavor to remain below the target and make a profit out of
selling on allowances.
such scheme to be successful the relevant market place must have enough buyers
and sellers. Those who fail to operate successfully
are penalized and required
to buy allowances from other sources. The main problem with the EU-ETS scheme in
the first trading period
was that too many permits were issued on a
grandfathering basis resulting in a flooding of the market place which caused
of permits to crash. This was due to member states generously setting
their own allocation with the result that emission permits
plummeted in price
from 32 euros/te of carbon dioxide (CO2) to less than 1 euros/te CO2 in a matter
Arguments For And Against Emissions Trading
There are, as could be expected, many arguments for and against emissions
trading. Arguments in favour of such schemes are that emissions
trading is more
effective than environmental taxation because it provides a positive
environmental outcome whereas taxation does
not. Emissions trading can reduce
compliance costs as industry can take advantage of reduction opportunities thus
reducing its cost
factor as well as turning emissions reduction from a burden
into a business.
benefit is the ability of a carbon market to provide a forum that fosters the
development and distribution of new technologies
to developing countries who are
now emerging as the greatest polluters and who are not obliged to reduce
emissions under the Protocol.
This is particularly the case for China and India.
As with any environmentally focused scheme there are downsides. Foremost is
the philosophical view that such schemes undermine the
need for a globally
shared approach to emissions reduction because emissions trading favours wealthy
The Protocol has only a
mediocre effect on emissions cutting aggregate emissions by 5 per cent from 1990
levels by 2008-2012.
emissions trading scheme set up in the EU has not resulted in the necessary deep
cuts that are needed in order to move towards
stabilizing greenhouse gas
emissions. The Protocol allows developed nations to obtain permits outside their
own national boundaries
so as to remain within emission target limits rather
than reducing emissions at the national level. This is achieved by setting up
clean development projects (CDM’s) in developing
In the second phase
of the EU-ETS, CDM’s are permissible but are likely to result in
investment in projects that would have
occurred in any event and therefore do
not achieve credible emission cuts. A further criticism of the EU-ETS scheme is
that the polluter
does not pay for the right to pollute because of
grandfathering permits. Polluters only pay when they exceed their allocated
with the result that a commodities market is created rather than a
scheme that forces major polluters to cut emissions.
Emissions trading fails to promote a move to technological development within
the national operations of developed countries. There
is also the problem of
‘hot air’ where vast surplus credits are created and sold off to
countries in need of credits
resulting in emissions levels which do not result
in any net reduction. For example, as Russia and the Ukraine have set their
levels far below the allocated base levels; surplus credits could
potentially flood the
There are two main types of emissions trading schemes operating globally:
cap and trade and baseline and credit. Those with an absolute
target are cap and
trade regimes, whereas those with relative targets are baseline and credit
Under a cap and trade scheme, a designated authority, usually governments,
set a cap on the amount of a specific atmospheric pollutant
that can be emitted
over a specified period of time. Companies or sectors involved are allocated
allowances called credits which
give the right to emit. Allowances are allocated
on different premises:
grandfathering where permits are free
benchmarking where permit allocation is based on historical output
auctioning which provides a market value and is the most efficient method
for market operation but can affect company balance sheets
permits are purchased at a fixed price.
In order to comply with the scheme, emitters must surrender allowances equal
to their total emissions. Once allowances are allocated
a company is free to buy
and sell from others in the market place. If a member of the scheme goes over
their allocated emission allowances,
a penalty is imposed for non compliance.
Company’s need to consider whether it is in their financial interests to
lower emissions
before considering trading on the carbon market. The end result
is a policy instrument that reduces greenhouse gas emissions at low
Various controls can be incorporated into the design of the scheme such as
the type of greenhouse gas covered, the threshold for entry
into the scheme,
whether offsets can be used through other flexibility mechanisms and the method
used to allocate allowances. An
absolute cap provides some level of certainty
the value of credits on the carbon
Under a baseline and credit scheme emission rights are not awarded by a
designated authority but have to be earned. Businesses establish
a baseline of
emissions which occur in the ‘business as usual’ scenario. This is
then validated by a competent authority.
Individual emitters are assigned an
emission baseline which represents a schedule of allowable emissions over time.
Emitters are
exempt from liability for emissions up to a baseline level which is
less than actual emissions. The only allowances that can be traded
that deviate from the initial allocation. The main difference between a baseline
and credit scheme and a cap and trade
scheme is emission intensity. When
emission rates per unit of activity (that is energy input or output of energy or
produce) exceeds
the baseline level, emitters can increase their total emissions
without being required to buy more allowances as long as the emissions
from increased activity rather than a change in emission intensity. If emissions
are higher than the baseline, additional
credits need to be purchased. If there
is a reduction in emissions the difference between the baseline and actual
emissions will
be converted into emission credits which can be
Absolute trading schemes are more attractive to policy makers and
environmental groups as they provide certainty on the environmental
outcome. The
cap determines the total amount of emissions from the sectors involved and the
market determines where the necessary
reduction in emissions takes place. The
main difference between a baseline and credit scheme and cap and trade scheme is
the former scheme, the intensity baseline is set in advance but the
actual amount of production and the emission intensity of production
known until the end of the year or the period used. This results in emitters not
knowing the extent of their liabilities
or benefits until the end of the trading
period. Whereas under a cap and trade scheme, the cap is known in advance so
can be allocated with certainty at the start of the emissions period.
One major downside of this scheme is that it requires a proportion
of the cap to
be set aside for new entrants which can create perverse incentives to keep
inefficient plants running at low output.
By contrast the baseline and credit
scheme does not require a new entrant
Baseline and Credit Scheme - Greenhouse Gas Abatement
Scheme New South Wales (GGAS)
An example of a baseline and credit scheme is the GGAS, the world’s
first carbon emissions trading scheme. In December 2002
the NSW Parliament
passed an amendment to the
Electricity Supply Act 1995
placing an obligation
upon electricity retailers and certain entities including large electricity
users to meet mandatory targets
for the emission of greenhouse gases from
electricity production and use. In 2003 the Greenhouse Gas Abatement Scheme
(GGAS), a Kyoto
compliant scheme, which sets an absolute limit on greenhouse gas
emissions, was introduced in NSW. The participants in the scheme
NSW retail electricity suppliers
NSW electricity generators prescribed by the regulations
Market customers in respect of an electricity load over a certain size for
A large customer who has made an election to be subject to a greenhouse gas
emissions benchmark
A person engaged in carrying out significant development that has made an
election to be subject to a greenhouse gas emissions
Annual benchmarks for electricity generators are established statewide.
Individual participants comprised of electricity wholesalers
and retailers must
base their allocation of the greenhouse gas benchmark on their share of NSW
electricity demand. The participants
meet their allocation by surrendering
abatement certificates created from project based emission reduction activities.
Of value in this scheme is the ability of participants to offset emissions
through the purchase of forest sequestration credits. Other
areas that can
result in abatement certificates are generation which is the reduction of
greenhouse intensity of electricity purchased
from generators through low
emission generation of electricity including co-generation or improvements in
emissions intensity of
existing generation activities such as a move to
gas-fired and/or renewable electricity generation away from coal generation.
side abatement improves energy efficiency through activities that result
in the reduced consumption of
electricity.
recognizes activities that reduce or promote the reduction of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions and the enabling of trading
in and the use of certificates
created as a result of those activities for the purpose of meeting GHG
benchmarks.
Each individual participant’s benchmark is calculated by:
Multiplying the state’s population for a year by the state’s GHG
benchmark per head of population to determine the electricity
Determining the proportion of the total electricity demand in the State that
was used by the participant for that year and
Applying the proportion to the electricity sector benchmark to calculate the
number of tonnes of CO2 that is the participant’s
Though the designers of the scheme considered a cap and trade scheme for NSW,
it was not implemented because it would have placed
liability on electricity
generators rather than retailers. NSW generators would have been put at a
disadvantage because generators
in other states could have undercut them as they
would not have been subject to the extra burden. Also if the State of Victoria
been permitted to provide extra electricity to NSW it would have resulted in
a national increase of greenhouse gas emissions because
Victoria relies on the
use of brown coal for its power stations.
The number of tonnes of abatement for which a participant is responsible is
determined by multiplying the total amount of electricity
supplied, purchased or
used by the participant in that year by the NSW pool coefficient for GHG
emissions and subtracting from that
figure the number of tonnes of GHG emissions
actually abated by the participant. Non- compliance results in a certificate
and the incurrence of a penalty unless sufficient abatement
certificates can be produced to account for the shortfall. If a benchmark
met, a penalty of AUD$10.50 is imposed for each tonne of
One of the main problems with the scheme has been poor reporting and high
transaction costs as most abatement certificates resulted
from only a few types
of activities and further only five corporations were responsible for creating
almost 80 per cent of the 2003
certificates.
In 2004 changes
were made to attract other providers and new abatement projects.
The American Experience
Though the United States is not a signatory to the Protocol it has a number
of carbon markets operating. Emissions trading schemes
at the sub federal level
have been in existence in the United States for some time. A particularly
successful scheme emerged following
the passing of the 1970 Federal Clean Air
Act (CAA). Under this Act the US Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
can identify
air pollutants that damage people’s health. The EPA sets air
quality standards by setting limits on concentrations of atmospheric
dioxide (SO2), nitrous dioxide (NO2), lead, particulate matter, ozone, and
carbon monoxide.
Under the auspices of this Act, the Acid Rain Program was introduced in order
to lower the emission of SO2. This was the first emissions
permit trading scheme
in the US that used unlimited trading within an overall cap, as the only method
of reaching specified emission
limitations
The Program was set up in two phases, each designed to restrict emissions from
fossil fuel fired power plants. Phase 1 began in 1995
and covered 263 units at
110 electric utility plants, most of them coal-burning, in 21 Eastern and
mid-Western states. Another 182
units joined as ‘substitution or
compensating units’ resulting in the coverage of 445
Phase 11 began in 2000 reducing annual emission limits of large high emitting
plants and setting restrictions on ‘smaller, cleaner’
plants that
use coal, gas and oil, covering more than 2,000
The program applies to
existing utility plants serving generators that have an output capacity of over
25 megawatts and includes
new utility
SO2 emissions have fallen from 11.87 million tonnes of SO2 in 1995 to 10.6
million tonnes of SO2 in 2001. The cap for 2010 has been
set at 8.95 million
The programme design
gives participants an allocation of allowances calculated on their historic fuel
consumption and a specific
Each allowance permits the
utility to emit 1 tonne of SO2 over the period of a
Allowances under the
programme can be traded or banked and participation is unrestricted. The Act
provides that a unit cannot emit
at levels that would violate federal or state
Included is an
‘Opt-in Program,’ whereby sources that emit SO2 can voluntarily join
the programme. The Opt-in programme
offers a financial reward to those who
voluntarily cut SO2 emissions. If the voluntary participant reduces its
emissions so that
it has unused allowances, and if the price obtained from
selling the allowances is greater than what it costs to reduce emissions,
voluntary participant will make a
A penalty of $2000 adjusted for inflation, must be paid for every tonne of SO2
that is emitted in excess of the allowances that a
unit holds. The unit must
then offset any excess SO2 emissions with equal allowances. The utility that
emits excess emissions can
surrender its allowances immediately or submit a plan
to the EPA that details how cutbacks will be
Sources of emissions
may also use a mixture of measures, such as using cleaner burning fuel or energy
efficiency measures, to comply
The design of the programme has been crucial to its success. An annual
reconciliation occurs at the end of the year during a 60-day
grace period where
units can ensure that they have enough allowances to correspond with SO2
emissions experienced in the previous
The EPA has an electronic
record keeping and notification system called the Allowance Tracking System
which tracks allowance transactions
and the status of the allowance account.
From this tally the EPA can determine compliance with emission allowances. The
contain information on unit account balances and the serial numbers of
each allowance. As the system is computerized it allows the
flow of data to
assist in the development of a market for
allowances.
The cap and trade
scheme was chosen as the EPA took the view that the flexibility under this type
of scheme achieves emission reductions
at the lowest cost
The Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX) is a ‘greenhouse gas emission
registry, reduction and trading system’ and the first
scheme in the world
to include all six greenhouse
It is a self-regulating,
‘rules-based’ exchange designed and controlled by its members on a
voluntary and legally-binding
Phase 1 of the scheme
ended in December 2006. At that time, all members had reduced their direct
emissions by 4 percent below the
baseline period
Phase II extends the
scheme through to 2010 requiring its members to reduce emissions 6 percent below
the baseline
The success of the CCX market is due to the fact that it can be accessed via
the internet enabling trading between CCX Registry Account
Holders. The system
provides daily and monthly statements to members, and supports traders that are
‘exchange-cleared’
thus allowing anonymity and permitting trading by
private negotiations. A member registers its emissions with the CCX Registry and
is allocated a ‘Carbon Financial Instrument’ contract in line with
the established baseline and reductions schedule of
the CCX. Reports and tools
are made available to members that will help them manage their GHG emissions,
and ‘Carbon Financial
Instrument’ contract
Each member must have a ‘Carbon Financial Instrument’ (CFI) contract
in the CCX Registry account equal to its verified
emissions for the year. Each
CFI contract is taken to be the equivalent of 100 metric tons of CO2. The
success of this programme
was reflected in the first emission reduction
compliance period for the calendar year 2003 where the total amount of emissions
its members was 8 percent under the emission reduction
The European Emissions Trading Scheme -
The EU-ETS represents a major undertaking that provides a framework for a
community wide compulsory carbon dioxide (CO2) allowance
trading scheme
involving all 27 EU member states. The 12 members that have joined since 2004
are not covered by the scheme as they
already had their own commitments under
the Kyoto Protocol.
In order to comply with its obligations under the Kyoto Protocol the EU has
elected to reduce its overall greenhouse gas emissions
by 8 percent over the
period 2008-2012 by taking into account annual average emissions over this
period as compared to levels recorded
The EU-ETS is designed to run in phases. The initial commitment period that
ran from 2005 – 2007 was considered a trial period
referred to as the
‘learn by doing phase’. In this phase only CO2 was
The second phase which
runs in the first Kyoto commitment period covers a period of 5 years running
from 1 January 2008 to 31 December
In the second phase
running from 2008, the scheme will involve not only the 27 EU member states but
also three members of the European
Economic Area – Norway, Iceland and
Liechtenstein.
Member States have their emission obligations set by their individual
governments in consultation with the EU Commission resulting
in a burden sharing
agreement. A portion of the target is assigned to installations participating in
the EU with the remainder of
the national target available for emission schemes
outside the EU-ETS.
States have to decide how much of their allowable Kyoto emissions would be
assigned to sectors included in the EU-ETS and
then spread the targets between
the sectors involved. The European Parliament’s resolution
OJC197/219&400 in 2000 determined
that the trading regime would be based on
quantified greenhouse gas abatement targets set in advance by individual
countries and
The initial drafting of the scheme began in January 2001. In March of that
year it was clear the USA would not ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
Commissioner
Wallstrom felt that a signal should be sent to the world that the Kyoto Protocol
had to be implemented.
Group 1 was set up to hold meetings with different stakeholders to get ideas on
how the scheme would operate. The introduction
of the scheme required a strong
enforcement framework in order to be effective. For the EU, the main question at
the initial stages
of discussions was whether enforcement would be at the
community or national level. As could be expected the lead up to the final
directive witnessed many disagreements. Non-governmental organizations as well
as industry wanted an emissions trading instrument
to combat climate change.
Non-governmental organizations wanted robust environmental effectiveness with
strict targets, monitoring,
verification and compliance functions that would be
exercised at community level whereas industry did not want an emission trading
scheme that would put European businesses at a competitive
disadvantage.
Some industries
wanted voluntary agreements rather than a firm trading system. This was based on
the concern that industry might
bear the burden whereas transport sectors and
households would not.
The drafting of the Directive took approximately three years to complete. It
began with the ‘Green Paper on Emissions Trading’
produced by the
European Commission in March 2000 which pointed out the economic benefits and
benefits for the internal market of
applying emissions trading at the EU level
rather than the national level
It addressed the issue of
the allocation of allowances between sectors and individual sources and set out
various options for the
issuing of permits. This included auctioning permits as
well as different approaches to the free allocation of permits known as
grandfathering.
It considered whether the allocation methods should be assigned
to Member States or whether a degree of harmonization should be
introduced.
It was not until the Bonn Agreements were adopted in July 2001 that the
proposal pushed ahead.
October 2001 the Commission published its proposal for a Directive establishing
the EU-ETS.
It came into force
in October 2003 setting out in detail the terms of the
The scheme covers four
sectors; production processing of iron and steel and minerals such as cement
glass or ceramic production,
energy i.e. electric power and direct emissions
from oil refineries and pulp and paper. The regime covers around 13,000
installations.
It allows for
links with other Kyoto Parties thus permitting a global trading scheme. The EU
allowed emission allowances to be free
initially and thereafter with up to 5
percent being auctioned in the first period and 10 percent in the second
The Directive requires each member state to impose binding caps on emissions
of CO2 from installations above a certain production
capacity or output
threshold. An installation is defined as a stationary technical unit where one
or more activities listed in Annex
1 are carried out and any other directly
associated activities which have a technical connection with the activities
carried out
on that site that could have an effect on emission and
The Linking Directive 2004/101EC amending directive
was agreed to on
April 20 2004 to regulate the purchase of the Protocol emission quotas. This
links the EU emissions trading scheme
with Joint Implementation Projects
(JI’s) and Clean Development Projects (CDM’s) though under articles
6 and 7 of the
Kyoto Protocol their use must be supplemental to domestic action.
The credits generated from these projects are part of the official
currency’ and eligible for compliance with Kyoto targets. Member states
can use credits generated by CDM’s
i.e. certified emission reduction units
(CER’s) and JI’s, Emission Reduction Units (ERU’s) to comply
allowances under the EU-ETS. Their use is limited to an assigned
percentage of the total amount of allowances to be allocated in
the relevant
trading period and stated in the National Allocation Plan of each Member State.
Thereafter the European Commission makes
a final decision on allocations. The
reason for this is that such credits are assumed to be cheaper than reductions
within the EU-ETS
scheme. CER’s and ERU’s from nuclear and land use
and land use change and forestry (LULUCF) projects cannot be used for
in the EU-ETS.
Linking is only
possible if a mechanism is put in place to convert units from one scheme into
units of the other. Trading can also
occur through brokers and financial
institutions.
Under the EU Emissions Trading Directive 2003/87/EC[2003] )JL275/32 each EU
member state is required to develop a National Allocation
Plan (NAP) in which
emission rights are allocated to operators of installations for activities
described in Annex 1 of the Directive.
Operators covered by the scheme must hold
a greenhouse gas emission permit. This specifies the monitoring and reporting
requirements
and sets out an obligation to surrender a number of allowances
equal to the total verified emission of the installation in the previous
calendar year.
An operator is ‘any person who operates or controls an installation or
where this is provided for in national legislation to
which decisive economic
power over the technical functioning of the installation has been
delegated’.
operator carries out several activities in the same installation the allowances
are aggregated. An allowance is a permit
to emit one tonne of CO2e during a
specified period.
A penalty rate
of 100 euros per tonne for emissions over the allowance was set, well above the
market price along with make good
provisions.
Not surprisingly the EU-ETS t has experienced a number of problems in its
first non- Kyoto period running from 2005-7.
What Went Wrong?
Phase 1 accounted for about 45 percent of the EU’s total CO2 emissions.
In 2005 allowances exceeded emissions by about 80 million
tonnes of CO2 about 4
percent of the EU’s intended maximum
This was due to both
over-allocation of permits and a response to the price of allowances in 2005.
The EU has been heavily criticized
for handing out excess free emissions
allowances in the absence of a Kyoto
constraint.
Only a small portion
of permits were actually
Because of the
over-allocation of allowances emission credits fell from around 30 euros to 8
euros but as some large energy firms
did not receive enough quotas the market
survived so that in May 2005 carbon prices settled at around 15
When in July the Polish
register of carbon credits was launched, an over-allocation of emission credits
resulted in the flooding
of the market with the price of credits falling to
Overall, EU Member States failed to set ambitious emission limits in the
energy and manufacturing sectors and rules at national levels
sufficiently well designed to provide incentives to channel investment into
cleaner plants and processes.
The other problem was that some Member States and some sectors decided on
emission projection levels before verified emissions data
became available and
this too caused an over-allocation of allowances. Large variations in prices of
allowances reduced the incentives
for long-term investment to reduce emissions.
A further problem was that the EU allowed member states to set their own
emission allocations
through each NAP. At the same time there was a windfall of
profits for electricity generators in the UK in the region of 1 billion
because power companies raised prices to reflect the market value of the ETS
allowances even though they had them for free
and as power companies they had
little international
competition.
As a result of this
mistake the EU has stated that in Phase 11, all power sector permits will be
auctioned so as to prevent windfall
profits. Another problem arises from strong
support for new emitters with free allocations of allowances for new entrants
coal-fired power plants which again affect the market price of
The Europa website sums up the problems as follows:-
‘Besides underlining the need for verified data, experience so far has
shown that greater harmonization within the EU-ETS is
imperative to ensure that
the EU achieves its emissions reduction objectives at least cost and with
minimum competitive
distortions.’
It also states that:
‘The first two trading periods also show that widely different national
methods for allocating allowances to installations
threatens fair competition in
the internal market. Furthermore greater harmonization clarification and
refinement are needed with
respect to the scope of the system , access to
credits from emission reduction projects outside the EU, as the conditions for
to emissions trading systems elsewhere and monitoring , verification and
requirements.’
The second phase runs from January 2008 – 2012 and coincides with the
Kyoto Commitment period. It expands the scope of the EU-ETS.
During this period
all 27 EU Member States are included as well as three members of the European
Economic Area. The Commission has
capped national emissions from EU-ETS sectors
at an average of around 6.5 percent below 2005 levels to help ensure that the EU
a whole and Member States individually, deliver on their Kyoto commitment.
CDM and JI credits will be introduced in this phase through
the Linking
Aviation emissions
may be included from 2010.
Phase 11 is adopting a stricter allocation process by rejecting the first
NAP’s submitted by most member states. This has resulted
in a rise in
permit prices to around 20 euros/te CO2. The EU is creating a credible cap
together with a credible system of registration
and monitoring. The cap cannot
be too lenient and/or open to manipulation otherwise the operation and
credibility of the ETS will
be undermined. Phase 1 and 11 rely mainly on
grandfathering or the free allocation of emissions to existing players based on
emissions with some permits set aside for new entrants.
Future Amendments to the Directive
There is a proposal to amend the Directive which established the EU-ETS so
that the period beyond 2012 will be strengthened and a
target set for a
reduction in emissions of at least 20 percent by 2020 compared with
This is provided other
industrialized countries commit to comparable efforts. This was endorsed in
March 2007 by the European Council
and the decision to draw up the agreement
taken in Bali and the UN climate change conference in December 2007.
The main changes proposed are:
There will be an EU wide cap on the number of emission allowances instead of
27 national caps. The cap will decrease along a linear
trend line which will
continue beyond the end of the third trading period from 2013 -2020.
A much larger share of allowances will be auctioned instead of being the
subject of free allocations
Harmonized rules governing free allocations will be introduced
Part of the right to auction allowances will be redistributed from Member
States with a high per capita income to those with lower
ones in order to
strengthen the financial capacity of the latter
A number of new industries will be introduced i.e. aluminum and ammonia
Two further gases will be introduced: nitrous oxide and
perfluorocarbons
Member states will be allowed to exclude small installations from the system
provided they are subject to equivalent emission reduction
NAP’s will no longer
Proposed Framework for Australia’s National
Emissions Programme and Traps to be Aware of
Now that Australia has ratified the Kyoto Protocol it is committed to a
target of 108 percent of 1990 emissions over the 2008-2012
The NETS is integral to
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions in this country. In advance of the scheme
the National Greenhouse Energy
Regulating Act (NGER) came into force in 2007
requiring around 700 large energy generator and energy users which cover 70 per
of Australian emissions, to report emission and energy use from 1 July
NGER will underpin the
future of the Australian Emissions Trading Scheme.
The future design of the NETS hinges on the forthcoming Garnaut Report,
though the interim report released in February 2008 gives
an indication of the
design of the scheme. Four specific target periods are proposed. The first
period up to 2012 will be based on
Australia’s Kyoto commitment. The other
three periods will see increased levels of commitment. The NETS will cover all
green-house
gases. The scheme proposes to cover emissions from stationery
energy, industrial processes, fugitives, transport and waste at the
outset with
agriculture and forestry to be included as soon as viable. Land clearing and
deforestation are not included. Though the
Task Group on Emissions Trading
recommends a mixture of free allocation and auctioning of emission permits, the
Garnaut Interim Report
supports the auctioning of permits arguing that the free
allocation of permits would not in any event prevent an increase in the
The Report considers
that grandfathering is not a suitable method of allocating permits and
allowances should be sold either through
auctioning or at fixed
Member states in the
EU-ETS were over generous in their allocations resulting in a price crash in the
carbon market
If Australian
states are given the right to create their own national allocation permits
strict controls would be needed at a national
level so as to avoid the
experiences of the EU-ETS where EU members were over generous with allocations
on a national level. Another
important factor to be taken into consideration is
that a major benefit to be gained from auctioning of permits is that the revenue
obtained can usefully be spent on improving the productive or adaptive capacity
of the economy consistent with reducing greenhouse
gas emissions. Transitional
assistance to trade exposed emission intensive industries such as steel and
aluminum that cannot pass
on the cost of the carbon price to consumers would be
supported under the scheme.
The Task Force recognizes a comprehensive system of emission measurement
reporting and verification is
Though the Task Force
takes the view that Australia has lengthy experience in successfully monitoring
emissions such as in the Greenhouse
Challenge Plus Programme where firms
responsible for 50 percent of national emissions self-report, this has not been
the experience
in the EU as discussed
Though Australia is in a
different position to that of the EU, it being one country, self-reporting tends
to lessen accountability.
In the case of the EU-ETS, established monitoring
continued on the same basis and resulted in the scheme failing to obtain overall
accurate emissions data. It is therefore critical that an ETS has to be designed
in such a way that emissions data and monitoring
processes are credible. A
further requirement is the setting of a cap that reflects an effective and
worthwhile scheme. Strong guarantees
of transparency and public access to
information are essential.
Part of the income from the sale of allowances must be returned to the
companies that are emitters or large users of electricity in
order to support
investment in energy efficient plants and to foster the transition to renewable
energy. Emission limits should be
met without relying on JI’s and
CDM’s unless a cap is placed on the percentage of credits that can be
obtained from these
measures. Credits obtained from CDM’s and JI’s
must come from high quality projects that are subject to both Federal
and UNFCCC approval. The aviation and navigation industry should be included
once the scheme is up and running successfully.
The governance of the scheme must be undertaken through an independent
regulator with the power to accurately monitor emissions and
report back to
emitters on a regular basis similar to that in existence in the US Acid Rain
Programme. It is only via good corporate
governance that the scheme will be
supported by industry and the general public. Finally, the penalty rate for non
compliance must
be an effective deterrent.
In summary emissions trading schemes such as the Acid Rain Programme in the
US can be effective and successful. However they must
be supplemented with other
measures that are not prone to market failures such as the phasing out of coal,
interim clean coal initiatives
and state measures that promote mandatory energy
efficiency. The move to renewable energy must not be stifled by any idea that
trading will solve the problems of atmospheric pollution because to
date this has not occurred. Emissions trading therefore should
be part of a
conglomeration of schemes and projects that will mitigate the effects of
greenhouse gas emissions and sooner rather
than later.
Head of Department of Business
Law Macquarie University.
Sometime Lecturer Department
of Business Law Macquarie University.
‘Government Announces
Detailed Timetable on Emissions Trading’ Media Release Senate The Hon
Penny Wong Minister for
Climate Change and Water pw 35/08 17 March 2008
<www.greenhouse.gov.au/emissionstrading/timetable.html> 17 May 2008.
For example in China 1,300 new
vehicles came onto the roads each day. New vehicles added in the first quarter
of 2008 are up 13.34
per cent more than the same period in 2007. Wan Hongjiang
‘Beijing’s vehicle population up 13% in 1
Quarter’ Window of China' China View <
www.zinhuanet.com/english/2008-04-02/content_7906974.htm
6 June 2008.
J Lefevere ‘Greenhouse
Gas Emission Trading – A Background’ in M Bothe E Rehbinder
‘Climate Change Policy’
Eleven International Publishing 2005
‘Report of the Task
Group on Emissions Trading’ Australian Government Prime Ministerial Task
Group on Emissions Trading
European Union Emissions
Trading Scheme (EU-ETS).
‘Discussion paper on
Measures to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions in New Zealand’ <
www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/cliamte/discusssion-paper-poast-2012-dec06/html/page
6 June 2008.
‘Lessons from the EU
Emissions Trading Scheme’ Sinclair Knight Mertz <
www.skmconsulting.com/knowledge_insgihts/EU+emissions+Trading+Scheme.htm
20 April 2008.
Opt cit n3 p123-4.
Controlling Global Climate: the Debate over Pollution Trading’ Maryland
School of Public Affairs
www.public.policy.umd.edu/IPPP/winter99/controlling_global_climate.htm
18 May 2008.
Article 3.1.
Article 12 Kyoto Protocol.
H Robinson N O’Brien
‘Europe’s dirty Secret: Why the EU Emissions Trading Scheme
isn’t working’ Open
Europe August 2007 <www.openeurope.org.uk>
6 June 2008.
H Ashiabor, P Blazey, B
Connors ‘Political Economy of Taxes and Emissions Trading in Australia, in
Critical Issues in Environmental
Taxation – International and Comparative
Perspectives’ Vol 5 Oxford University Press p265.
For general information see
http://www.greenhousegas.nsw.gov.au/
18 May 2008.
Op cit n18 p266.
See generally information
at the Environmental Protection Agency website <
www.epa.gov/air/CAA/
> 12 may 2008;
‘Air Quality Index – A Guide to Air quality and Your Health’
<airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=static.aqi>
2 June 2008
http://www [.] oecd.org/dataoecd/38/41/1888654.pdf
12 May 2008 p11.
‘Encouraging Environmentally Sustainable Growth in the United States
Economics Department Working Papers’
OECD 26 January 2001.
http://www/oecd.org/dataoecd/38/41/1888654.pdf
12 May 2008 p11
‘Acid Rain Program
SO2 Allowances Fact Sheet’
www.epa.gov/airmark/trading/factsheet.html
6 June 2008.
Acid Rain Programme
http://www.epa.gov/airmarkt/progsregs/arp/basic.html
6 June 2008.
‘A Comparison of EU
Air Quality Pollution Policies and Legislation with Other Countries
Environmental Aspects of Enterprise
Policy Review of the Competitiveness of
Implications for European Industry
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/environment/reports_studies/reports/study1.pdf
Op cit n26 p 3.
Op cit n26 p 3.
Title 1 of the Clean Air
Op cit n25 p1.
Op cit n25 p 6.
Op cit n25 p 6.
Op cit n25 p 1.
Op cit n25 p 1.
Op cit n25 p 1.
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
Methane (CH4), Nitrous Oxide (N20), Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC’s) Hydro
fluorocarbons (HCF’s) Perflurocarbons
and Sulfur Hexafluoride (SF6) (the
latter threes gases are often referred to as halogenated bases).
Change’ 2004
http://www.chicagoclimatex.com/about/
‘Chicago Climate
Exchange Announces Results of Compliance Report for 2003,’ Chicago Climate
Exchange 2 December 2004.
http://www.chicagoclimatex.com/environment/2003complianceReport
13 September 2006 p1.
‘Trading Emissions to
Cut Costs and Reduce Emissions Worldwide’ European Commission Directorate
Central Publication
p 5 and 10.
http://www.bvsde.paho.org/bvsacd/cd29/emission/trading2.pdf
6 June 2008.
<Europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/08/35> 1 May
Op cit n44 p7.
EUETS Phase 1 AgCert.<
www.agcert.com/eu_ets.aspx
EU Parliament Resolution 26
October 2001 [2001] OJC197/219 & 400.
Op cit n3 p104-5.
R Dornau ‘The
Emissions Trading Scheme of the European Union’ in D Freestone and C
Streck ‘Legal Aspects of Implementing
the Kyoto Protocol Mechanisms:
Making Kyoto Work’ Oxford University Press 2005 p418.
Op cit n3 p47.
Op cit n3 p 264.
Decision 5/CP.6 Bonn
Agreements on the Implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action
FCCC/CP2001/5, 36-49; Directive 2003/87/EC.
Directives 2003/87/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 Establishing a
Scheme for Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Allowance Trading with the EC and Amending
Council Directive 96/61/EC [2002] OJ L275/32.
See summary table of
national allocation plans of the EU25.
<europa.eu.int/comm./environmental.climat/emission_plans.htm>
First phase runs from 2005
- 2007 second phase 2008 - 2012.
Article 30(a) Annex 1 of
the Directive covers the following areas:-
Energy activities
Combustion installations with a rated thermal input exceeding 20 MW (except
hazardous or municipal waste installations); Mineral oil
refineries; Coke
Production and Processing of ferrous metals
Metal ore (including sulphide ore) roasting or sintering installations
Installations for the production of pig iron or steel (primary or secondary
fusion) including continuous casting with a capacity exceeding
2.5 tonnes per
Mineral industry
Installations for the production of cement clinker in rotary kilns with a
production capacity exceeding 500 tonnes per day or lime
in rotary kilns with a
production capacity exceeding 50 tonnes per day or in other furnaces with a
production capacity exceeding
50 tonnes per day
Installations for the manufacture of glass including glass fibre with a
melting capacity exceeding 20 tonnes per day
Installations that manufacture ceramic products by firing, in particular
roofing tiles, bricks refractory bricks, tiles stoneware
or porcelain with a
production capacity exceeding 75 tonnes per day and /or a kiln capacity
exceeding 4 m 3 and with a setting density
per kiln exceeding 300kg.m3.
Other activities
Industrial plants for the production of: Pulp form timber or other fibrous
materials; Paper and board with a production capacity exceeding
20 tonnes per
COM2003/0403.
‘Rapid Press Releases
Europa’ p8 Q and A on Commission Proposal to Review EU-ETS’
<europa.eu/rapid/pressRleases
Action.do?reference=MEM0/08/35> 1 May
Article 3(f).
Article 3(a).
D Ellerman ‘Review of
Pilot Phase of EU-ETS finds it to be successful’ quoting Ellerman and
Buchner in Review of environmental
Economics and Policy Oxford Journals <
www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2007-05/oup-rop052407.php
24 April 2008.
Sinclair King Merz
‘Scheme Lessons from the EU emissions Trading Scheme’ <
www.skmconsulting.com/knowledge_insights/EU+Emissions+Trading+Scheme.htm
20 April 2008.
J Zegnal ‘EC Toughens
up for the next phase of emission trading’ 16-22 October 2006
www.euets.com/index.php?page=news&newsid=42&1-1
5 May 2008.
Climate Action Network
Europe ‘Quo Vadi, EUETS? Is the EU’s key climate policy tool headed
in the right direction? <
www.climnet.org
> 4 May 2008 p 1.
EU Energy Policy: EU
Emissions Trading and Link Directives
<www.inforse.org/Europe/eu_em-trad.htm> 20 April 2008.
<Europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?referecne=MEMO/08/35> 1 May 2008
2004/101EC.
‘Questions and
Answers on the Commission’s Proposals to revise the EU’s Emissions
Trading System’.
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/08/35 & format=HTML & aged=0 & language=EN & guiLanguage=en
6 June 2008.
Media Release Senator the
Hon Penny Wong ‘Climate Change Report Card Shows Rudd Government has
Australia on Target’
PW18/08 25 February 2008.
Garnaut ‘Climate
Change Review Interim Report’ February 2008
http://www.garnautreview.org.au/domino/Web_Notes/Garnaut/garnautweb.nsf
18 May 2008.
Ibid. and op cit n4.
Op cit n4 p122.
Op cit n4 p122.
Op cit n4 p122.
Op cit n4 p122, the Green
Paper released by the Rudd government in July 2008 contains a proposal that
aluminium companies that export
goods will receive permits covering up to 90
percent of their emissions. Electricity generaters will also receive
assistance.
Op cit n4 p83.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (332 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter