URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawSymp/2006/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith II, George P --- "Law, Religion and Medicine: Conjunctive or Disjunctive?" [2006] MqLawSymp 2; (2006) 1(1) Macquarie Law Symposium 9
LAW, RELIGION AND MEDICINE: CONJUNCTIVE OR
DISJUNCTIVE?
GEORGE P SMITH, II
PRELUDE AND DEDICATION
MAKING A DECIDED DIFFERENCE: THE JUDICIAL PHILOSOPHY OF
JUSTICE MICHAEL D KIRBY, AC, CMG
From virtually the beginning of his public career in the Australian Law
Reform Commission, Justice Michael Kirby was called upon to
address vital and
complex issues in health law and ethics. Indeed, it may be seen that the whole
national debate of how best to renew
the legal system in order to ensure its
fairness accessibility and continued relevance in the Age of The Biomedical
Technology was
begun on his
Dealing first in 1977 with law reform in the field of human tissue
transplants, he was forced – of necessity – to study
the need to
re-define death, the feasibility of adopting a regime of donation or one of
taking, with an opting out privilege, the
acceptability of payment for body
parts, the availability of donations by minors, the rights of relatives to
override the wishes
of a deceased to donate body parts for either research or
organ donation, together with legal and ethical issues of the then rather
process and procedure of
fertilization and the scope of genetic
engineering. Medical confidentiality and privacy in medical information, child
abuse reporting
and other cutting edge issues were studied
More recently, Kirby J has applied his nearly boundless energies and keen
interests to tackling ethical and legal questions surrounding
the HIV/AIDS
pandemic, UNESCO’s work on the Human Genome Project and the need for
protection of human rights for homosexual
and bisexual men and women, drug users
and drug dependent persons and those infected with HIV/AIDS and, finally,
shaping ethical
principles to be used as guides for charting health care
allocative schemes through the application of cost-benefit
Indeed, as Kirby J has cautioned,
this issue of rational and principled apportionment of scarce medical resources,
or what has been
termed distributive justice,
is a foundational issue facing Australia
the United States in this 21st century.
The Kirby Informing Principle or Ethic
The Informing Principle or Ethic that emerges from Kirby J’s work as a
judge, lawyer humanitarian and scholar – and, more
often than not from his
lectures and papers delivered
ex cathedra
(or away from the High Court
bench) – is, in one, both visionary and futuristic and anchored in a value
system that may be
termed, ‘Transcendent Idealism’. This set of
values draws on humanism and moral realism and represents a synthesis of
are regarded as the three primary value systems: the human individual, society
and transcendent purpose.
In order to consider and evaluate the vexatious problem of balancing
individual rights against social authority, transcendent idealism,
acknowledges ‘God’s transcendent purpose which is concerned with the
dignity and salvation of each human
While not providing an exacting
template for resolving all socio-legal issues, it seeks to posit a ‘body
of shared values through
which problems can be
The Kirby Ethic builds upon this value system and clearly embraces the
foundational principle or quality of love set forth in St Paul’s
the Corinthians.
Indeed, it is not only the
cornerstone of the Ethic but also the yardstick by which the effectiveness of
any discourse or implementation
on human rights is measured. Without its
acceptance, there can be no real appreciation or understanding of the very
essence of human
Achieving a new world order which recognizes the centrality of human rights
calls for a recognition of an individual responsibility
to advance the virtues
of honesty, compassion, kindness, justice and nobility of life purpose –
together with an abiding respect
for human goodness and dignity together with a
tolerance for diversity:
all qualities
found inherently (or at least ideally) within all of us. Recognizing the dignity
of one’s very own existence
demands, in turn, a witnessing of that
humanity and dignity within the polity for
In order to lead and support the advancement of human rights, one must be
informed and educated to the hard issues which shape current
To this end, participatory
democracy – an obligation for all citizens in democratic free
– must assist in promoting
rational discourse in all aspects of law, health and biotechnology; for it is
only through informed
discussion that a level of perception can be set which
allows for solutions to vexatious issues to be
With the obligation to be informed is a co-ordinate responsibility, as
citizens, to dissent (when necessary) and remember further
that powerful
dissenting ideas may not be seen as either persuasive or valid in the time in
which they are expressed but –
over the course of history – may well
be recognized and even accepted ultimately as new contemporary bases or vectors
of positive
force in the social order of that
As pilgrims all, Kirby J bids us to be forever
– maintaining an idealism
as not only to the future but a measured respect for that of the
Where there are changes in social circumstances and community attitudes, in
turn, make old rules anachronistic, then the Kirby Ethic
holds those rules must
bend in order to accommodate change.
order to achieve an openness of spirit to change, interdisciplinary outreach is
In order to implement the Kirby Ethic judicially, it – of necessity
– must morph into a principle of judicial interpretation
which holds that
in cases of ambiguity, it is not only permissible, but indeed essential, to
construe Australian Statutes and the
Constitution
in a manner utilizing the
norms of universal human rights law so that a reconciliation of international
law and municipal law can
be effected and thereby witness the enforcement of
Human Rights as a universal phenomenon.
This reconciliation will, in turn, allow the law to be viewed ‘from the
outside’ or through the world’s eye as
progressive instead of
regressive.
The Kirby Ethic eschews a rigid and almost mechanical application of case
decisions over conceptualism (or that way of considering
law as a set of
preferred values).
Indeed, normative values
must be set forth in all cases of determinative decision
with efforts taken to go beyond
categories of indeterminancy such as ‘fair’ or ‘just’ or
what is rational
and supportable.
If integrated into the fabric of informed decision making by the courts,
legislative bodies and the polity, the Kirby Informing Principle
or Ethic will
set new parameters for discussions, action and mediation in the perplexing
issues of the New Age of Biotechnology.
In a word, the Ethic will advance a more
comprehensive framework for principled analysis grounded in honesty, compassion,
humaneness, justice and nobility of life purpose.
I INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
Faith, religion, spirituality and prayer have a current focused outreach and
easy parlance in the market places and public squares
and court cases abound of dramatic
challenges to the placement of monuments to the Ten Commandments in public
buildings and grounds,
God’s name in school pledges of
allegiance,
the teaching of Darwinian or
evolutionary science in public education,
the role of faith and religion in health care
the value of affirmations of
religious faith on the political hustings,
and – internationally – the efforts of French President Jacques
Chirac to ban ‘overt religious symbols’ in
public schools in France
in an effort to maintain secularism throughout the educational
The impact that these occurrences have on the fiber of contemporary society
is significant, and – at the same time – truly
incalculable. It is
made more problematic because of a failure of the system to agree, in the first
instance, on a unified definition
This situation parallels that
state which also exists in international
Because of this present vacuum, it has
been suggested that in lieu of defining religion, it would be more practicable
to consider
it as a belief, identity, or way of
Regrettably, the law – from a
national context or perspective – has not risen to the challenge and
structured an unerring
definition. Rather, the United States Supreme Court has
chosen to define religion in
United States v Seeger
by stating that
[T]he test of belief ‘in a relation to a Supreme Being’ ... is
whether a given belief that is sincere and meaningful occupies
a place in the
life of its possessor parallel to that filled by the orthodox belief in God. ...
In August, 2001, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Alabama, Roy
Moore, installed a two and a half ton monument to the Ten
Commandments as the
centerpiece of the rotunda in the Alabama State Building – intending, as
such, to remind the citizens of
the state of his personal belief in the
sovereignty of the Judeo-Christian God over both the state and the church. The
Federal District
Court ordered, subsequently, the removal of the monument
finding its placement to be in violation of the Establishment Clause of
Amendment to the
Constitution
, which forbids the government from making any
‘law respecting the establishment of
On appeal, the Eleventh
Circuit affirmed
and the United States
Supreme Court refused to review the case.
While the judicial disposition of this case is now
the issues of the extent to which
the acknowledgment and expression of religious faith, within the ambit of state
action, and is
consistent with the Establishment Clause of the
Constitution
remains a highly vexatious matter.
Defining the appropriate role of religion in town squares and the
nation’s public buildings has, of late, however, focused on
the extent to
which religious monuments may be placed appropriately on public
This has become a new, energized
national issue because of the pervasive concern that distinctive American moral
values that underpinned
the founding of the Nation are eroding and, further,
that society is becoming Godless.
addition to key cases in Alabama
it has been reported that some two
dozen disputes over the placement of monuments to the Ten Commandments or
similar displays have
– since 2000 – been taken to the courts for
settlement.
Early in 1980, the United States Supreme Court recognized the Ten
Commandments as a ‘sacred text in Jewish and Christian faiths’
which ‘no legislative recitation of a supposed secular purpose can blind
us to that fact’.
It did not hold,
however, that not all government uses of the Commandments are taken as
impermissible.
Subsequently, in 1988, the Supreme Court – while acknowledging the
subtle ways in which the values of the Establishment Clause
susceptible to a single verbal
formulation’
– reaffirmed its
decision in
Everson v Board of Education
which structures the modest framework
for analyzing issues under the Establishment Clause.
A democratic and political process tied more to television sound bites than
intelligent and informed deliberations among its citizens
is a process
guaranteeing itself of lethargic inactivity if not stagnation. It is for the
judiciary to fill the breach and continue
its role as interpreters of the Common
Law and when need be, architects of the new Age of Biotechnology. Ideally, when
cases of profound disagreement arise over issues of medical science,
courts and legislatures should remain passive and allow resolution
disputes within each concerned family unit and, where possible, their church
community of faith.
Oftentimes, the at-risk
family and its religious support groups are unable to cope with understanding
the ramifications of ultimate
decisions regarding medicine. ‘Meditating
structures’
can only go so far in
discerning and promoting legal justice – or, the obligation to support the
common good.
The common good is shaped by
the legislatures and the courts and – ultimately – it remains for an
enlightened judiciary
to interpret its course. It is regrettable, but a fact in
contemporary society, that every complex moral issue is more often than
transformed into a legal issue.
and morality intersect in daily life, it is not surprising that the courts are
called upon to arbitrate.
Invariably, law
supports some visions of how life should be lived within the community while, at
the same time, undermining others.
The purpose of this essay is to explore the conjunctive and disjunctive
influences that religion has in one specific field of current
socio-political
debate: namely, biomedical technology and ethical decision
More specifically, the role of
religion as an equal – or, as the case may prove to be – limited
partner with law and
medical science in assessing the dimensions and patterns of
application of the new startling biotechnologies will be evaluated. Central
this inquiry will be a consideration of the legitimacy of, in the first
instance, evolutionary science and its acceptance in public
– for, it is this science
from which the whole study of genetics and eugenics arise and which in turn
direct and validate the
very framework for the new
biomedicine.
From this analysis it will be seen that far from being antagonistic to law
and medicine, religion and religious principles stabilize
the field of
biomedicine and serve, additionally, as vectors of force in shaping both ethical
and moral constructs for decision making.
In turn, each of these three disciplines complements and strengthens what should
be the ultimate goal of the state namely: to secure
the happiness, spiritual
tranquility and well-being of its citizens. This purpose is, in turn, advanced
– and thus enhanced
– by safeguarding the genetic well-being and
general health of its citizens.
toward this goal and meeting it eventually will have the effect of minimizing
human suffering and maximizing the social good
that derives from rational and
humane actions taken to displace man’s genetic weaknesses from the line of
inheritance.
II DIALOGUE BEGINS
A primary goal for many religious thinkers has been to develop a process for
determining how to lead science and technology toward
a level of awareness and
appreciation of human and environmental
Given the growing trend of placing
and then testing scientific development within a framework of moral
understanding and normative
values, the choice is ‘having theologians and
religious ethicists contribute a theological perspective or having scientists
attempt to be moral
philosophers’.
The foundational texts of most religious communities, as well as scripture
itself, do not address the complex issues of biotechnology
and molecular
biology. While the religious texts do establish broad ethical norms for
purposeful living, the task becomes one of
adapting a mechanism for them to
apply to the biomedical issues of contemporary society; in other words, how to
re-shape and, thus,
modernize them into a constructive dialogue with science
– one which escapes the confines of abstract applications and offers
specific guidance and modern ethical norms for resolving concrete biomedical
Whether it is practical to pursue the development of a common framework for
morality and ethical analysis within the context of the
New Biology, is
problematic.
Advocates of post modernism
argue that a ‘Christian rather than denominational approach to
bioethics’ is to be preferred.
Whatever course is followed, the challenge
remains the same: namely, how to show – and thereby attempt to restate
relevance of these religious principles to a skeptical secular
In an effort to address the basic theological and ethical issues associated
with the new medico-science technologies and, thus, engage
the issue, much study
has been undertaken over the years by various ecumenical and denominational
bodies beginning in 1973 with the
efforts of The World Council of Churches to
study the ethical significance of science and
technology.
Through the succeeding years,
various other studies were commissioned by various organizations such as the
World Conference on Faith
and Science and The Future. Interestingly, their
findings were never granted any official standing but merely accepted as the
of each study panel.
Catholic Church did – however – in 1987, begin to both clarify and
shape the official dialogue for its members
through the issuance of its
‘Instruction on Respect for Human Life in Its Origin and on the Dignity of
All too often, a recitation of traditional beliefs is set forth without an
interpretation of their implications for scientific
applications.
While of marginal universal
significance, these faith-based denominational efforts nonetheless provide a
rich opportunity for education
and interaction as well as for the development of
a broader-based perspective on the religious, moral and ethical ramifications of
the New Biology.
Only time will tell
whether these ‘seedlings’ will take root from these critical
engagements and provide normative values
for biomedical decision making.
As the astonishing positive successes of genetic research and engineering and
of genetic medicine continue to be charted with clarity,
the role of moral
theology – grounded in various faith traditions – should be used to
frame guidelines for determining
if and when various specific applications of
these technologies, within an appropriate ethical context, may be utilized.
McCormick suggested the controlling consideration should be, ‘Will
this or that intervention (or omission, exception, policy,
law) promote or
undermine’ the integrity of the human
The central concern of Fr Richard A McCormick is the integrity of personhood.
For him, personhood begins at conception and, accordingly,
would be violated by
human stem cell experimentation, cloning, and generally,
fertilization.
In this regard, McCormick is
– as opposed to
– in his viewpoint. Long
range or societal benefits from scientific advances of this nature and other
genetic research are
of secondary concern.
Drawing upon a contemporary interpretation of
tikkun olam
the mandate to participate in an active partnership in the repair and perfection
of the world – the Jewish community
supports scientific discoveries and
human applications of genetic research.
And, interestingly for Presbyterians, ‘prophetic inquiry’ directs
that they endeavor to utilize modern technology and
science in affirming the
dynamic character of the creation through the teachings and interpretations of
the biblical tradition.
Law and policy making as well as administrative and judicial decision making
should not – indeed, cannot – favor one denominational
theology over
another. Rather, balanced decisions must be made incorporating, when
appropriate, moral, ethical (eg, religious) values
with scientific objectives
for individual growth and societal advancement. When cases or issues for
consideration arise, they are
just that: individual and fact sensitive. Yet,
nevertheless, their evaluation can be undertaken by a template shaped by a
of costs versus benefit: use or non use – all designed to
achieve a positive, just good.
No substantive resolutions are needed. The role for the various church
theologies should be, rather,
‘interrogative’.
dialogue between science and religion to be effective, ‘fallibilism’
must then be an acknowledged given. In other
words, both parties need to accept
the proposition that they may not only be incorrect in their understandings of
each other, but
‘in their inferences about the implications of their
positions, in their development of their own arguments and even in some
claims they have never
questioned’.
Love and Justice
While there are differences between a legal order, system of morality and set
of religious beliefs, it does not follow that contemporary
legal order does not
contain elements of moral religious
All laws are norms set within a
hierarchy whose foundation is to be found in love; for it is within the primary
form of love that
justice is found.
Augustine saw the ethics of love as the essence of
For him, without the ethics of
love, there could be no true orderliness – this, because nature would be
disturbed by man’s
wilfulness.
Without love there could be no justice for there would be lacking a cogent
motive, and pattern, for men to render to other men their
due. ... without love
as a gift of God’s grace man could not love the proper things
In addition to including rules and concepts, law is – at its most basic
level – but a set of relationships among
Despite the obvious tensions or discontinuities between law and religion, one
cannot truly flourish without the other. Without religion,
law degenerates into
little more than a mechanical legalism; and religion without law loses its
social effectiveness.
There are four elements shared by law and religion: ritual, tradition,
authority and universality.
Within every
religion is found two legal elements – one which relates to the social
processes of the particular community sharing
a faith and the other ‘to
the social processes of the larger community of which the religious community is
Indeed, it has been
suggested that the two major dimensions of man’s social life may be seen
as law and religion even though,
as such, they are dialectically interdependent
vectors of force.
In the final analysis, perhaps it is best to see law as a way in which both
justice and love are translated into complex social situations
within various
communities.
Since love is situational, it
has been argued persuasively that it – rather than binding rules and
principles – should direct moral responses (
) at all levels of decision making in issues of the New
Accordingly, the standard of
humane treatment in end-of-life cases should be shaped and guided by love and,
similarly, scientific
decisions regarding the suitability of investigation. In
one case, the construct is personal and in the other it is
communitarian.
III CONSTITUTIONAL PHILOSOPHY
Ever since America was founded, the national symbol has been an eagle
supported in its flights and its destiny by two powerful wings:
plain reason or
common sense and humble faith.
The founding
generation drew its common sense from not only the traditional wisdom of ancient
philosophers and moralists, but from
scriptures;
for, it was evidence to them
that a faith in the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob was an ideal magnification
of human reason.
Indeed, for the founders,
of all philosophies and religions, Judaism and Christianity served as the best
unified foundation for republican
institutions because they encouraged virtue
and sharpened a zest for liberty.
From the very beginning of the Nation, the ‘dominant metaphor for
church-state relations was that public officials must act
as “nursing
fathers” to the religious and moral habits of the
Put simply, as a religious
people, the majority of early Americans believed wholeheartedly that they owed
their liberty to their creator.
In the United States
Constitution
, the action to separate church from state
was driven significantly by the same recognition that religion concerns itself
with differing
senses or levels of reality than those of the political
Accordingly, two clauses in the
First Amendment enunciate with clarity the boundaries of church and state
– the Establishment
Clause forbids the government from making any
‘law respecting the establishment of religion’, and the Free
Exercise of
Religion Clause prohibits the government from restricting religious
belief or practice..
While these two
clauses, especially the second one, are taken in contemporary society as
affirming rights of individual conscience
together with the appropriateness of
religious pluralism, there is strong historical evidence suggesting however that
the framers
were more interested in recognizing the establishment of religious
duties free from state interference.
One of two driving and very practical forces behind the crafting of the
religion clauses in the First Amendment was an evangelical
conviction that
religion – and not just individual conscience – was to control a
limited government that in turn must
be subordinate to a sovereign God. A second
fundamental conviction undergirding the separation of church and state was that
should, quite simply, be secular and not religious. It was this
unyielding view that was in direct opposition to the Republican belief
state should support religion in order to promote public morality. It was mainly
on the arguments that, for the sake of
religious integrity, religion should be
insulated from state support, that the secular view of the state triumphed in
the Establishment
Religion’s Role
The role of religion in a constitutional democracy is, surely, at the apex of
current legal and social debate.
questions about religion involve moral issues, they are presented regularly both
to the courts and to the legislatures. Furthermore,
since these two bodies are
not ‘philosophically reflective enough to deal with moral issues which are
integral to debates on
difficulties in meaning,
interpretation and application are a given. Under these circumstances, it could
be viewed as improper to
demand of the state that it be subject
‘the higher law of
Nevertheless, it has been
suggested that since the ‘bedrock of moral order is religion’,
politics and morality can only
be viewed as
inseparable.
Interestingly, today
political activists now include religious believers who seek not only to shape
public policy but often to seize
If the proposition is advanced that only religion provides morality with a
foundation,
then it follows that
religion may be taken as an ‘independent moral force’ in American
Yet, the extent of its
independence remains a complex and volatile issue. While some religions advance
civic responsibility as a
noble virtue and set high levels of moral performance
in daily life, others stress a form of political withdrawal and personal
and, still others, are obsessive and
Historically, however, religion is seen as an associative force that serves
to strengthen moral solidarity as well as political
attachment.
This is seen dramatically in
the work of various communities of faith where strong welfare organizations are
developed which, in
turn, draw upon high levels of popular participation in
promoting multiple forms of everyday
assistance.
IV THE LAW OF RELIGION IN AUSTRALIA AND PERIPHERAL ISSUES
Although Cicero is thought to have been responsible for attempting to define
today the courts continue to
grapple with a contemporary definition. A commonly accepted lay definition of
the term states that a
religion ‘means belief that the totality of
existence includes objective overall purpose or significance beyond pure reason
or the senses’.
The High Court of Australia did not deal directly and definitively with this
issue until 1983 in the case of
Church of the New Faith v Commissioner of
Payroll Tax (Vict)
overturned two appeal decisions of the Supreme Court of Victoria which had held,
in essence, that – under the Victorian
Payroll Tax Act
– the Church of the New Faith, formed to promote Scientiology, was not a
religious institution whose ways were exempt
for payroll tax under the Act.
In the three judgments in
Church of the New Faith
, two were written
jointly – the first by Mason CJ and Brennan J, the second by Murphy J and
the third by Wilson and Deane JJ.
All three judgments attempt to define, and
thereby interpret, religion.
For the Chief Justice and Brennan J, theism is not an essential element of
religion. Rather, ‘it is belief in a supernatural
being, thing or
principle’ and ‘the acceptance of conduct to give effect to that
Thus, religion not only
encompasses conduct but belief as well. Indeed, beliefs, practices, and
observances are all central to this
For Murphy J, casting his judicial net as far as possible, the validity of a
religion’s claim that it truly is a religion is
tested by, broadly,
evaluating the centrality of its position and whether it proposes a way to
achieve purpose in life. Accordingly,
‘[a]ny body which attempts to be
religious and offers a way to find meaning and purpose in life is
religious’.
The third judgment, authored by Wilson and Deane JJ, references its
foundation to then current meanings of the word, religion, in
the United States
and thereby presents as much broader template for analysis which may be thought
of as somewhere between the previous
judgments in the case at
Under their opinion, a range of
indicia test is used in the ultimate determination – among them being
whether the claimed religion
espouses a belief in the supernatural or ideas
relating to man’s inherent nature and peace within the universe and
among its identifiable group followers, particular standards of
behavior having supernatural significance and, furthermore, that
the adherents
of the religion maintain their practices or ideas in fact constitute a
Indeterminacy and Extra-Legal Norms
When hard cases arise in the law and relevant statutes, common law, contracts
or constitutional law provisions, do not clearly resolve
a dispute in question a
state of indeterminacy results.
how this is to be resolved remains unclear. Some argue that non-comprehensive
extra-legal norms such as religious views may
‘guide’ – and
only guide – judicial decision-making in such
Others contend judges have a
right to include religious sources when justifying decisions even though such
values are not shared universally
even by the litigants. Still others suggest judges must always first seek to
develop an analysis that follows a secular model
– except in those cases
involving issues of human worth where religious arguments may then be
considered.
The nature and extent to which interdisciplinary or extra legal normative
outreaches should be tolerated remains problematic. Suffice
it to suggest that
contemporary law in action would incorporate the Kirby Ethic and allow religious
values, when pertinent to the
resolution of a particular case, to be allowed so
long as they are acknowledged specifically as being a part of the judicial
of a case at bar.
existing legal authority proves inadequate, conscientious exploration dictates a
judge search out the real bases of legal
principle and legal policy –
whatever grounding they may have.
Political Underpinnings
Religions, and the moral theologies attendant to them, have a decidedly
political character.
Indeed, Judaism,
Christianity and Islam are regarded, in the main, as political. While being
prophetic, they have sought nevertheless,
and continue to seek, to challenge the
socio-political
and attack the economic inequalities of
society as well as endeavor to protect the sick and unhealthy and be a voice for
and other marginalized interest
When ecumenical political dialogue is engaged, it is a significant and
positive undertaking because it provides a forum where citizens
and members of
faith communities can seek consensus or more often to merely diminish dissension
or simply clarify issues of common
disagreement, ‘but always to cultivate
the bonds of political community, by reaffirming their ties to one another, in
their shared commitment to certain authoritative politico-moral
Often defined as a Christian nation, America still advocates a discursive
indeed tolerating, an open debate on religion itself becomes the short run or
immediate goal. When, however, religion does
not inform the debate, but rather
undergirds it, the central concern is the extent to which ‘belief or
nonbelief in a God makes
the difference in one’s normative
A distinct feature of modernity is the notion that law is totally secular,
without a founding God and, thus, independent of any divine
command other than
the force of human reason
which is, of
necessity, directed toward the establishment of intelligible
A contrary view suggests,
‘everyone must invoke some God or other because ... everyone has to speak
normatively’ –
for participation in any public activity calls for an
acknowledgment of the need for law.
No doubt, the central question to be posited today is: in a constitutional
democracy defining itself as a secular polity, can religion
ever be represented
as the basis of the rule of law?
law’s secular legitimacy be derived from religious principles, values,
moral teachings or practices apart from validating
a specific historical
Finally, does moral adherence
to a body of law require belief in a God or
Throughout most of recorded human
history, there has always been a connection between God and the
For example, the all inclusive name
the Bible uses for ‘God’ is
which means
‘authority’ – first, divine and secondarily,
Whatever the template contemporary analysis is tied to – a covenantal
theology of the Bible, Platonic natural law, Hobbesian
natural law or a
philosophically informed morality seen in the English Common Law – in
America, ‘the majority of the
citizens believe themselves obligated by a
prior, divine morality, despite the fact that most of them are unable to argue
theoretically’.
the philosophers and moral theologians to make these
V CHRISTIAN THOUGHT AND EVOLUTION
While Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species first appeared in 1859 and
advanced a theory of organic evolution, arguing –
as such – current
living species evolved from pre-existing species, more than a century earlier a
French naturalist, Chevalier
de Lamarck, advanced a theory of progressive
evolutionary development derived from ‘vital forces within living things
inheritance of acquired
characteristics’.
Rather than
accept Lamarck’s theory that the process of natural selection was driven
by a benign process of individual adaption,
Darwin postulated a ‘survival
of the fittest’ process in evolutionary development. Indeed, the central
feature of Darwinism
became the concept of natural
For the Christian world at that time, the ultimate challenge of Darwinism to
it was stated thusly: ‘Beneficial variation was
random and natural
selection cruel. If nature reflected the character of its creator, then the God
of a Darwinian world acted randomly
The Darwinian theory of
a mindless process of natural selection suggests a universe not only blind to
life and humanity but totally
indifferent to its
Yet, within this theory was
found the elements of what is termed ‘evolution theodicy’. This, in
turn, gave rise to a movement
that advocated the acceptance of God’s
aloofness or separation from natural evil and thus stood outside a strictly
framework of analysis but instead was wedded to metaphysical
presuppositions about the nature of
Interestingly, while philosophy and science have always been influenced by
theology – and especially so with evolutionary theory
evolutionists deny steadfastly the
Yet, as observed, a central
metaphysical presupposition infuses the whole of the technical ordering of
evolutionary science: namely,
that evolution’s success is tied to a
doctrine of God. In other words, ‘[i]t is a theological view that preceded
historically and became the metaphysical landscape on which the theory
was constructed’.
Today, one of
the leading authorities in the field has suggested that the process of evolution
should be seen within an historical
context which, in turn, serves as an
enhanced guide to understanding
It is thought that evolutionary information comes from two central sources:
the science of genetics and from contemporary
From this comes the view that
religion is to be seen ‘as an information system within culture that is
part of the effort of
nature to understand itself and conduct itself in
The interrelatedness of all creation is shown time and again by scientific
work in genetics. Indeed, the new DNA discoveries restate
with convincing
clarity the shared evolutionary heritage of all living
and the constant lifetime
interaction between genes and the
environment.
Interacting with the
biological sciences as a co-efficient, or at least a vector of force, in
influencing the total development of
the individual is the environment –
both the cultural and the physical. Because of the fact that, as cultural
beings, individuals
shape the contexts in which social interactions occur, they
exhibit an inherent capacity for ethical behavior and spiritual
development.
Indeed, the mystery of the
human spirit and the capacity for self-transcendence will never be eliminated by
the New Biology.
While human nature is illuminated by genetic science, it is not explained
totally. The complexity, transcendence, and mystery of the
human person remains
and thus serves as a reference point of intersection between culture and
theology as well as the natural
A positive force in
contemporary society is to be seen in the new and ongoing dialogue between
genetics, molecular biology, and the
theology of human nature which seeks to
build upon these very points.
distinctly religious voice in, for example, medical ethics becomes passive or is
lost, this in turn encourages a form of moral
philosophy for the market place
and thus places law as the dominant source of
It can only be hoped that from
this inter-cultural discourse will come new frameworks for principled decision
making which, in turn,
promote reasoned and balanced ethical responses to
personal and societal challenges of this age of the New
A Papal Clarification
On October 23, 1996, in an address by John Paul II to the Pontifical Academy
of Science, the Holy Father suggested science and religion
are compatible.
Science can purify religion from error and superstition, religion can purify
science from idolatry and false absolutes. Each can draw
the other into a wider
world, a world in which both can
As to the specific issue of the theory of evolution, the Pope acknowledged
that it is ‘more than just a
hypothesis’.
While not mentioning
Charles Darwin by name, the statement is seen nonetheless as advancing the idea
that religious faith and the
teaching of evolution can co-exist
Indeed, while observing that
there are a number of different theories of evolution, the Holy Father, went on
to observe that, ‘[i]t
is possible to accept evolution as a theory while
affirming that the spiritual and philosophical elements must remain outside the
competence of science’.
for Roman Catholic theology, what had been – up to this time – the
most significant point of argument and division
between the genetic revolution
and theology as a body of thought,
longer in issue.
Today, a consensus has been reached not only among scientists – and
biblical scholars, but mainstream religions and educators
as well, that the
theory of evolution is a verifiable account of the origins of
With the Pope’s acceptance
of evolution as a theory, comes the realization that, as such, ‘[s]cience
is not a threat to
Accordingly, what John
Paul II has done, hence, is to chart a middle position between the creationists
and evolutionists which, in
turn, fosters not only dialogue but an openness to
Darwinism and Intelligent Design
In 1991, Philip E. Johnson constructed the philosophical underpinnings of a
contemporary intelligent-design movement which, in essence,
asserts the theory
of Darwinian evolution is based on inaccurate assumptions and weak
More specifically, the small
and vocal number of biologists, chemists, philosophers and mathematicians who
constitute the membership
of the movement, argue that because of the refusal of
mainstream science to consider anything but natural explanations for things,
is therefore biased subjectively against proofs of supernatural intervention in
the evolutionary process. Thus, the efficacy of
the evidence for evolution
through natural processes is called in
Proponents of the theory of intelligent design believe, simply, that an
intelligent agent (but not necessarily using the word, God)
has guided the
history of the earth.
Criticized as not
being a science, the president of The National Academy of Science has termed
intelligent design as nothing more
than a ‘way of restating creationism in
a different formulation’.
For the vast majority of the scientific community, evolution began billions
of years ago and was both unsupervised and impersonal.
Yet, others find
significant gaps in the scientific record that leave evolution more a theory
than a documented fact. Accordingly,
they put forth the notion that the
evolution of the species took place over time by the grand design of a
transcendent personal creator.
These ‘creationists’ also contend
that the true age of the earth should, as inferred from the Bible, be computed
in thousands
of years – not
With the publication in 1965 of
The Genesis Flood
, the term,
‘creation science’ was introduced into the American
vocabulary.
Soon thereafter, a whole
movement took shape.
Followers of the
creation science movement, termed creationists, adopt the Biblical narrative of
the Book of Genesis as their theory
accepting as such the creation
of the world by a personal God.
creationists, only two possible constructs can be employed to resolve the
question of the origin of life and of the universe:
theistic and atheistic. In
other words, God is acknowledged as the creator of history or life and seen as
an evolutionary dynamic.
The book of Genesis has not been accepted in the public school classrooms of
the Nation as a teaching source nor has creation science
succeeded in re-shaping
mainstream science. Indeed, led by the National Academy of Science, mainstream
scientific organizations have
rejected totally the creationist
Central to the claims of the legitimacy of creationism is an apparent
conundrum: normally, if creationists accept the Bible as true
and infallible,
why is it regarded as important to link science with it? The answer given is
that since creationism does not qualify
as a science in that it does not afford
a set of hypotheses capable of being tested, a higher level of legitimacy is
sought for it
by placing science at its heart or as its
‘Modern Americans
cling to scientific rhetoric no matter what the
Indeed, ‘scientific
sanctification’ validates many conservative beliefs by attributing
scientific credibility to their
interpretations.
What is seen in
reality, then, is that by shifting attention from issues of faith and value to
those of scientific interpretation,
the scientific creationists have
‘reduced the Bible to the level of a science
Since mainstream Christians and Jews do not see the Bible and evolutionary
theory as inconsistent, modern creation science is not
a contemporary issue of
great moment.
Rather, they understand
that science, itself, can neither tackle and resolve the moral issues of the day
nor serve as a template
for living life to the fullest. Put simply,
‘whether rejected or accepted, evolution cannot speak to the vital issue
and wrong’.
Scopes and Its Aftermath
When in 1925 in Dayton, Tennessee, a high school science teacher, John T
Scopes, taught a class on evolutionary theory, a national
debate was thereby
triggered over the origins of humans which – in turn – forced the
Nation to confront not only its
fears and suspicions of scientific knowledge,
but its application and uses as well.
essence, the ‘Scopes Monkey Trial’ pitted religion, and a
fundamentalist view of divine creation (eg
creationism) against
scientific thought on evolution. It became a harbinger of the utilization of
evolutionary biology that did not
begin however until after World War
In 1925, the Tennessee Legislature became the first state in the Nation to
enact a law against the teaching of evolution in the public
schools. Not only
was Darwinism banned, but all teaching concerned with human evolution as well
and criminal sanctions were imposed
for violations. Originally initiated by the
ACLU as a means of invalidating the state’s anti-evolution statute as a
of the First Amendment, in the end, Scopes lost and was found guilty
by a jury and the court imposed a fine of $100. On appeal, the
Supreme Court of
Tennessee went back to the original legal issue – that is, whether the
anti-evolution statute was inconsistent
with the state constitution’s
religion clause which forbade preferences being given, by law, ‘to any
religious establishment
or mode of worship’. With but one dissent, the
court held that the challenged legislation was constitutional. Yet, on a
technicality,
Scope’s conviction was reversed. Since, under the Tennessee
Constitution
, any fine greater than $50 could be assessed only by a jury, it was
held that the trial judge had no jurisdiction to impose the $100
The historians of the 1950s and the commentators of the 1930s saw the Scopes
trial at two levels: both groups agreed that it was a
defeat for fundamentalism,
while the commentators of that period during which the trial occurred saw it as
a ‘media spectacular’.
In the end, then, perhaps the Scopes trial can be viewed properly as ‘a
step in the triumph of reason over revelation and science
superstition’.
otherwise, the enduring importance of Scopes is that it embodied the
quintessential ‘American struggle between individual
liberty and
majoritarian democracy, and cast it in the timeless debate over science and
The Scopes controversy
continues to persist even today.
recast now as ‘creation science’ (as opposed to creationism) versus
The Continuing Debate: Strategizing Against
It was not until 1968, and the case of
that the federal
constitutionality of prohibiting the teaching of evolution in public schools was
decided by the United States Supreme
Court. Here, again, the ACLU joined in
seeking a declaratory judgment against a forty year old anti-evolution statute
which had never
been used. With but one dissent, the Court held that the statute
was void because it sought to establish a religion and thus violated
Establishment Clause.
purpose alone became the Court’s basis for striking the
Stated simply, it was held
that there could be no state prohibition against teaching a scientific theory or
doctrine for reasons that
would counter the fundamental principles of the First
In 1987, in the case of
Edwards v Aguillard
, the United States Supreme
Court held that a creationism law in Louisiana forbidding the teaching of the
theory of evolution in public
elementary and secondary schools, unless
accompanied by instruction in the theory of creation science, was invalid
facially as violative
of the Establishment Clause of the 1st
The purpose of the challenged
legislation was to discredit evolution by counter balancing its teachings at
every turn with the teaching
of creationism – either of which would
promote the beliefs of certain religious
With the ultimate demise of the anti-evolution statutes through
, opponents of the theory of evolution have two, possibly three,
strategies in their present battle to eviscerate or bury the theory.
attacks have centered on supporting attempts to exclude evolution from being
taught in the classrooms altogether –
asserting as such that the teaching
of evolutionary theory promotes the religion of secular
Accordingly, its inclusion in
public school science curricula violates the Establishment Clause of the US
Constitution
. Courts have rejected this view generally – holding that the
theory of evolution is scientific and, thus, not to be taken as
a religious
The second strategy has focused on efforts to either compel the teaching of
creationism as another valid scientific theory on the
origins of life or,
alternatively, to discredit the validity as well as the importance of the theory
of evolution in the sciences.
This strategy has been advanced by efforts to
legislate in the states Balanced Treatment Acts designed to require public
to give balanced treatment to creation science with evolution
This approach has also not been
successful.
Another clever approach – and no doubt the third strategy – to
advancing the creation science movement, has been seen
more recently in 1999,
with the actions of the Kansas State School Board in adopting a new statewide
science curriculum which wipes
out virtually all mention of evolution and
related concepts such as natural selection, common ancestors and the origins of
the universe.
While the science
standards did not prohibit the teaching of creationism, they discouraged clearly
the teaching of evolution. Even
though these standards were but guidelines, thus
allowing each school board within the state the freedom to decide whether to
to teach evolution, the State School Board had the final authority to
determine the content of standardized tests. Accordingly, it
was decided –
beginning with the 2000-2001 school year, that both the 7th and 10th grade state
science examinations would not
contain questions regarding the origin of life,
the earth and the universe. The practical effect of this decision is that the
of evolution in the classroom is now discouraged, at best, and –
at worst – eliminated totally.
November, 2000, a new state board of education was elected in Kansas. It
proceeded to reject the 1999 science standards and went
on to adopt in February,
2001, new standards which identified evolution as one of the unifying concepts
of science.
One overriding point remains clear: since the U.S. Supreme Court failed to
address clearly in
Edwards v Aguillard
the multiple relationships and
interactions of religion, science, and secular humanism within the bounds of
public school education,
unending controversy will
Indeed, all of the Supreme
Court’s decisions since the Tennessee Supreme Court’s decision in
Scopes v State
have failed to slow the spread of creationism. Rather,
they have encouraged fundamentalists, more and more, to abandon
evolution-teaching
public education for creation-affirming church affiliations
or home schooling where their faith, and that of their children, can
be nurtured
and sustained.
New Outreaches and Challenges
Even with the ‘failures’ of public education to accommodate
fundamentalism in curricular offerings, with higher education,
however, a most
interesting occurrence is being recorded: that is, religion – as an
academic subject – is no longer confined
to divinity schools and Sunday
pulpits. Today, it is probed, and its relevance examined, in undergraduate and
graduate programs in
sociology, political science, international relations,
business, and medicine.
surprisingly, this new-found student interest in the field of religion and the
quest to make its tenets applicable to the
contemporary problems of daily
professional living is having the effect of reshaping the content and the
direction of the whole of
However, the extent to which
explicit religious arguments should be introduced into public debate remains an
open-ended issue.
VI CREATIVE PARTNERSHIP?
Religion, and its denominational theologies, set normative standards for
ethical conduct and, thus, serve as a construct for social
decision making.
Alternatively, as suggested, these norms and constructs can be seen properly as
a third culture – interpreting,
reconciling and stabilizing law and
medical science. Yet, if the view is accepted that the ‘bedrock of moral
order is religion’,
it must follow
that law and science not only build upon it but are linked irretrievably to it
in all of their present policies and
The alternative hypothesis suggests the synergistic forces of law, religion,
and science combine in a dynamic partnership to form
a communitarian alliance
dedicated to providing a framework in which man can pursue the peace of ordered
harmony which allows for
a balanced happiness in his social, spiritual, and
physical relationships.
alliance, the rank or equality of status depends largely upon the frame of
reference taken for each problem presented Historically,
there can be no
disputation of the first order significance of the moral and ethical theories
and principles derived from religion.
Indeed, it has been suggested that without
religious beliefs, moral teachings merely ‘hang in the air’ without
any foundation.
In contemporary society,
however, law – as has been suggested – must assume the primary role
of directing and stabilizing
all courses of human affairs – fortified in
interpretative analysis, to be sure, by ethical and moral principles. In public
matters, however, if not a Jeffersonian ‘wall of separation’ between
matters of church and state, then at least a Madisonian
‘scrupulous
neutrality’ must be maintained if faithfulness to the original intent of
the framers of the
Constitution
While Americans believe in ‘The Living
Constitution
‘morphing document’ evolving from age to age according to majority
– expressed and manifested
ideally, as such, through a ‘deliberative’ democratic
(sadly, not guided by informed
judgment) – the central weakness to this theory of living
constitutionalism is that there is
no one guiding principle for it to
In contemporary issues of
bio-medicine, there is little ‘rational’ deliberation by the
populace. This condition, in turn,
forces the judiciary – as interpreters
of the laws and the social conscious – to define and inevitably test
current medico-legal
issues by the text and legislative history of the
Constitution
thereby providing, ideally, both predictably and stability to both
an evolving and highly contentious area of the
Compatibilities and Incompatibilities
The duality of man or the recognition of his spiritual and material sides,
has not been the grounds upon which contemporary science
has advanced. Rather
than challenge and attack this concept, science has merely set it aside and
defined as non-scientific all inquiries
into spiritual
As the scientific dialogue has
assumed increasingly that man is no more than matter and energy, dualism has
nearly disappeared.
Yet, throughout
modern science, there remains a continuing search for an intersection point
between values and empiricism.
Perhaps the noblest and most practical point of balance between religion and
science should be love, justice or humaneness –
for its achievement by man
promotes the essence of faith by instilling meaning and value to the
life-experience and also enhances
one’s overall physical well being.
Stated otherwise, the fulcrum of this balancing test between religion and
science is the
achievement of a point of equilibrium that promotes policies and
shapes direct actions that minimize suffering and improve the social
of all men.
There is a common
misperception that religion needs only faith in order to sustain itself. The
correct understanding is that ‘religion
requires belief and belief is
built on knowledge’.
differing contexts, both science and theology, then, seek truth and wise
Toward Reconciliation
Not every scientist must become a believer nor every believer embrace science
totally in order for there to be a reconciliation between
science and faith.
While viewed from vastly different perspectives, the biblical and the scientific
description of the creation of
the universe and the beginning of life on earth
present identical realities. Once these perspectives are identified, they can
rather comfortably. If an acceptance of the need to read and understand
the Bible on the Bible’s terms – complete with
subtextual levels of
interpretation – is understood and science then admits it is powerless to
either confirm or deny a purpose
for life, a true reconciliation between science
and faith will be achieved.
Scientific investigation is in fact very similar to religious experience. In
science, the defining event is when that which was unknown
becomes visible and
even clear. In spirituality, experiences with meaning, purpose, and teleology
are foundational. Thus, semantic
differences remain small between scientific
insight and what is termed – in the language of religion –
revelation.
VII CONCLUSION
Shaping a Unified Goal and Response
The theologies of the world religions not only demand an answer but also
prompt a response to the problem of suffering – for
they assist in seeking
an explanation to, or rationalization of, suffering. In one very real sense,
then, the New Biology is considered
properly as a theological response to the
enigma of human suffering. The medical scientists and physicians endeavor to
cure. Through
therapeutics and investigation, the purpose of religion and
medical science is the same: to minimize or ameliorate
It remains ultimately for law to serve as a primary mechanism for effecting
this duality of purpose through wise and humane legislation,
administrative
policy making, and judicial interpretations designed to assume both distributive
and corrective justice in the delivery
of health care and the advancement of
medical science
which, in turn, promote
the personal dignity, value and integrity of the human
Law’s Challenge and The Kirby Ideal
In the ‘dreamtime’ of tomorrow, comparative jurisprudence and
international law – together with a reliance on interdisciplinary
disciplines – will be the touchstones for contemporary lawmaking which
seeks to both elevate and thereby validate the nobility
of the human purpose and
protect its free and oftentimes diverse
eschews parochial strait
jackets and, instead, codifies humanistic
and recognizes its compass must
always point to the advancement of human
If lawyers are to continue to play a relevant role in the
‘dreamtime’, they must become more aware of the nature and
consequences
of the scientific and technological advances of the
Otherwise, they will not only
‘increasingly lack understanding of the questions to be asked, let alone
the answers to be given’.
is well to remember that ‘doing nothing has just as many consequences as
doing something’.
‘Unless interdisciplinary machinery can be developed, capable of
consulting the experts and the general community and helping
[legislatures] with
social and legal implications of medical developments’, we must then be
forced to acknowledge the inability
of democratic institutions to respond to the
challenges of science and technology – unmistakenly ‘the great
of the 21st century.
is well to remember that even though science promises an unpredictable future,
futures are inevitably unpredictable.
The most fundamental lesson to be learned from the march of science and
technology, then, is that in order to foresee development
of the future,
controlled leaps of the imagination must be engaged
In the final analysis, the
observations of Kirby J are pertinent:
If democracy is to be more than a myth and a shibboleth in the age of natural
science and technology and more than a triennial visit
to a polling booth, we
need a new institutional response.
- one that is both informed and guided by the Kirby Ethic.
If we fail in this challenge, Kirby J continues, ‘we must simply resign
ourselves to being taken’ where the machines of
science and technology
Such a pathway ‘may
involve nothing less than the demise of the Rule of Law as we know
Indeed, as Windeyer J
cautioned in 1970, if law does not keep pace with medicine, it will continue to
march ‘in the rear’,
It is for ‘society to
decide whether there is an alternative or whether the dilemmas posed by modern
science and technology,
particularly in bioethics, are just too painful,
technical, complicated, sensitive and controversial for our institutions of
government’.
BS, JD, Indiana University-Bloomington;
LLM Columbia University; LLD, Indiana University-Bloomington. Professor of Law,
The Catholic
University of America. The research and writing of the essay began
in Spring, 2005, when the author was a Visiting Fellow at the
Emory University
Center for the Interdisciplinary Study of Religion and continued while was a
Visiting Fellow at Wolfson College,
University of Cambridge, in June. Some of
the ideas in this essay had their genesis in the author’s book,
Christian Religion and Biotechnology: A Search for Principled Decision
(2005). Finally, Professor Smith expresses his gratitude to Dean
Rosalind Coucher and her colleagues on the Faculty of Law during
his stay as a
Visiting Professor at Macquarie during July – August, 2005.
Michael D Kirby,
Reform the Law
See Michael D Kirby,
Through the
World’s Eye
(2000). See also Michael D Kirby, ‘The Human Genome
Project – Promise and Problems’
Journal of Contemporary
Health Law and Policy
See George P Smith, II,
‘Distributive Justice and Health Care’
Contemporary Health Law and Policy
Michael D Kirby, ‘Bioethical
Decisions and Opportunity Costs’
Journal of Contemporary
Health Law and Policy
George P Smith, II, ‘Setting
Limits: Medical Technology and the Law’
[2001] SydLawRw 13
Sydney Law Review
A James Reichley,
1 Corinthians 13:8.
Michael D Kirby, ‘The New
Biology and International Sharing – Lessons From the Life and Work of
George P Smith, II’
Indiana Journal of Global Legal
Kirby, above n 1,
, 6, 13, 40. See also Kirby, above n 3,
Through the World’s
Kirby, above n 1,
Reform the Law,
Ibid 6. See also Kirby, above n 3,
Through the World’s Eye
See generally, Michael D Kirby,
‘Teaching Australian Civics’
[1997] QUTLawJl 12
Queensland University of
Technology Law Journal
Michael D Kirby, ‘Health, Law
and Ethics’
Journal of Law and Medicine
, 35. See also
Kirby, above n 1,
Reform the Law
. Tony Blackshield, Michael Coper and
George Williams
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of
(2001) 394-396. See generally, Cyrile John Radcliffe,
and its Compass
(1961); Michael D Kirby, ‘Tradition and Diversity
– Twin Strengths of The Judiciary’ (2004) 42
New South Wales Law
Society Journal
. Kirby, above n 1,
Kirby, above n 3,
Through the
World’s Eye
, 202, 238.
Kirby, above n 3,
Through the
World’s Eye
, 395. See Michael D Kirby, ‘Are We All Nominalists
[2004] DeakinLawRw 24
Deakin Law Review
Kirby, above n 3,
Through the
World’s Eye,
. Michael D Kirby, ‘Seven Ages of
[2000] MonashULawRw 1
Monash University Law Review
, 10. See also
Michael D Kirby, ‘Judicial Activism: Authority, Principle and Policy in
the Judicial Method’ (2004) 90,
91, The Hamlyn Lectures; Michael D Kirby,
‘The Impact of International Human Rights Norms: A Law Undergoing
[1995] UWALawRw 1
University of
Western Australia Law
See generally, Howard Davis,
Human Rights and Civil
Lord Cooke, xv in Kirby, above n 3,
Through the World’s Eye
Kirby, above n 3,
Through the
World’s Eye,
Kirby, above n 3,
Through the
World’s Eye
See generally Hugh Heclo, ‘An
Introduction to Religion’in Hugh Heclo and Wilfred McClay (eds),
Religion Returns To The Public Square: Faith and Policy In America
‘Symposium on Religion in The Public Square’ (2003) 17
Law, Ethics and Public Policy
Larry Copeland,
‘Church-and-State Standoffs Spread over
USA’ (2003)
Glassroth v Moore
F Supp 2d 1290 (MD
Ala, 2002), aff’d
[2003] USCA11 221
335 F 3d 1282
(11th Cir, 2003);
Van Orden v Perry
125 S Ct 1240
(2005). On 1 October 2004, the United
States Supreme Court granted review of
Van Orden v Perry
[2003] USCA5 417
351 F 3d 173
72 USLW 3702
, and will address the question of whether a six foot
high, three foot wide monument presenting the Ten Commandments and located on
stretch of state owned property between the Texas State Capitol and the Texas
Supreme Court promotes the establishment of religion
in violation of the First
Amendment. On this same date, the High Court granted certiorari to review
McCreary County,
Ky v American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky
[2003] USCA6 433
72 USLW 1389.
Here, essentially, the Court will review a lower
court ruling barring an exhibition of displays of the Ten Commandments in court
houses and public school buildings together with other secular documents (eg,
The Declaration of Independence and the Magna Carta)
and symbols which have had
a significant role in shaping the American legal system, as a violation of the
First Amendment’s
Establishment Clause. On 27 June 2005 in
, a 5-4 court held a valid secular purpose was to be found in the
display of the Commandments donated by the Fraternal Order of Eagles
40 years ago, as but one of seventeen sculptures on the State Capitol grounds
– and, as displayed, they have a dual
historical and religious meaning and
did not promote a significant religious message which violates the Establishment
73 USLW 4690
(28 June 2005). In
, decided the same day, a
5-4 court held that was no valid secular purpose on courthouse displays of the
Commandments. The crucial
difference in the two cases is to be found in the
origins of the displays – for, in
, the Commandments were
displayed first, by themselves, on the courthouse walls in Kentucky by county
officials. Other historical
documents were not added to the displays until the
American Civil Liberties complained that – standing alone – the
Commandments
promoted religion:
73 USLW 4639
(28 June 2005).
Nedow v United States
[2003] USCA9 127
328 F 3d 466
(9th Cir, 2003), cert granted in part
Elk Grove Unified School District v Newdow
[2004] USSC 2325
124 S Ct 2301
(2004). On 14
June 2004, the US Supreme Court held that Michael A Nedow had no standing to sue
the school district where his daughter
attended elementary school, on her
behalf, to ban the words, ‘under God’, from the Pledge of
Allegiance:
[2004] USSC 2325
124 S Ct 2301
(2004). Interestingly, an April 2004 Gallup Poll
revealed only 8% of the public wanted the ‘under God’ clause removed
from the Pledge – with 91% wishing to retain it. See Charles Lane,
‘Justices Keep “Under God” in Pledge’,
(Washingon, USA), 15 June 2004. See generally Martin J McMahon,
Constitutionality of Regulation or Policy Governing Prayer, Meditation or
‘Moment of Silence’ in Public Schools
(1992) Annotation,
ALR Fed] 211.
See generally James Moore,
‘Charles Darwin’ and Peter J Bowler, ‘Evolution’ in Gary
B Ferngren (ed),
Science And Religion: A Historical Introduction
`Claudia Kalb, ‘Faith and
(New York City, USA), 10 November 2003.
Jim VandeHei, ‘A Spiritual
Struggle for Democrats: Silence on Religion Could Hurt Candidates’,
Washington Post
, (Washington, USA), 27 November 2003. See generally E J
Dionne Jr, ‘Faith Without Fealty: It’s Time to Free Religion
Party Politics’
Washington Post
, (Washington, USA), 19
October 2004; William Carey, ‘American Democracy and The Politics of
Faith’ in Heclo, above n
26; Reichley, above n 7,
Keith B Reichburg, ‘French
President Urges Ban on (Islamic) Head Scarves in Schools’
Washington Post
, (Washington, USA), 18 December 2003; Keith B Reichburg,
‘French Senate Approves Ban on Religious Attire’
Washington Post
, (Washington, USA), 4 March 2004. See Steven G Gey,
‘Free Will, Religious Liberty, and a Partial Defense of the French
to Religious Expression in Public Schools’
In June, 2005, the University of Leicester NHS Trust in
England announced the placement of Bibles in hospital bedside lockers by
International was ending – this, because it was determined that some
ethnic minorities might be offended by this continued
practice. See Nick
Britten, ‘Offensive Hospital Bibles May be Banned’,
, (London, UK), 3 June 2005. Later that month, the Newham General
Hospital in East London removed a crucifix from a prayer room because
the room too Christian. See Tom Whitehead, ‘Fears as Christian Symbols
Disappear’,
The Daily Express
, (London, UK), 6 June 2005. See
generally, Jeremy T Gunn, ‘French Secularism as Utopia and Myth’
Houston Law Review
; Nikki R Keddie, ‘Secularism and
Its Discontents’ (2003) 132
Jeremy T Gunn, ‘The Complexity
of Religion and The Definition of “Religion” in International
Harvard Human Rights Journal
Ibid 200-205.
[1965] USSC 49
, 165-166 (1965).
Glassroth v Moore
F Supp 2d 1290 (MD
Ala, 2002), aff’d
[2003] USCA11 221
335 F 3d 1282
(11th Cir, 2003).
Moore v Glassroth
[2003] USSC 7577
(2003) (cert denied).
‘Alabama Judge Removed: Moore Installed Monument to
Commandments’
Washington Post
, (Washington, USA), 14
November 2003 (reporting on the removal of the Chief Justice from his office of
the Supreme Court of Alabama
by a unanimous Court of the Judiciary of
See generally, Ronald D Rotunda,
Modern Constitutional Law: Cases and Notes
(6th ed, 2000). The Australian
Constitution
has a similar clause: Section 116 of the Australian
Constitution
states: ‘The Commonwealth shall not make any law [(i)] for establishing
any religion, or [(ii)] for imposing any religious
observance, or [(iii)] for
prohibiting the free exercise of any religion, and [(iv)] no religious test
shall be required as a qualification
for any office or public trust under the
Commonwealth’.
See Copeland, above n 27.
See generally, Paul
Finkelman, ‘The Ten Commandments on The Courthouse Lawn and
Fordham Law Review
In a September, 2003,
pool of 1,003 adults conducted by USA Today/CNN/Gallup, it was determined that
70% of the respondents approve
of the placement of Ten Commandments monuments in
public places. Ibid
Glassroth v Moore
2d 1290 (MD
Ala, 2002), aff’d
[2003] USCA11 221
335 F 3d 1282
(11th Cir, 2003).
Van Orden v Perry
[2003] USCA5 417
, 176 (5th Cir, 2003).
Copeland, above n 27.
Stone v Graham
[1981] USSC 4
[1981] USSC 4
, 42 (1980)
in teaching a secular study of comparative religion, history or civilization is
acceptable.
Allegheny County v Greater
[1989] USSC 146
, 591 (1988).
[1947] USSC 44
Douglas W Kmiec,
Cease-Fire on the
Family: The End of the Culture War
Peter L Berger and Richard J Neuhas,
To Empower People: From State to Civil Society
(1996) 148-49. See
generally George P Smith, II,
Family Values and the New Society: Dilemmas of
the 21st Century
Kmiec, above n 52, 97.
. M Cathleen Kaveny, ‘Law,
Morality and Common Ground’,
(New York City, USA), 9
December 2000, 7.
See generally R Kent
Greenawalt, ‘The Use of Religious Convictions by Legislators and
Church and State
See generally George P Smith, II,
The New Biology: Law, Ethics and Biotechnology
See generally R Kent Greenawalt,
‘Establishing Religious Ideas: Evolution, Creationism, and Intelligent
Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethics and Public
George P Smith, II, ‘Genetics,
Eugenics and Public Policy, the Family: Exploring the Yin and the Yang’
[1984] UTasLawRw 2
University of Tasmania Law Review
See generally, George P Smith, II,
‘Intrusions of a Parvenu: Science, Religion, and The New Biology’
Pace Law Review
George P Smith, II,
‘Biotechnology and the Law: Social Responsibility v Freedom of Scientific
Mercer Law Review
Ibid. See also George P Smith, II,
‘Manipulating the Genetic Code: Jurisprudential Conundrums’
Georgia Law Review
, 733. I am, of course, expanding the
‘unalienable’ rights to life, liberty and happiness set out in the
Declaration of
Independence to include, modernly, the right to access good
genetic health since being healthy is required usually for total happiness.
Audrey R Chapman,
Unprecedented
Choices: Religious Ethics at the Frontiers of Genetic Science
See William B Drees,
‘Playing God? Yes! Religion in Light of Technology’ (2002) 37
Journal of Religion and Science
. Chapman, above n 64, 25. See William B
Drees, ‘Where to Look for Guidance? On the Nature of Religion and
Science’ (2004)
Zygon: Journal of Religion am Science
. Chapman, above n 64, 25. See
generally, Tad S Clements,
Science vs Religion
(1990). See Stephen P
Weldon, ‘Postmodernism’ in Ferngren, above n 30 (discussing whether
postmodernism is not so much
a departure from modernist thought as merely an
extension of it and whether religion must be made compatible with a scientific
understanding
of the world).
. Chapman, above n 64, 31-32.
. Chapman, above n 64, 32. Various
reports, policy statements and studies have been commissioned by eight major
North American Protestant
denominations (including the Methodist, Episcopal,
Lutheran, Presbyterian and Baptist churches) which address the religious and
ramifications of the science of genetics. Ibid 34
See generally, Kevin D O’Rourke
and Philip Boyle,
Medical Ethics: Sources For Catholic Teaching
1993). But see, George P Smith, II, ‘Quality of Life, Sanctity of
Creation: Palliative or Apotheosis?’
Nebraska Law Review
. Chapman, above n 64, 40.
. Chapman, above n 64, 37.
. Richard A McCormick,
The Critical
Calling: Reflections on Moral Dilemmas Since Vatican II
(1989) 267.
See Sarah Delaney, ‘Pope
Condemns Cloning of Human Embryos and Organ Transplant Technology’
Washington Post
, (Washington, USA), 30 August 2000. See generally Cindy
Wooden, ‘Human Cloning Would Be A Crime Against People’,
, (Washington, USA), 14 August 2003.
. Drees, above n 66, 45.
Drees, above n 66, 44-46.
David H Smith, ‘Creation,
Preservation and All The Blessings’ (2001) 81
Anglican Theological
. Ibid 568-569. See generally Ian
Religion in an Age of Science
Samuel E Stumpf, ‘Theology and
Jurisprudence’
Vanderbilt Law Review
. Jerome Hall, ‘Religion, Law and
Ethics – A Call for Dialogue’
Hastings Law Journal
St Augustine,
The City of God
(John Healey trans, 1931) book xix, c.1, 12-14. One finds happiness – or
attains the peace of a rational soul (defined, in
turn, as an ordered harmony of
knowing and doing) – only within society itself. The happy life, then, is
social and is guided
by love which is seen as service and acknowledged as the
universal good. Ernest Barker makes these points eloquently in his introduction
to this translation at xxv – xxvii, xxxiv, xliii. See generally, Raymond B
Marcin, ‘Justice and Love’
Catholic University Law
Hall, above n 81, 1270.
Hall above n 81, 1270. See generally,
Martin Rhonheimer,
Natural Law ad Practical Reason: A Thomist View of Moral
(Gerald Malsbary trans, 2000).
Harold J Berman,
The Interaction of
Law and Religion
Harold J Berman,
Faith and Order:
The Reconciliation of Law and Religion
See, Joseph Fletcher,
Medicine and
(1954). See also, George P Smith, II, ‘Stop in the Name of
Anglo-American Law Review
See generally, George P Smith, II,
‘Setting Limits: Medical Technology and the Law’
[2001] SydLawRw 13
Michael Novak,
On Two Wings: Humble
Faith and Common Sense at the American Founding
(2002) 27. See also
Reichley, above n 7, Ch. 3.
Novak, above n 93, 28-29.
Ibid 30-33. See generally, E Brooks
Christian Thought from the Age of the Puritans to the Civil
Novak, above n 93, 70.
Novak, above n 93, 77. While the
framers valued the contribution religion made to morals, ‘they distrusted
faith, the transcendent
dimension of religion, the yearning for the divine
likely to express itself in prophecy, theology, or mysticism’. William
McWilliams, ‘American Democracy and the Politics of Faith’ in
Heclo, above n 26, 147.
Fred M Frohock,
(1992) 140. See generally, R Kent Greenawalt, ‘Diverse
Perspectives and The Religion Clauses: An Examination of Justifications
Qualifying Beliefs’
Notre Dame Law Review
Ibid. See J Hunter and O Guinness
Articles of Faith
Articles of Peace: The Religious Liberty
Clauses and the American Philosophy
Frohock, above n 99. See generally,
David L Faigman,
Laboratory of Justice
(2004); Herbert Hovenklampt,
Science and Religion in America
(1978) 1800-1860.
‘Religiously Based Morality: Its Proper Place in American Law and Public
Wake Forest Law Review
, 401. See also
John Witte Jr, ‘The Theology and Politics of The First Amendment Religion
Clauses: A Bicentennial Essay’
Emory Law Journal
David Novak, ‘Law: Religious
or Secular?’
Vanderbilt Law Review
, 570. See R Kent
Greenawalt, ‘Religion as a Concept in Constitutional Law’
California Law Review
See generally, Reichley, above n 7; Philip
Religion and the Law
(1962); R Kent Greenawalt, ‘The Use
of Religious Convictions by Legislators and Judges’
of Church and State
Symposium, above n 102, 371.
See Charles E Rice,
Abortion: The Theory and Practice of the Secular State
(1979) 135.
Ronald Reagan, ‘Politics and
Morality are Inseparable’
Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethics
and Public Policy
See generally, James Carroll, ‘Why Religion Still
Matters’ (2003) 132
Michael Walzer, ‘Drawing the
Line: Religion and Politics’
Utah Law Review
Stephen L Carter,
The Culture of
Disbelief: How American Law and Politics Trivialize
Walzer, above n 107, 624.
Walzer, above n 107, 630.
Walzer, above n 107, 630.
Reichley, above n 7, 22.
Reichley, above n 7, 22.
[1983] HCA 40
(1983) 154 CLR, 120.
earlier cases –
Adelaide Company of Jehovah’s Witnesses Inc. v
The Commonwealth
[1943] HCA 12
(1943) 67 CLR 116
Kryger v Williams
– the High Court chose not to take decisive action on this
definitional issue.
See generally, David Malcolm,
‘Religious Tolerance and The Law’
Australian Law
(1983) 154 CLR, 132.
Bruce Kaye, ‘Case Note and
Commentary, an Australian Definition of Religions’
[1991] UNSWLawJl 16
of New South Wales Law Journal
(1983) 154 CLR, 151.
Kaye, above n 118.
(1983) 154 CLR, 173-174.
generally Hans Mol,
The Faith of Australians
(1985); Stephen McLeish,
‘Making Sense of Religion and The
Constitution
: A Fresh Start for
[1992] MonashULawRw 10
Monash University Law Review
Mark C Modak-Truran,
‘Reenchanting The Law: The Religious Dimension of Judicial Decision
Catholic University Law Review
Kent Greenwalt,
Consciences and Public Reason
(1995) 142.
Wendell L Griffen, ‘The Case
for Religious Values in Judicial Decision-Making’
Michael J Perry,
Religion in
Politics: Constitutional and Moral
(1997) 104.
Kirby, above n 22,
Michael L Perry,
Love and Power:
The Role of Religion in American Politics
(1991) 77. See also Chapman, above
Ibid 124-125.
Novak, above n 103, 575-576. See
generally, Martin E Marty, ‘Over Religious Secular World’ (2003) 132
Novak, above n 103, 576.
Ibid 576-577.
Ibid 573. See generally,
Pierre Schlag, ‘Law as the Continuation of God by Other Means’
California Law Review
Novak, above n 103, 574.
Novak, above n 103, 575.
Novak, above n 103,
Novak, above n 103, 596. See Ronald
Law’s Empire
(1986) 407.
Edward J Larson,
Summer for the
Ibid 16. The theory of evolution
focuses on changes in life once begun rather than the origins of life.
Ibid 17. See generally, Michael R
Darwin’s Spectre: Evolutionary Biology in the Modern World
Chapman, above n 64, 169.
Cornelius G Hunter,
Darwin’s God
(2001) 145-159.
Ibid 159. See generally, John F
Deeper Than Darwin:
The Prospect for Religion in the Age of
Stephen J Gould,
The Structure
of Evolutionary Theory
(2002) Ch 2-7.
above n 64, 172,
citing Philip Hefner,
The Human Factor: Evolution, Culture and Religion
Ibid 173, citing Philip Hefner,
The Human Factor: Evolution, Culture and Religion
(1993) 156.
Ibid 178. See generally, Mary
Nature and Morality
See James M Gustafson,
Intersections: Science, Theology and Ethics
(1996). See also Chapman,
above n 64, 199-204.
Chapman, above n 64, 15 (relying
upon the philosophy of Daniel Callahan).
See generally Roger L Shinn,
New Genetics: Challenges
For Science, Faith and Politics
Bernard J Ficara,
Fact, Fiction or Fancy
(2001) Ch 21.
John Tagliabue, ‘Pope
Bolsters Church: Support for Scientific View of Evolution’,
, (New York, USA), 25 October 1996. See Robert J Russell, William R
Stoeger and George V Coyne (eds),
John Paul II
On Science and
Ficara, above n 161, 124. See
Michael Ruse,
The Relationship Between Science and Religion
(2001). See
also Russell,
above n 162.
Chapman, above n 64, 235.
From Genesis to
(2002) 190-191.
Edmund D Pellegrino,
‘Theology and Evolution in Dialogue’ (1997) 79
Q Rev Biology
Phillip E Johnson,
(1991). See Michael Powell, ‘Doubting Rationalist: Intelligent
Design Proponent Philip Johnson and How He Came to Be’,
, (Washington, USA), 15 May 2005.
See Robert T Pennock (ed),
Intelligent Design Creationsim and its Critics: Philosophical, Theological,
and Scientific Perspectives
(2001). See generally, Greenawalt, above n
Brian J Alters and Sandra M Alters,
Defending Evolution in the Classroom: A Guide to the Creation/Evolution
Controversy
(2001). See Edward B Davis and Robin Collins, ‘Scientific
Naturalism’ in Ferngren, above n 30, 322 (analyzing the advocates
intelligent design attacks on scientific naturalism or the claims that
’all objects, processes, truths, and facts about
nature fall within the
scope of scientific method’).
Beth McMurtrie, ‘Darwinism
Under Attack’,
Chronicle of Higher Education
, (USA), 21 December
2001. See generally, Francis Beckewith, ‘Science and Religion Twenty Years
After McLean v Arkansas: Evolution,
Public Education, and The New Challenge of
Intelligent Design’
Harvard Journal of Law and Public
Pennock, above n 170.
John C Whitcomb and Henry M Morris,
The Genesis Flood
(1965). See Dorothy Nelkin,
The Creation
Controversy: Science or Scripture in the Schools
Judith Villarreal, ‘God and
Darwin in the Classroom’
Chicago-Kent Law Review
Arlie Hoover,
The Case for
Teaching Creation
Judith Villarreal, above n 175,
Judith Villarreal, above n 175,
351. See Hugh Ross,
The Genesis Question: Scientific
Advances and the
Accuracy of Genesis
(1998) Ch. 11.
Steven Goldberg,
Ibid 35-36.
Ibid 38-39.
Ibid 39. See generally Ficara,
above n 161, Ch. 18.
Scopes v State
154 Tenn 105,
289 SW 363 (1927).
Gilbert Merritt, ‘From the
Scopes Trial to the Human Genome Project: Where is Biology Taking the
University of Cincinnati Law Review
Edward J Larson, ‘The Scopes
Trial and The Evolving Concept of Freedom’
Vanderbilt Law
Larson, above n 143, 239. See
generally, Edward A White,
Science and Religion in American Thought: The
Impact of Naturalism
Larson, above n 143 227.
Ibid 265. See generally, John H
Science and Religion: Some Historical Perspectives
Jon Christensen
Teachers Fight for Darwin’s Place in US
Classrooms’
New York Times
, (New York, USA), 24 November
Villarreal, above n 175, 345; Dan
Sheid, ‘Evolution and Creationism in The Public Schools’
Journal of Contemporary Legal Issues
[1968] USSC 204
Larson, above n 188, 524.
Larson, above n 188, 525.
[1987] USSC 120
. For an analysis of whether
creation science is really science or merely the religious doctrine of divine
creation repackaged in
jargon, together with arguments for creationism from the
Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause of the
Constitution
Sheid, above n 194, 100; Charles Freid,
Saying What the Law Is: The
Constitution
in the Supreme Court
(2004) Ch 5
; Faigman, above n 101,
318-323. See generally, Jay D Wexler, ‘Darwin, Design, and
Disestablishment Teaching the Evolution Controversy
in Public Schools’
Vanderbilt Law Review
See also Bert Thompson,
The Scientific Case for Creation
Wendell Bird, ‘Note; Freedom
of Religion and Science Instruction in Public Schools’
Law Journal
Colleen McGrath, ‘Redefining
Science to Accommodate Religious Beliefs’
New York Law
School Review
, 303. See Theresa Wilson, ‘Evolution, Creation, and
Naturally Selecting Intelligent Design Out of the Public Schools’
University of Toledo Law Review
Ibid 303. See Ark Stat Ann §
80-1663 (1981); 17 LA Rev Stat Ann § 286 (1981); Tenn Code Ann §
49-2008 (1973).
McGrath, above n 200, 305-309. See
McLean v Arkansas
529 F Supp 1255 (ED
Ark 1982) often referred to as
‘Scopes II’, where state legislation mandating balanced treatment of
creation science
and evolution science in public school curricula was held
unconstitutional thus thereby dealing a death blow to the teaching of
creationism
and, by implied reference, the teaching of Intelligent Design.
Beckewith, above n 172, 458.
Hanna Rosin, ‘Creationism
Evolves: Kansas Board Targets Darwin’,
Washington Post
(Washington, USA), 8 August 1999. But see, Larry Witham, ‘49 States
Mandate Teaching Evolution’,
Washington Times
, (Washington, USA), 8
April 2000 (reporting, however, that Louisiana, Mississippi, Georgia, Alabama,
Florida and Arkansas have very
brief and restricted standards in regards to the
teaching of evolution).
McGrath above n 200, 319. See
generally, Jeffrey F Addicott, ‘Storm Clouds on The Horizon of Darwinism:
Teaching the Anthropic
Principle and Intelligent Design in The Public
Ohio State Law Journal
McGrath above n 200, 328.
Villarreal, above n 175, 374.
Larson, above n 188, 261. The
Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act
of 2000 forbids the
government from imposing or implementing a land use regulation that imposes a
substantial burden on the religious
exercise of a person or religious assembly.
This protection also extends to schools run by religious groups. 42 USC §
2000cc(a)(1).
See Caroline Adams, ‘The Constitutional Validity of
Religious Persons Act
Fordham Law Review
See generally R Kent Greenawalt, ‘Hands Off! Civil Court Involvement
in Conflicts Over Religious Property’
Columbia Law Review
Teresa Watanabe, ‘Faiths
Social Reach: Academia Is Getting Religion’,
Washington Post
(Washington, USA), 9 November 2000. For the impact of religious/spiritual
education within medical schools, see also, Harold G Koenig,
McCullough and David B Larson,
Handbook of Religion and Heath
58-59, 437-439 and 455-56 .
Goldberg, above n 179, 130. See
Mark V Tushnet, ‘The Limits of The Involvement of Religion in The Body
Politic’ in James
E Wood Jr and Derek Davis (eds),
The Role of Religion
in the Making of Public Policy
(1991) Ch. 7.
Reagan, above n 106. See generally,
R Kent Greenawalt, ‘The Role of Religion in a Liberal Democracy: Dilemmas
and Possible
Journal of Church and State
See St Augustine, above n 82.
Peter Singer,
Writings on an
Ethical Life
See Witte, above n 102. See
generally, Goldberg above n 179, Ch 8; R Kent Greenawalt,
Convictions and Political Choice
Antonin Scalia,
A Matter of
Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law
(1997) 46-47.
Cass R Sunstein,
The Partial
Constitution
(1993) Ch 4-6.
Scalia, above 215, 44-45.
Scalia, above 215, 44.
Goldberg, above n 179, 18.
Goldberg, above n 179, 18.
Goldberg, above n 179, 135. See
generally, Gustafson, above n 158.
Smith, above n 91.
Gerald Schroeder,
The Science of
John Polkinghorne,
Belief in God
in an Age of Science
(1998) 92. See generally, George P Smith, II,
‘Pathways to Immortality in the Millenium: Human Responsibility,
Theological
Direction or Legal Mandate’ (1996) 15
St Louis Public Law
Schroeder, above n 223, 21, 141.
Science has already sought to close biblical ranks by recognizing there was not
only a beginning
to the universe but that life began on earth rapidly following
water and not through millennia of random sets of reactions. Ibid
29. See also
Arthur Peacocke,
Paths From Science Towards God: The End of All Our
(2001) Ch 1-2.
See Schroeder, above n 223; Arthur
Theology for a Scientific Age
Martin E Marty and Kenneth L Vaux
Health/Medicine and the Faith Traditions: An Inquiry into Religion and
(1982) 209. Interestingly, eighty-four percent of Americans think
that praying for the sick improves their chances of recovery: Kalb,
above n 31,
46. There is no scientific proof that prayer induces healing, however:
‘Symposium, Prayer and Healing: Can Spirituality
Influence Health?’,
CQ Researcher
, (USA), 14 January 2005, 15.
George P Smith, II,
‘Distributive Justice and Health Care’
Contemporary Health, Law and Policy
; George P Smith, II, ‘Judicial
Decisionmaking in the Age of Biotechnology’
Journal of Law, Ethics and Public Policy
See generally, George P Smith,
Genetics, Ethics and the Law
(1981) 164-65.
J Robert Nelson,
Frontiers of Genetics and Religion
(1994) 162. See generally, Smith, above n
63, ‘Manipulating the Genetic Code’; George P Smith, II, ‘Law,
and Medicine: Leeways of Choice, Partners of Discourse’
[1987] UNSWLawJl 23
University of New South Wales Law Journal
. Kirby, above n 22, ‘Seven
Ages of a Lawyer’, 10.
See Kirby, above n 3,
the World’s Eye
xviii, Ch 15.
See generally, Michael D Kirby,
‘Indicators for the Implementation of Human Rights’ in Janusz
Symonides (ed),
Human Rights: International Protection Monitoring,
Enforcements
(2003) Ch 11
; George P Smith, II,
Human Rights and
Biomedicine
Michael D Kirby, ‘Human
Rights – The Challenge of The New Technology’
Australian Law Journal
, 181. See generally, Michael D Kirby,
‘Human Rights and Technology’
University of British
Columbia Law Review
Kirby, above n 22, ‘Judicial
Activism’, 88 fn. 386 (quoting Lord Justice Sedley).
Kirby, above n 1,
238. See also Kirby, above n 16, 31-34.
Owen D Jones and Timothy H
Goldsmith, ‘Law and Behavioral Biology’
Columbia Law
Kirby, above n 3,
Through the
World’s Eye
Kirby, above n 1,
Ibid. See also Kirby, above n 3,
Through the World’s Eye
Mount Isa Mines Ltd v Pusey
[1970] HCA 60
(1970) 125 CLR 383
, 395 (Windeyer J).
Kirby, above n 1,
, 238. See generally, Radcliffe, above n 17; George P Smith, II,
Science and Religion in a Changing World Order: Designing a Template
the Age of Biotechnology
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter