URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2019/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cashman, Peter; Ginivan, Eliza --- "Digital Justice: Online Resolution of Minor Civil Disputes and the Use of Digital Technology in Complex Litigation and Class Actions" [2019] MqLawJl 4; (2019) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 39
PETER CASHMAN*, ELIZA GINNIVAN**
I INTRODUCTION
II DIGITAL JUSTICE THROUGH ONLINE DISPUTE RESOLUTION OF HIGH-VOLUME LOW VALUE INDIVIDUAL CLAIMS
B ODR in Australia
C International Examples of ODR
D Evaluating ODR
E Using Foundational Principles to Assess ODR
1 Access to Justice
(a) Remote and Asynchronous Dispute Resolution
(b) Alternative Dispute Resolution
(c) Pre-action Protocols
(d) The Digital Divide
2 Open Justice
3 Procedural Fairness
(a) Legal Representation
(b) The User Experience of Procedural Justice
(c) Levelling the Playing Field through System Design
(d) User Data to Improve Fairness
E Conclusions concerning ODR in High-Volume, Low-Value Individual Disputes
II THE USE OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY IN LARGE, COMPLEX LITIGATION IN THE HIGHER COURTS
A The Commencement of Litigation: The Development and Management of Client Data Bases by Lawyers
B The Conduct of Litigation: Reviewing Voluminous Documentation Produced on Discovery
C The Filing and Exchange of Court Documents and Evidence by Parties
D The Judicial Management of Documentation and Evidence
E The Conduct of Trials
F Concluding Litigation
G The Administration of Settlement Distribution Schemes
H Some Historical Lessons from the Dalkon Shield Litigation
I Some Lessons from the Vioxx Case and Recent Class Action and Mass Tort Litigation in the United States
III CONCLUSIONS
DIGITAL JUSTICE: ONLINE RESOLUTION OF MINOR CIVIL
DISPUTES AND THE USE OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY IN COMPLEX LITIGATION AND CLASS
This article focuses on two ends of the civil justice spectrum. At one end
are high-volume, low-value disputes confined to specific
facts and legal issues
unique to the disputing parties. Many of these disputes do not presently enter
the traditional civil justice
system. At the other end are complex legal
proceedings which encompass the claims of multiple litigants with similar causes
against one or more ‘common’ defendants, such as class
actions or mass tort proceedings. At both ends of the spectrum,
tension between the desire for individualised justice and the need to facilitate
the resolution of claims in a manner
which is efficient, economical, transparent
and procedurally fair. We examine how digital technology is being deployed to
disputes at both ends of this spectrum. In the first part of the paper,
we focus on the use of technology to resolve high-volume,
low-value disputes
which share a common objective: the resolution of high-volume claims at
low-transaction cost. In particular, we
examine the increasing adoption of
processes and procedures from the world of commerce to resolve disputes in the
public justice
system. In the second part of the article we examine how new
technologies can facilitate the conduct and resolution of large scale,
class action litigation in the higher courts through client intake, claim
management, discovery processes, trial procedures
and the implementation of
settlements. We conclude that online dispute resolution methods have the
potential to achieve, and in many
instances do in fact achieve, the economical
and expeditious resolution of claims in a manner which is transparent and
procedurally
I INTRODUCTION
This article focuses on the use of digital technology to enhance justice
outcomes at both ends of the civil justice spectrum. At one
end are large
numbers of relatively low-value disputes in which the issues are confined to the
specific facts and legal issues unique
to the parties in dispute. Many of these
disputes do not presently enter the traditional civil justice system as the
transactional
costs to resolve them are disproportionate to the amount in
dispute. At the other end are large, complex legal proceedings which
the claims of substantial numbers of persons with causes of action against one
or more ‘common’ defendants,
and which share common issues that may
facilitate resolution through class actions or mass tort proceedings. We examine
of recent developments in which digital technology is being deployed to
resolve disputes at both ends of this spectrum. Although
these digital
technology innovations differ in the methodologies they use, they have a common
objective – the resolution of
high-volume claims at low transaction cost.
Both ends of this civil claims justice spectrum share the goals of facilitating
to justice in a manner which is transparent, procedurally fair,
economical and expeditious.
In the first part of the article, we focus on the use of digital technology
to resolve high-volume, low-value disputes. In particular,
we examine the
increasing uptake of online dispute resolution (‘ODR’) platforms in
public justice systems for the resolution
of such disputes. These ODR platforms
have adopted processes and procedures that were developed in the commercial
realm to deal with
high-volume disputes by consumers of products and services.
One leading example is eBay, which resolves over 60 million disputes
using ODR methodology. In this article, we explore the opportunities and
challenges ODR presents for the resolution of high-volume,
low-value disputes
through the prism of fundamental principles of the civil justice system.
In the second part of the article, we focus on the use of digital
techniques and new and emerging technologies in the management and
resolution of
large scale complex litigation, including class actions, in the higher courts.
We examine a number of ways in which
new technology, at lower cost and with less
delay, may better facilitate the conduct and resolution of large scale complex
litigation,
including through client intake, claim management, discovery
processes, trial procedures and the implementation of settlements.
At each end of this spectrum, as in many other areas of civil dispute
resolution, there is a tension between the desire for individualised
justice and
the need to facilitate the resolution of large numbers of claims efficiently and
economically. This tension exists from
the inception of discrete individual
claims through to the resolution of mass litigation. How this tension is
resolved has important
implications for the parties in dispute and the
administration of justice.
Reform of the civil justice system is a continuous and iterative process to
improve the system and ensure it meets community expectations.
In a rapidly
changing society that is increasingly reliant on digital technology in all areas
of life, the justice system often lags
behind. However, changes in technology
and civil procedure can play an important role in facilitating access to
justice, bringing
costs and delay across the civil litigation spectrum. ODR is increasingly
implemented as a major reform in civil justice systems in Australia and
internationally. At present, various Australian governments,
including in New
South Wales, are considering how to incorporate ODR into the civil justice
system. As we seek to demonstrate, ODR
methods have the potential to achieve,
and in many instances do in fact achieve, the economical and expeditious
resolution of claims
in a manner which is transparent and procedurally fair.
JUSTICE THROUGH ONLINE DISPUTE RESOLUTION OF HIGH-VOLUME LOW VALUE INDIVIDUAL
Origins of ODR
ODR involves the use of information and communications technology to help
parties resolve disputes.
court and tribunal system, ODR is a digital platform that allows people to
progress through dispute resolution for low-value
disputes, from the
commencement of a claim to final determination, entirely online. This process
may involve different methodologies,
including the use of information delivered
through ‘guided pathways’, blind bidding, hybrid alternative dispute
(including facilitated negotiation and early neutral evaluation,
either with human input or artificial intelligence algorithms),
communication (such as remote or video participation in hearings and
asynchronous messaging), and uploading and responding
to evidence online.
ODR can empower parties to resolve disputes early, freeing up court and
judicial resources to deal with complex and serious matters.
It can streamline
court processes and expand methods of access, reducing the need for extensive
physical court infrastructure. In
this part of the article, we examine ODR
initiatives in Australia and other countries. We then consider ODR alongside
principles of the civil justice system: access to justice, procedural
fairness and open justice. These principles were selected as
a starting point
because an ideal ODR platform will incorporate these principles while
facilitating the just, quick and cheap resolution
of disputes. We examine
opportunities and considerations for the implementation of ODR in Australian
civil justice systems and lessons
learned from ODR implementation around the
world to date.
ODR was initially developed in the commercial sphere as a means of dealing
with high-volume, low-value, consumer disputes arising
from online transactions
on e-commerce websites such as Amazon, eBay and PayPal. In these disputes,
parties are often geographically
distant and jurisdictionally distinct. The
complexity and expense of going to court is disproportionate to the amount in
ODR allowed buyers and sellers to resolve straightforward disputes
expeditiously and at low cost, usually by agreement. Offering
an in-built
dispute resolution mechanism also served the commercial interests of these
companies as parties often continued or increased
their consumer activity after
resolving a dispute online, regardless of the
The potential of ODR to resolve disputes efficiently and effectively
eventually attracted the attention of governments, courts and
tribunals around
the world. In the last six years, ODR has been incorporated into domestic
justice systems and processes in several
ways, including as an external process
that feeds into a formal determination, as the default platform for a new
tribunal, and integrated
into a pre-existing court (otherwise known as
‘court-annexed’ or ‘court-integrated’ ODR). ODR is also
to resolve disputes between jurisdictionally distinct parties under
multilateral agreements. Court-integrated ODR has been used to
greatest effect
in high-volume, low-value disputes, where parties are usually unrepresented and
their preference is for rapid resolution
of the claim.
ODR has the potential to transform the efficiency and effectiveness of the
justice system for low-value disputes. ODR can make dispute
resolution more
accessible for people in the community with unmet legal needs. Proponents claim
that ODR improves efficiency and
upholds high standards of justice, while
simultaneously ‘bridging the justice gap’ by reducing barriers of
cost, delay
and complexity that can limit access to
ODR has been presented as
a solution for courts and tribunals experiencing budget cuts, resource
constraints and poor performance
oversight on the progression and determination
of disputes.
While ODR contributes to ongoing efforts to use technology to improve the
civil justice system, it also represents a fundamentally
different approach to
Rather than digitising litigation procedure and practices (which we explore in
the second part of this article), successful ODR models
re-engineer how dispute
resolution processes can be designed to benefit
This includes inverting
dispute resolution design and redirecting investment to the early stages of
dispute resolution, rather than
to court or judicial
This process of redesign distinguishes ODR from previous justice innovations
that use technology to streamline or enhance existing
processes. Further, by
uncoupling court process from both physical premises and paper-based processes,
and rethinking the procedures
required to deliver a just system, proponents
contend that ODR has the potential to overcome the intrinsic tension between
‘efficiency’
and ‘justice’ in the civil justice
in Australia
Court and tribunal ODR is in its infancy in
While ODR is utilised within some state-funded alternative dispute resolution
schemes, the Australian Dispute Resolution Advisory
Council notes that ODR has
not enjoyed the support and development that should be expected in a country
with a geographically remote
population that is an early adopter of
technology.
In 2018, the NSW Government indicated its support for integrating aspects of
ODR into existing court process and infrastructure, providing
a faster, cheaper
way for parties to access the civil justice
This commitment seeks to
further the guiding principle of the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
ensure that civil disputes are dealt with in a way that is just, quick and
In NSW, ODR will build on
existing digital initiatives to streamline court processes such as the Online
Court, e-Registry, eSubpoenas
and Audio Visual Link technology.
Two other notable civil justice system ODR projects are the Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) small claims project
and the Legal Services
Commission of South Australia family law platform. The VCAT project involves
piloting an ODR platform in a
number of small claims with a view to expanding
the platform in the area of small claims and possibly minor criminal and larger
Australian-based
firm Modron has been engaged to develop the platform, which will incorporate
video chat and text chat. The Legal
Services Commission of South Australia has
received seed funding from the Commonwealth Government for a national ODR
platform to
assist separating couples to resolve family law
This platform will
such as agreements that have assisted
other couples and previous judgments, to
illustrate how judges have treated similar
International
Examples of ODR
ODR projects have been introduced in a number of countries. We refer below to
some recent developments in Canada, the United Kingdom,
the Netherlands, the
United States and the European Union.
Established in British Columbia in
the Civil Resolution
Tribunal (‘CRT’) is Canada’s first online tribunal and the
first in the world to be integrated
into a public justice
It is currently the mandatory forum for small claims disputes under $5,000 and
strata property claims of any amount. In April 2019,
the CRT will begin
determining some motor vehicle accident and injury claims up to
The CRT’s mandate is to provide ‘accessible, speedy, economical,
informal and flexible’ dispute resolution
It does this through a
participatory and collaborative approach to dispute resolution which assists
parties to reach a consensual
agreement, with adjudication as a last resort. The
CRT has four stages:
1. Solution Explorer: a free online tool which uses ‘guided
pathways’ to help a person navigate options to resolve their
2. CRT Intake and Negotiation: The initiating party enters the details of the
claim. Notice is served on the other side and parties
have the opportunity to
negotiate directly.
3. Facilitation: An expert facilitator helps parties reach a consensual
agreement using mediation, conciliation or early neutral evaluation.
If an agreement is reached, this can
be turned into a binding order.
If the parties cannot resolve the dispute, the facilitator helps parties prepare
for adjudication.
4. Adjudication: A tribunal member considers the parties’ evidence and
arguments (usually in written form) and then issues a
determination.
Hearings usually
occur ‘on the papers’, but telephone or video conferencing hearings
can be held if credibility or complex
The CRT’s performance is rigorously evaluated through detailed
qualitative and quantitative analysis.
The CRT publishes selected statistics in a monthly
Such data reveals that the
majority of claims (70 percent) are resolved at the facilitation stage and very
few claims require adjudication.
Most participants (69 percent) agreed that the
process was easy to understand
and 82 percent agreed they were
treated fairly throughout the
United Kingdom
Another international example of the aspirational use of ODR is the United
Kingdom’s (‘UK’) £1 billion
Transforming Our Justice
reform program, a wide-ranging courts modernisation program that aims
to reduce the justice staffing pool by 5,000 and save £265
million a year
through lower administration and judicial costs, fewer physical hearings and
courthouses.
Through this program, the entire process for civil money claims will be
automated and digitised by
The ‘Money Claim Online’ pilot, launched in March 2018, is the
initial release of this
Money Claim Online
is a starting point for the development of the ‘digital by design and
by default online
a single online system for criminal, civil, family and tribunal
Money Claim Online
allows people with money claims up to £10,000 to issue a claim, file a
defence and attend mediation.
also allows without-prejudice offers to be made and accepted, and constructs
agreements based on these terms.
The website will be expanded to include facilities for negotiation and
settlement, questioning parties and adjudicating between them,
The pilot has
collected data on user experience and dispute resolution pathways, which
revealed that 80 percent of users said the
service was very good and easy to
The number of matters in
which defences were filed rose from 22 percent to 40 percent and the default
rate dropped from 53 percent
Fifteen percent of
cases were referred to mediation but only 27 percent of those went to the
mediation appointment.
related development, the proportion of incorrectly completed divorce forms
dropped from 40 percent to under 1 percent among
users of the Digital Divorce
ODR processes are also utilised for appeals against parking and traffic fines
in the UK’s Traffic Penalty Tribunal. Parties
can upload evidence,
including video and voice files, to an online platform for instant
Continuous online hearings through asynchronous messaging between the parties
and the adjudicator can take place over several
Decisions made on this
information alone (e-decisions) are the norm, but telephone and face to face
hearings are available in certain
circumstances.
Decisions are
uploaded for viewing by the parties and then sent by post if the decision has
not been viewed within two days, though
this is rarely
Around 80 percent of
Traffic Penalty Tribunal cases are resolved through
e-decisions.
Seventy-five
percent of appeals are closed within 21
Telephone enquiries have
been reduced by 30 percent and there has been a significant saving in the costs
incurred by local authorities
in dealing with
The Netherlands
Rechtwijzer
(‘Signpost to Justice’) was an online platform
for resolving relationship disputes, such as divorce and separation,
landlord-tenant
disputes and employment
Due to the ongoing
nature of the relationships in many of these disputes, the platform focused on
facilitating consensual and sustainable
enabled an online dialogue between the parties and also offered mediation,
adjudication and neutral review of all
agreements.
However, funding for
the website was discontinued as it was deemed financially unsustainable after
United States
In the United States, Matterhorn is a cloud-based ODR platform currently in
use in 40 courts across eight states. It can be bought
off-the-shelf and adapted
to court systems that deal with high-volume claims, including small civil claims
and claims about non-compliance
with child support
It features real time or asynchronous communication, sends reminders to parties
and is optimised for
mobile phone use. A third party (facilitator, mediator or arbitrator) can assist
with the resolution of claims.
Matterhorn user data has demonstrated its platform increases access to
justice and user satisfaction while decreasing the burden on
court resources.
Thirty-nine percent of users reported that they would not have been able to
attend court in person to resolve their
Ninety percent found
the website easy to use and 92 percent understood the status of their case
throughout the online process.
Cases closed in 14 days rather than the 50 days recorded for traditional court
processes, and court staff completed their work in
20 percent of the
Like Matterhorn, Modria is a customisable ODR platform for US and
international courts. Modria provides parties with a diagnosis of
their issue
and the likely process for resolution, which helps them to decide whether to
proceed with their case.
do proceed, the platform collects intake information and opens a web chat
between the parties to facilitate a
resolution.
Either party can
request that the dispute be escalated to a mediator or
arbitrator.
The dispute
resolution process can be tailored to different types of disputes, from simple
debt cases to complicated child custody
This ODR platform has
resolved more than one million disputes around the world and claims to resolve
cases in half the time taken
by traditional
European Union
The European Union’s ODR platform facilitates the resolution of
consumer complaints arising from online transactions in European
The ODR platform
provides a single point of entry for disputes between consumers and traders, and
channels consumer disputes to one
of over 300 certified external ADR
The platform allows
parties to choose their own language and includes automatic translation. The
platform mandates deadlines to ensure
a prompt resolution, such as 30 days for
negotiation and 90 days for ADR.
More than 24,000 disputes were submitted in the first year of operation and 44
percent were resolved bilaterally outside the platform
in the initial
negotiation stage.
In April 2018, the European Union launched the
New Deal for Consumers
policy. One objective of the policy is to give consumers better tools to
enforce their rights and to obtain compensation. As part
of this strategy, the
European Commission stressed the importance of strengthening
As such, it seems likely
that the European Union will adopt more ODR processes in the coming years.
Evaluating ODR
These examples demonstrate the enormous potential of ODR to reform the civil
justice system by increasing access, resolving disputes
earlier and reducing
costs. The integration of ODR into the public justice system can both improve
efficiency and reframe the way
the civil justice system operates in relation to
high-volume, low-value disputes.
For governments, courts and tribunals, ODR’s most attractive feature is
its potential to reduce the cost of the administration
of justice. ODR can
achieve this by: allowing courts to process large numbers of claims with little
human input; potentially increasing
the number of claims filed that require
little cost to manage, thereby increasing fee revenue; reducing the human
resources and physical
infrastructure required to administer justice; freeing up
judicial and registry resources to focus on areas of high demand or significant
delay or backlog such as crime or complex civil litigation; and reducing the
time needed to assist self-represented litigants navigate
a complex justice
system and comply with procedural requirements.
The cost-efficient administration of justice is an appropriate goal of civil
justice system reform. Yet in designing and implementing
system innovations, it
is necessary to look beyond ostensibly ‘objective’ improvements in
efficiency, timeliness and
effectiveness in order to assess more qualitative
elements of the justice system that have no tangible economic value or easily
metric. These elements include considerations such as access to justice,
transparency, procedural due process, fairness and the level
of satisfaction of
participants in the process.
When considering reforms that will reshape how justice is done, it is
pertinent to use the principles underlying the civil justice
system as the
guiding lights by which to chart a path of reform. This is particularly
important when adopting technology developed
in the profit-oriented commercial
sphere for use within the public justice system, which is necessarily guided by
other considerations
in addition to the bottom line.
Due to the nature of the exercise of judicial power, court-integrated ODR
requires a different set of norms, values and outcomes to
private or commercial
ODR. While some commercial ODR initiatives incorporate aspirational values that
align with civil justice goals,
such as transparency, due process and fairness,
commercial ODR is mostly an unregulated field operating within only the
constraints
of contract.
Commercial ODR may have opaque rules, questionable consumer protection and a
lack of independent or appellate
In contrast, courts are
subject to institutional norms and legal requirements, and must accommodate
evidentiary and procedural
These issues can be
disregarded in commercial ODR design but are essential to any public justice ODR
A central question is whether ODR is an improvement on the traditional civil
justice system. Insofar as ODR facilitates the resolution
of disputes that would
never have entered into or been resolved through the civil justice system, it
represents an obvious improvement.
From the perspective of those in dispute, ODR
will either facilitate the resolution of disputes that otherwise would not have
resolved or provide a less expensive, more expeditious and no less
satisfactory resolution than would otherwise have been achieved
through the
traditional civil justice system.
Yet it is important that the purported benefits of ODR are not simply taken
on face value. International experience indicates that
proponents will be
expected to demonstrate, using evidence, that ODR achieves the objectives it
sets out to accomplish. Claims that
ODR will improve dispute resolution has
attracted scrutiny in the UK, where the legal profession and not-for-profit
sector have expressed
concerns that the proposed Online Court may reduce access
to justice, reduce the fairness of the outcomes, diminish the integrity
justice system or privilege efficiency over due process. The UK Committee of
Public Accounts has required the HM Courts and
Tribunals Service to publicly
report how its digital justice reforms will improve access to
In Australia, the
desire to evaluate ODR with reference to evidence was reflected in the Law
Council of Australia’s
Justice Project
recommended investment in research which could inform the uptake of ODR in
Australia, particularly in relation to the
impact of ODR on disadvantaged users,
having regard to their technological and legal capability and the necessary
safeguards to support
disadvantaged
ODR’s data collection capabilities present an excellent opportunity to
collect robust and meaningful data to assess whether
ODR achieves the goals of
providing transparent, procedurally fair, economical and expeditious justice for
high-volume, low-value
Leading international ODR platforms are utilising justice system principles as a
framework to collect data to evaluate system design
and performance. The
CRT’s highly detailed evaluation framework measures many metrics including
the time taken from filing
a claim to resolution, the cost to an individual to
obtain that resolution, the proportion of decisions overturned on appeal and
fairness of the process.
A solid evidence base built around justice principles can inform the design
of an appropriate platform and allows stakeholders to
assess whether, firstly,
ODR is an improvement on traditional justice processes and, secondly, whether
the platform strikes the right
balance between the sometimes competing civil
justice values of fairness and efficiency.
Foundational Principles to Assess ODR
In this section of the article, we examine the opportunities and challenges
presented by ODR through the lens of three foundational
principles of the civil
justice system: access to justice, procedural fairness and open justice. These
well-accepted legal principles
have been adopted as evaluative criteria in
leading international ODR projects, including the UK’s emerging Online
the CRT in Canada.
each of these principles, we will examine opportunities, considerations and
examples in practice from international ODR projects.
Access to courts and tribunals is an essential element of the rule of law and
is a human right enshrined in international
Judicial resolution in a
public setting enhances the legitimacy of the legal system by building public
respect, trust and confidence
Binding decisions
communicate and reinforce norms of social and economic behaviour
while creating precedent and developing the
Access to a court to
resolve a dispute provides the benefits of a (largely) publicly funded, open
process that provides a determinative
outcome and methods for enforcement.
Unlike other dispute resolution options, a court is expected to exercise this
decision-making
power while being consistent, transparent and impartial.
Although courts and tribunals are the enduring symbol of justice, it is
estimated that only three to four percent of civil disputes
end up in courts or
tribunals, with the vast majority resolved through other
Despite this, the
accessibility of these forums is crucial. The remainder of the civil justice
system, including informal and non-legal
dispute resolution, operates in the
shadow of the mandatory and coercive powers of the courts.
Access to justice is a key goal of the civil justice
Yet for each dimension
of access to justice, there are multiple barriers preventing entry. Attending a
court or tribunal is a significant
personal undertaking. In addition to the
obstacles of cost, procedural complexity and delay, the psychological and
emotional toll
of entering into an adversarial dispute resolution process
dissuades many people from taking their legal matter to a court or tribunal.
Failing to provide meaningful access to justice means that disputes may go
unresolved at great social or financial
People may resort to
private or non-binding agreements, capitulate to the stronger party’s
demands, or simply put up with a
problem if it requires too much effort or
expense to resolve. If people cannot readily defend their rights, enforce their
or seek justice, the rule of law is weakened and unfair or illegal
activity can flourish.
ODR is one means to remove or diminish the profound barriers caused by the
cost, time and delay involved in going to
There are two main
structural changes associated with ODR that increase access to justice.
(a) Remote and Asynchronous Dispute
The first is a decoupling of the justice process from physical locations. An
ODR platform can connect an individual to other parties,
facilitators and
adjudicators who may be geographically
With remote participation being the default, parties can participate from
wherever they are – a reversal of the traditional
justice system’s
requirement that all parties be at the same place to progress or resolve a
matter. This makes justice more
accessible by reducing the need for parties,
especially for people in rural, regional or outer metropolitan areas, to travel
significant
distances and incur transport fees to attend a courthouse or wait
weeks or months for an infrequent circuit court visit.
The second change is the move from a synchronous (at the same time) to an
asynchronous (at different times) process. ODR allows people
to progress a
dispute whenever it is convenient. In traditional court processes, all parties
(as well as the judge, the court and
registry staff) are required to be present
at the same time and place, usually in person. This can cause delays due to
conflicts and the unavailability of court resources. Court processes
usually occur during business hours, meaning that if parties
self-represented, they must take time off work or arrange childcare to attend a
hearing. Allowing people to progress disputes
at a time that is convenient to
them improves the flexibility of the civil justice system, increases the
court’s capacity to
handle cases and reduces the barriers to justice
created by court processes which require parties to be gathered at the same
As ODR reduces the cost and time consequences of going to court to resolve or
respond to a dispute, more people who have been marginalised
or excluded by the
court’s traditional operating system may begin to utilise the courts. This
can include people with an ‘unmet
need’ (a justiciable legal claim)
who were prevented from accessing the courts due to geographical or financial
constraints,
including disadvantaged people, caregivers or people with a
disability;
and people who have
‘lumped it’ because the time, cost and complexity of using a
traditional court process were not worth
it for the amount in
(b) Alternative Dispute
A key principle of access to justice is that disputes should be resolved as
early as possible, in a manner proportionate to the amount
or issues in dispute.
Alternative dispute resolution (‘ADR’) is a common method of
obtaining early and appropriate resolution.
ADR is also a core component of
commercial ODR platforms and a feature of successful ODR platforms used in the
context of public
ADR in ODR increases access to justice by allowing people to resolve disputes
at the earliest opportunity, at minimal cost and by
consent (where appropriate).
Intelligent system design can offer bespoke dispute resolution options which
suit the needs of the parties
– for instance, conciliation if resolution
is likely, or early neutral evaluation if one party requires an objective
of the merits of their case.
Most ODR models incorporate at least two standard ADR tools: negotiation and
facilitation (which can include conciliation or mediation).
In Canada’s
CRT, ADR is the default method for resolving disputes, reversing the traditional
model of presuming adjudication
is the end point and ensuring that only the most
intractable disputes, or those where agreement is not appropriate, result in a
determination.
takes the concept of ADR offering a ‘multi-door courthouse’ to its
ultimate form: a system designed to tailor both
technology and dispute
resolution processes to the parties’ specific
(c) Pre-action
ODR’s emphasis on resolving disputes early reflects the objectives of
pre-action protocols. Pre-action protocols are procedural
mechanisms to
facilitate the resolution of disputes before they result in full court
proceedings.
They involve
threshold requirements that parties must, or are expected to, comply with before
starting a court case.
Evidence from the UK, where pre-action protocols have been in place for over
20 years, has shown that these procedures focus attention
on the key issues at
an early stage, encourage greater openness between the parties and facilitate
the resolution of many cases that
would have otherwise proceeded to
litigation.
In Australia,
threshold requirements are already a feature of some court processes and there
are some ‘pre-action’ requirements
for some types of cases in some
Australian jurisdictions. For instance, in the NSW Supreme Court Possession
List, parties are expected
to have narrowed the issues in dispute and discussed
the possibility of settling the dispute by ADR before the initial
However, attempts to introduce more wide-ranging pre-action protocols in
Victoria and New South Wales have been
unsuccessful.
Embedding a checklist of requirements that a party should consider or must
comply with before commencing a claim through an ODR platform
can help narrow
the issues in dispute and encourage ADR. This can encourage the parties to
resolve the dispute in a timely and proportionate
(d) The Digital
ODR relies on parties having both digital access (access to a working
internet connection) and digital ability (the ability to use
the internet to
navigate an online platform). However, sizeable segments of the Australian
population are digitally excluded due
to a lack of digital access and
Practical barriers to digital access include black spots and intermittent
broadband, especially in rural and regional Australia;
accessibility of
websites; the affordability of internet connection; and the limited opening
hours and resources of free internet
providers such as libraries.
This ‘digital divide’ can present a barrier for people accessing
an internet-based platform like ODR. There is a strong
relationship between
digital ability and socio-economic status. Australians with low levels of
income, education and employment are
significantly less digitally
They are also more
likely to experience legal problems and less likely to resolve their legal
problems than other people in the
A platform that does
not address the connection between disadvantage, low digital skills and
exclusion from the legal system risks
entrenching this marginalisation.
The accessibility of ODR is at the forefront of the discussion around digital
inclusion initiatives in the UK. Two landmark reports
have explored how to
reduce digital exclusion for civil justice system
Under the UK’s reform program, the Good Things Foundation has been funded
to provide face-to-face support and assistance in
navigating online forms for
users of digital justice pilots through community-based Online Centres in
libraries, churches and GP
Open Justice
Transparency is a core part of the justice system and open justice is a
hallmark of the exercise of judicial
The principle requires
court proceedings to be open and subject to public and professional scrutiny.
Courts will not act contrary
to this principle save in exceptional
circumstances.
Open justice
has been described as ‘one of the most pervasive axioms of the
administration of justice in common law systems’
and ‘a fundamental
tenet of Australian
democracy’.
Open justice has several practical manifestations. Proceedings are conducted
in an open court, which the public and press can access,
and judgments are
accessible. Information and evidence presented in court are communicated to
those present, and fair and accurate
reporting of judicial proceedings conducted
in open court is permitted.
Open justice ensures judicial accountability and protects against the risk of
a court abusing its decision-making
Open justice also
maintains confidence in the integrity and independence of the courts, educates
the public about judicial application
of the law and reduces the likelihood of
people bringing vexatious claims or giving false
As in other jurisdictions, in NSW there is a presumption that substantive
civil hearings occur in public.
However, open justice can be restricted, particularly where it is
necessary to secure the proper administration of justice or when
it is otherwise
in the public interest.
Suppression orders, hearing evidence ‘in camera’ or hearing certain
interlocutory matters in the absence of the public
are some ways open justice is
altered in NSW. Moreover, open justice only requires scrutiny of the judicial
process and, therefore,
does not apply to every process and procedure of courts
and tribunals.
There is no
freestanding right for the public to access court documents filed in proceedings
and held as part of the court
Material that is not
admitted into evidence or read in open court is generally not available, even
after the conclusion of the
proceedings.
Transcripts of
proceedings are not readily available and are not generally free.
Open justice presents a challenge for ODR given that digital processes can
both expand and constrain open justice. Removing processes
and decisions from a
publicly viewable forum could make the justice system more opaque, resulting in
a loss of scrutiny of judicial
decision-making. Judges, reform officials and
peak legal professional organisations have expressed concern about the loss of
transparency
in the Online Court in the
Some NGOs have asserted
that ODR by its nature threatens open justice, especially when criminal
proceedings are involved.
Journalists have emphasised the importance of public and media access to court
proceedings to ensure visibility and scrutiny of the
On the other hand, digital technology can radically enhance open justice by
making processes and proceedings more observable and transparent.
increase public participation and engagement by allowing people who cannot
access the court in person to view
proceedings.
This can include
through streaming or broadcasting hearings, making messaging transcripts
available and creating a publicly searchable
Members of the
judiciary in the UK have recognised that ‘our digital courts must be open
courts’ and are optimistic that
embedding open justice in digital
platforms presents a technical challenge rather than an insuperable
In the development and implementation of ODR, the meaning and importance of
‘open justice’ may also face scrutiny from
the parties themselves.
Many parties would prefer to resolve their disputes privately. In the process of
resolving a dispute, there
is often disclosure of private and confidential
information, including medical data and financial records. The user-centric
of ODR platform design, which involves understanding the end users’
needs and expectations, may lead to new iterations of open
justice for online
Open justice has traditionally intersected with other rights, including in
respect of reputation, the right to privacy and the right
On a digital platform,
the tension between these rights is amplified, with new challenges arising in
information privacy, the prevention
of cyber-hacking, and data storage and
security. Concerns about information security is reportedly one of the main
barriers to the
adoption of ODR especially, as ODR platforms which are entirely
online are vulnerable to data breaches in a way that current case
systems are not.
The permanence of information and evidence exchanged via ODR is another
contentious issue. Digital platforms generally record all
information exchanged
in a dispute. This means that sensitive information could continue to be
available and potentially misused
in the future. Parties may be dissuaded from
using a service if they cannot be certain that their information will remain
confidential.
ODR platforms
that promote open justice will be required to carefully balance various rights
and take privacy and data collection
and storage issues into account.
For all its novel applications, ODR also represents the next phase in the
evolution of open justice in response to technology changes
from both within and
outside the court. The concept of an ‘open court’ has been adapted
to contemporary civil justice
procedures, such as the increased reliance on
written submissions, affidavits and statements to provide evidence-in-chief
than in-person oral evidence (which was traditionally a key aspect of
‘open court’ by virtue of it being communicated
An observer of court
hearings will frequently witness documents and witness statements simply being
tendered and admitted into evidence
without any open disclosure of their
The courts themselves are spearheading the expansion of open justice by
leveraging technology. For example, in NSW, the Supreme Court
easy-to-read summaries of significant cases and maintains a Twitter account to
alert the public of upcoming decisions.
To engage a broader audience beyond
those who can attend court in person, some higher courts in Australia and
internationally facilitate
recordings of proceedings which can be viewed in real
time or after the event. The Supreme Court of the United States began audio
recording hearings in 1955. Proceedings before the High Court of Australia, the
Supreme Court of the United States and the Supreme
Court of the United Kingdom,
among others, can now be viewed online. It is both necessary and appropriate
that the concept of open
justice reflect its technological and legal context,
and the expectations of the community it serves.
Justice system bodies that have adopted ODR technology have implemented
different approaches to transparency. In Canada, the CRT’s
Information
and Access Policy
provides a framework for openness in respect of the
CRT’s decision-making process, which balances transparent decision-making
with protecting the privacy of parties and witnesses. In the UK, methods under
discussion to ensure open justice in the eventual
Open Court include live
streaming of virtual court proceedings (both online and via ‘viewing
booths’ installed in court
and providing
booths within court buildings to allow the public to access approved parts of
certain court files.
The degree of open justice required in ODR is a vexed question. A leading
judicial proponent of the UK’s Online Court, Lord
Justice Briggs, is
confident that ‘modern IT can facilitate better public access to civil
proceedings than exists at
Other senior
members of the judiciary believe that the ‘delivery of justice should be
as open to scrutiny as Parliamentary
Others argue
this level of openness would be unnecessary and undesirable in most civil
proceedings.
How this tension
will be resolved in the development of ODR systems in Australia remains to be
Procedural fairness is the fairness of the
through which a
substantive decision is
Procedural fairness is an aspect of the general principle that parties are
entitled to a fair hearing. This is enshrined in multiple
places in Australian
law, including the Australian
Constitution
, procedural rules and the
court’s inherent power to prevent abuse of its
The requirements of procedural fairness change depending on the circumstances
of the individual case or the type of
Procedural fairness
generally requires that parties are given a reasonable opportunity to lead
evidence, make submissions, present
a case and cross-examine
The overarching
consideration is ‘fairness’, which is evaluated in the context of
the case itself and having regard to
the interest of justice generally,
including the need to facilitate the timely and economical resolution of
The content of procedural fairness has evolved over time. Traditional civil
proceedings often involved full party control of pre-trial
stages through to a
full hearing with both parties legally represented. More recently, proactive
judicial managerial control can
lead to, amongst other things, restricting the
number of witnesses; not requiring oral submissions; restricting the length of
submissions; limiting the ambit of discovery of documents; and refusing
applications for adjournment.
The transition from party control of civil proceedings to more proactive
judicial case management has given rise to contentious issues
These concerns also
arise within ODR, in which case management is entrenched into the process
through platform design.
Yet overall, ODR presents an opportunity to strengthen procedural fairness by
allowing creative thinking about how to make the process
fairer. Dimensions of
procedural fairness in ODR include the role of legal representation, digital
innovations to improve the justice
experience, creating a level playing field
through platform design and user testing to inform fairness settings.
(a) Legal Representation
Legal representation is a key way that parties have traditionally obtained
procedural fairness in legal matters. However, either by
preference or design,
the individuals in dispute, rather than their lawyers, are the primary
participants in ODR
The intention is
that legal representation is not a prerequisite to successfully resolving a
claim, so a party will not be substantially
disadvantaged if they do not have a
lawyer. This reverses the standard court model of adversarial dispute resolution
where ‘equality
of arms’ means both parties are legally
represented.
The presumption of no legal representation in ODR platforms reflects the
reality of low-value claims. In most traditional court matters,
the costs of
legal representation far outweigh the value in dispute so most people are
unrepresented, often to their detriment. In
the NSW Local Court,
self-represented litigants make up 25 percent of plaintiffs and 42 percent of
defendants in defended
This is a large
proportion of parties navigating a complex legal system without support.
Even if both parties do not need, or choose not to use, legal representation
in the ODR context, a power imbalance may still exist
between the parties. This
may arise from disparity between their resources, education and experience,
cultural factors or the comparative
ability of the parties to reduce the issues
in dispute into a justiciable claim or defence.
Courts already recognise that they must be diligent to ensure
self-represented litigants are afforded procedural
In a similar vein,
successful ODR platforms must go further than simply digitising pre-existing
procedural rules, which would replicate
the current barriers self-represented
litigants face. International ODR platforms have done this through translating
legal rules
and forms designed for legal professionals into plain language and
avoiding the term ‘self-represented litigant’ (a phrase
denotes an exception rather than the
(b) The User Experience of
Procedural Justice
The concept of ‘procedural
as distinct from
‘procedural
’ has gained greater prominence in
discourse about ODR because it adopts a technology-driven focus on human-centred
the user experience. ‘Procedural justice’ arises from an
individual’s perception of the fairness of a process,
which can be shaped
by their experience of control/voice, neutrality, respect, and trust in the
decision-maker.
procedural fairness, procedural justice is not an objective legal principle, but
an individual’s subjective belief about
how they were treated in a given
When a party loses a case in a court setting, they will often be more
satisfied by the outcome if they feel that the proceedings were
procedurally
fair. Similarly, delay has a corrosive impact on party and public perceptions of
the justice system. One interesting
yet unsurprising finding from research on
consumer perceptions of ODR in a commercial context is that expedition enhances
satisfaction
with the process, even when the outcome is unfavourable to the
The digital flexibility of ODR allows experimentation to strengthen
procedural justice. Big data collection and analysis and targeted
qualitative
research can offer ideas for platform and process design. In this regard,
findings from the emerging field of research
into procedural fairness in ODR are
instructive.
For instance, self-represented litigants report a preference for
communicating with judges using ‘lean’ text-based messages
receiving responses through ‘rich’ media such as video
This increases
their sense of being ‘heard’ and reduces feelings of hopelessness,
stress and frustration.
another study, parties preferred receiving interpersonal cues from a
remotely-based decision maker (for example, a picture of
the decision maker or
biographical details) because knowing who was determining the dispute enhanced
participants’ belief that
their contribution was
In the first study, self-represented litigants reported a more meaningful
experience through asynchronous messaging because it gave
them more time to
compose responses than at an in-person
Separately,
litigants who found an online platform easy to use were more likely to view the
process as fair and feel positive about
Determining what ‘standard’ of procedural fairness should be
upheld by ODR forums is a vexed question. Some research findings
indicate users
have the same expectations of procedural justice in ODR as they have with the
traditional courts.
people interact with and expect differing standards of service
Expectations for
transparency, voice and respect are likely to be different. Given the scope for
digital technology to improve fairness
at relatively little cost, ODR should aim
to deliver high standards of procedural fairness.
(c) Levelling the Playing
Field through System Design
A goal of procedural justice is to treat parties fairly by providing an equal
opportunity to present their case. Yet parties themselves
are rarely equal. Most
cases are characterised by parties with dramatically different resources.
‘One-shotters’ (who
use court once or infrequently) often confront
‘repeat players’, who utilise the court system regularly and
have the upper hand in litigation because they have superior knowledge
of the legal process, ready access to specialist expertise,
and can influence
Parties with deep
pockets can also draw out proceedings in order to force the other party to
settle or capitulate.
Offsetting this power imbalance can be difficult in a forum historically
designed for, and often by or under the influence of, repeat
ODR can level the playing field through design features that minimise power
imbalances between the
This can involve
identifying power imbalances in the current system and mitigating unfair
advantages through ODR platform and process
design. International solutions
include both innovative uses of technology and procedural reform, including
adopting fixed procedural
options to mitigate any unfair advantage of repeat
enforcing time
limits to prevent orchestrated strategic
‘gateway checks’ (similar to pre-action protocols); and
incorporating expert knowledge or artificial intelligence
to guide users towards
resolution without expert assistance from a
(d) User Data to Improve
Collecting and utilising data on user experience can guide the development of
a fair and efficient ODR platform. Data can be used
to design reforms, improve
court performance, reduce system demand, and develop iterative changes to the
platform design itself.
can include both qualitative and quantitative data, which can be collected
through online forms, IP addresses (for ascertaining
geographical location and
use patterns), or online user surveys (to measure user satisfaction). ODR
developers have utilised human-centred
design, which focuses on end-user
experience, to guide data collection and in turn shape the
‘fairness’ of the ODR platform
and process. In the Canadian CRT,
this began with extensive user testing in the early design stages and continues
through qualitative
user surveys and website
The feedback helps
to determine whether the process is providing procedural justice and has
informed changes to improve the fairness
This would represent a significant advance given the limited user feedback
currently sought by Australian courts. Current civil justice
data collection is
limited, with only a few metrics used and with limited qualitative studies about
the user experience.
quality and completeness is compromised by aging case management systems, a lack
of uniform or adequate definitions and the costs
and errors of manual data
However, by
prioritising data collection and iterative improvements based on the analysis of
results, ODR can shape a platform which
ensures that each unique user
experiences a high standard of procedural fairness. Collecting more and better
data will reveal how
ODR design can improve the dispute resolution process and
may shed light on what may prevent disputes from occurring.
Conclusions concerning
ODR in High-Volume, Low-Value Individual Disputes
ODR platforms have the potential to resolve large numbers of small-scale
disputes more expeditiously, at lower cost to the parties
and the public, and
with greater user satisfaction compared to traditional civil litigation
processes and procedures. However, in
the design and implementation of such
platforms, important objectives in terms of access to justice, open justice and
fairness need to be accommodated. We have sought to outline how this
might be achieved with reference to ODR innovations in other
countries and some
findings from empirical research. The alignment of an ODR platform to these
goals needs to be established using
evidence, and not merely asserted.
II THE USE OF DIGITAL
TECHNOLOGY IN LARGE, COMPLEX LITIGATION IN THE HIGHER COURTS
Class actions and the resolution of mass disputes give rise to a number of
challenging problems for litigants, lawyers, judges and
the legal system. All
too often class action litigation is protracted and costly. Although class
actions were designed to facilitate
access to justice, this encompasses more
than mere access to the courts by the commencement of a class action proceeding.
The ongoing
delay in many class actions erodes the confidence of class members
in the justice system and the substantial transaction costs erode
amounts that they receive if the case is successfully resolved.
However, as with the resolution of high-volume, low-value
, digital technology and online dispute resolution mechanisms can
facilitate the more economical and more expeditious resolution of
in a manner which is both procedurally fair and transparent.
In this section we examine, with reference to several recent and current
class actions in Australia and North America, the use of
digital technology in
the development and maintenance of client data bases by lawyers; the review of
voluminous documentation produced
on discovery; the filing and exchange of court
documents and evidence by parties; the judicial management of documentation and
the conduct of trials; and the administration of settlement
distribution schemes.
The Commencement of
Litigation: The Development and Management of Client Data Bases by
Prior to and after the commencement of litigation, lawyers often desire to
sign up substantial numbers of those with claims as clients,
even though this is
not necessary to commence a class action. In cases funded by a commercial
litigation funder prior to the relatively
recent endorsement of common fund
it was often
considered necessary to enter into contractual litigation funding agreements
with large numbers of claimants and to
obtain documentary information and
instructions from them concerning the nature and quantum of their individual
claims. In commercial
parlance, this is known as ‘book
Even after the advent of common fund orders it may be necessary in some cases
to take instructions from all prospective class
Such documentary
information obtained from claimants may encompass:
1. fee and retainer agreements and costs disclosure documents provided by the
law firm(s) conducting the litigation;
2. litigation funding agreements provided by the litigation funder;
3. instructions concerning the nature of the circumstances giving rise to
each individual claim;
4. instructions and documents concerning the nature, extent and quantum of
the individual damages suffered by each claimant; and
5. records or information in the possession of third parties needed as
evidence to prove causation (for example, in the case of personal
arising out of defective products) or the nature and extent of personal injuries
or economic loss.
Current methods for obtaining such instructions and information
1. Collection through websites established by law firms and in some instances
2. The distribution, execution and return of agreements by electronic
3. The use of standard form questionnaires which may be completed
electronically;
4. The distribution of newsletters and other information, including FAQs, to
claimants by electronic means.
When proceedings are to be commenced, many courts, including the Federal
Court of Australia, have introduced procedures for the electronic
pleadings, court documents and evidence (as discussed below). In some class
actions it may be necessary to establish databases
of group members who have
exercised their right to opt out of the proceeding. Relatively conventional and
readily available digital
processes and programs have been adopted to gather and
process these types of information. There are numerous off-the-shelf computer
programs available for these
The Conduct of
Litigation: Reviewing Voluminous Documentation Produced on Discovery
It is not unusual in large complex litigation generally, and in class actions
in particular, for a large volume of documentation to
be reviewed and produced
by way of discovery. With increases in the use of computers and advances in
digital technology there has
been an exponential increase in the volume of
electronic information that may be relevant to
litigation.
Vickery has noted:
We are now dealing with very large numbers. A major commercial bank in the
world today produces some 2 terabytes of Electronically
Stored Information (ESI)
every minute, and some as much as 2.5 TB per minute. To put this in perspective:
A terabyte (TB) is a multiple
of the unit ‘byte’ for digital
information. One terabyte is one trillion bytes or 1,000 gigabytes. It is
estimated that
over 85 million pages of Word documents would fill one terabyte.
It would contain electronic information equivalent to an 8 foot
stack of CD's or
pile of 80,000 telephone
Historically, the process of document review has been time consuming and
expensive. The substantial cost incurred in the traditionally
time consuming and
inefficient methods used for the manual review of such documents has led to
various procedural changes which have
substantially attenuated the ambit of or
the right to discovery in some types of cases. Various law reform proposals have
directed at narrowing the criteria for the discoverability of relevant
or potentially relevant
In many cases, lawyers for the litigants will seek to reach an agreement on
protocols for the electronic exchange of documentary information,
judicial supervision and approval. Before the digital revolution, each
potentially relevant document was reviewed manually.
With the advent of computer
technology, various key words became customarily used for the electronic
scanning of documents in order
to sort the wheat from the chaff. Key words could
be used individually or in combination to conduct electronic searches. This
the use of Boolean operators, connecting search words using terms such
as ‘and’, ‘or, ‘’not’
‘near’, or mathematical symbols to define and refine searches by
combing or limiting search
This methodology is
also used in internet search engine technology.
The limitations of Boolean search technology are well known and have been the
subject of detailed empirical research. From such research
it is clear that
Boolean searches often miss a substantial number of relevant documents. In fact,
traditional key word Boolean search
methods may miss the majority of relevant
documents. In one study, 67 percent of relevant documents were only found when
other than Boolean search were
Traditional methods of document review are also very expensive. A study by
the Rand Institute for Civil Justice (‘Rand Institute’)
traditional linear discovery accounts for 73 percent of e-Discovery costs in the
United States.
Rand Institute
research found that parties in civil litigation could possibly lower the high
costs of large scale electronic discovery
by using predictive coding (discussed
below) to reduce the number of documents requiring human review, although the
cost effectiveness
of such coding is yet to be
determined.
Thus, as Justice
Vickery has observed: ‘If the age of technology has produced the problem
– it can also assist in providing
In the United States, the Text Retrieval Conference (‘TREC’)
periodically reviews empirical research on the effectiveness
of text retrieval
It is administered
by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (‘NIST’),
an agency of the US Department
of Commerce. As Judge Grimm of the US District
Court for the District of Maryland has noted, it is a research collaboration
at studying the e-discovery review process to evaluate the
effectiveness of a wide array of
technologies’.
There is room for optimism that as search and information retrieval
methodologies are studied and tested, this will result in identifying
are most effective and least expensive to employ for a variety of
[electronically stored information] discovery
As another United States District Court Judge has observed:
Whether search terms or ‘keywords’ will yield the information
sought is a complicated question involving the interplay,
at least, of the
sciences of computer technology, statistics and linguistics ... Given this
complexity, for lawyers and judges to
dare opine that a certain search term or
terms would be more likely to produce information than the terms that were used
to go where angels fear to
More sophisticated electronic search methods have been developed recently and
deployed in large complex litigation, including class
actions, where a large
body of electronically stored information (‘ESI’) may be in issue.
This involves the use of Technology
Assisted Review (‘TAR’), whereby
a person with expertise in the subject matter of interest reviews a subset of
the documents
with a view to identifying those of relevance and developing a set
of coding or search terms which can then be applied to the whole
documents. This is often an iterative process which, when combined with
sophisticated ‘intelligent’ software,
can produce much more reliable
identification of relevant documents. The process involves predictive coding and
continuous active
learning (‘CAL’), including the use of algorithms
derived from statistical modelling to identify documents that are conceptually
similar to a sample of documents that were subjectively reviewed by a person or
persons with knowledge and expertise in the subject
matter of interest. Other
TAR methods are based on systematic rules that emulate the expert decision
making process.
Vickery has noted, TAR is often used as part of a suite of
technologies.
An independent person may be engaged to assist in the review
Also, as part of the
iterative process, validation methods based on a sample of documents are usually
used in order to obtain some
measure of how effective the TAR process is. This
will often involve measuring the percentage of responsive documents that TAR
identifies,
the percentage of non-responsive documents identified and the degree
of volatility of the process, based on the percentage of documents
changed from one designation category to another between rounds of the
The process does not
work on non-text documents, such as old hard copies, photographs, diagrams or
drawings, and is of limited application
spreadsheets.
In 2012, a US Federal District Court endorsed the use of TAR to review ESI in
appropriate cases.
Supreme Court of Victoria was the first court in Australia to order the use of
TAR techniques to assist in the process of discovery
litigation.
In the first
Victorian case in which TAR was ordered, 4 million documents had been produced
on discovery. After the elimination of
duplicates, this was reduced to 1.4
million. According to Justice Vickery, a junior solicitor taking one minute to
review and catalogue
each document manually would have taken 583 working weeks,
or 10 years, to compete the task. Hence, TAR was ordered to expedite and
simplify the process.
resulted in a reduction to 300,000 documents, 210,000 of which were likely to be
irrelevant, thus reducing the pool to 100,000
As the Supreme Court of Victoria noted, TAR has been endorsed by a number of
courts in other countries, including the High Court of
England and
the High Court of
and the Federal
District Court in the United
TAR has also been
used in a number of other international
More recent judicial
scrutiny of this process has focused on issues concerning the objections of
parties; proportionality; mechanisms
for cooperation and transparency; the
initial selection of test documents or ‘seed sets’; recall and
precision; and validation
TAR has been
deployed in a number of Federal Court of Australia class action
proceedings,
and is currently
being used in the VW ‘diesel gate’ litigation presently pending in
the Federal Court of
litigation, five class actions and a proceeding seeking penalties instituted by
the ACCC are all progressing concurrently
before Foster
The problem of voluminous
discovery documentation has loomed large. At the time of writing, the
respondents in the VW litigation
had identified over 100 million documents to be
reviewed for relevance, most of which are in German. TAR has also been used in
proceedings
in the Supreme Court of
Queensland.
In terms of cost,
Justice Vickery has estimated that TAR would cost only one fifth or less
compared with a manual
In one Australian
matter, TAR was used to review 778GB of data, equivalent to 6.6 million
documents. This was reportedly reduced
in 31 hours to 157,000 by deploying only
one lawyer, a service provider and an independent
consultant.
The Filing and Exchange
of Court Documents and Evidence by Parties
The electronic filing and exchange of court documents, pleadings and evidence
has become the norm in many Australian courts. This
has saved time and cut costs
for both litigants and the courts. The Federal Court of Australia was one of the
first courts in the
world to adopt an electronic filing system. This development
does not require further elaboration here.
The Judicial Management
of Documentation and Evidence
In many cases, voluminous documentation in the higher courts is stored in
electronic and readily searchable form. Various commercial
service providers are
available in Australia to facilitate this.
The Conduct of
In many instances, ‘electronic trials’ have been conducted
whereby the court and the parties may access and use in the
hearing, and in oral
and written submissions, extensive computer based information rather than hard
copies. For example, this occurred
in the VW litigation, specifically at the
hearing concerning whether the cars in issue were fitted with illegal
Whilst the use of such computer based technologies has made forensic
information access and management considerably more convenient
traditional paper based modus operandi, this has not been without significant
financial cost. Commercial service providers
are usually appointed, and approved
by the court, to obtain, process, store and facilitate access to, and the
retrieval of, digital
information. Often additional technology personnel will
also be deployed by the parties. The commercial cost of these services is
considerable.
However, in many class actions and in other forms of ‘mega’
litigation, Justice Sackville’s observation applies:
‘It would have
been virtually impossible to conduct the trial without the use of modern
technology’.
number of cases, it has been estimated that there had been a substantial
reduction in trial time through the use of modern
technology.
Although electronic trials have become relatively commonplace, there has been
relatively little use of technology to facilitate participation
in hearings by
remote advocates and witnesses. This usually only occurs in limited
circumstances, usually when dealing with interlocutory
or procedural matters and
often only with either the consent of the parties or judicial
There is often
judicial resistance given the perceived benefits of having witnesses give
evidence in person in
The tension between the desire for individualised justice and the need to
deal with large numbers of claims continues to manifest
itself at the conclusion
of class action and mass tort proceedings. Where an ‘opt out’ class
action is converted to a
closed class, often to facilitate settlement, there is
a need to process large numbers of claims from persons who seek to ‘opt
Where a settlement agreement is reached between the parties and approved by
the court, there is often a need to devise and implement
claims processing
procedures to determine eligibility for payment and to quantify the amounts to
be paid to large numbers of class
If the case is not settled and proceeds to trial, the judgment will usually
only deal with the individual claim(s) of the lead plaintiff(s)
and some or all
of the issues common to the claims of the class members. If the lead plaintiff
is successful, there will need to
be judicial or administrative procedures
implemented to deal with the ‘individual’ issues arising in each of
of the remaining class members. These judicial or administrative
procedures may need to deal with issues of causation and reliance
that may arise
in product liability or shareholder class actions. Such procedures will also
need to encompass methods of quantifying
the economic value of large numbers of
individual claims.
For example, in the current VW litigation in the Federal Court of Australia,
the trial of the five class actions on behalf of consumers
who purchased the
vehicles in question will involve primarily the determination of the individual
claims of the five lead applicants,
together with a number of common questions
applicable to the claims of the remaining class members. If the applicants are
successful,
a further 90,000 claims by class members will need to be
To date in Australia, in each of the abovementioned stages (namely, the
commencement, conduct and conclusion of class action and mass
tort litigation),
considerably greater use of new and emerging technologies might have been
employed to reduce transaction costs
and to expedite the resolution of disputes
and the implementation of settlements.
In the following part of the article, we provide some examples of how
settlement administration and implementation might be improved
in the future,
drawing on a number of current or completed cases.
The Administration of
Settlement Distribution Schemes
In recent years, there has been ongoing controversy over the cost and delay
associated with the implementation of class action settlements
in Australia.
This issue attracted considerable controversy in connection with the settlement
of the Victorian bushfire litigation,
which experienced substantial delays and
large transaction costs. The problem was exacerbated by a decision not to make
interim payments
pending the evaluation of all claims. The delays and costs were
due in large measure to the individualised assessment of each group
member’s claim by humans (including lawyers, loss adjusters and medical
personnel). In part, this arose out of the volume and
complexity of the claims,
which encompassed claims arising from personal injuries, property damage and
business losses. For example,
the settlement of the Kinglake bushfire case
involved around 1,800 personal injury claims and over 9,000 property damage and
loss claims.
Until recently, a practice had developed whereby the solicitors conducting
the class action proceedings sought to appoint themselves
as the administrators
of any settlement, a process which, at least until recently, had received
judicial approval. In many cases,
the evaluation and resolution of claims during
the settlement process have been carried out by the same solicitors who acted
the class members in the litigation. Thus, lawyers acting as advocates for
their clients one day become appointed as adjudicators
of their clients’
claim the next. This is often said to be justified by their familiarity with the
issues in question, the
adoption of independent review procedures and ongoing
judicial scrutiny.
In some instances, this has been imposed as a term or condition of the
proposed settlement. This has attracted some judicial
There have also been
recent recommendations for reform, including from the Australian Law Reform
Commission, which has recommended
that there should be a tender process so that
any interested party may tender for such work, with a decision to be made by the
based on questions of costs and
efficiency.
In the United States it has been customary for independent persons be
appointed as trustees under judicial supervision to implement
many class action,
mass tort and bankruptcy
settlements.
In some recent
Australian class action settlements independent persons have been appointed to
process claims and make payments, by
agreement of the parties and with the
approval of the court.
present purposes we do not express a view as to
should administer
settlements. However, we contend that there is room for improvement in
such settlements are implemented.
In particular, it is clear that settlements can be designed and implemented
in a manner which makes greater use of new digital technologies
expedite and reduce the cost of claims resolution. However, the use of digital
technology in litigation has to be tailored
to the substantive, doctrinal and
evidentiary requirements for proof of both liability and damages. In the absence
of agreement between
the parties during the conduct of litigation, or an agreed
and court-approved methodology (in the case of class actions) for resolving
claims where there is a settlement, the parties and the court are constrained by
the relevant substantive law and procedural rules
applicable to the
Even in the event of
a settlement, strict legal and evidentiary rules may be required to be applied
in the resolution of each individual
claim. However, many if not most,
settlements provide for some degree of relaxation of strict legal and
evidentiary requirements
in respect of both proof of eligibility for payment and
the quantification of the amount(s) to be paid. Settlement distribution schemes
usually seek to ‘achieve a broadly fair division of the proceeds, treating
like group members alike, as cost-effectively as
As Gilsenan and Legg note, ‘settlement distributions need to balance
fairness and precision with
efficiency’.
analyse a number of settlement distribution schemes adopted in a range of
Australian class actions, encompassing shareholder
and mass tort and
product liability
proceedings.
perceptive analysis, they also refer to matrix or grid settlements which are
common in the United States but have only rarely
been used in mass tort class
actions in Australia.
In the United States, claims resolution facilities have been developed not
only in connection with the settlement of class actions,
aggregated mass tort
and bankruptcy
proceedings, but also for the resolution of claims which are not aggregated. As
Dodge notes, many of the most innovative
recent claims structures, including the
BP Gulf Coast Claims Fund and the fund established in the aftermath of the Costa
disaster, use a new ‘bottom-up’ model of
‘disaggregative’ mass claim resolution instead of the familiar
Importantly, many claims resolution mechanisms have been implemented to
resolve individual disputes in a manner which precludes their
aggregation, such
as mandatory individual arbitration clauses in consumer and employment
contracts. Since these clauses are unilaterally
drafted by corporations with a
view to precluding class action litigation, questions have arisen as to their
fairness and enforceability.
To date, at least in the United States, they have
received considerable judicial support, including from the Supreme Court of the
United States.
As one author has suggested, the rise of ‘private disaggregation’
has the potential to create a dramatic shift in the
legal landscape given that
this new approach to dispute resolution is driving many of the most innovative
claims resolution mechanisms
which are emerging. Such mechanisms often
streamline procedures and the resolution of substantive issues or shift the cost
defendants, thus facilitating the pursuit of claims that may otherwise
not be pursued, at least outside of the context of class actions,
because the
transaction costs exceed the potential
This may also
resolve claims that might not otherwise be certified as suitable for a class
action and avoid the systemic costs and
delays inherent in aggregate
litigation.
Whether or not claims resolution mechanisms arise out of aggregated or
disaggregated claims, individualised assessment of claims can
be combined with a
matrix or grid and standardised payments in designing claims resolution
facilities. A good example of a ‘hybrid’
claims resolution mechanism
that combined simplified and expedited claims resolution options with more
traditional requirements to
establish proof of eligibility for payment and
quantify damages is the Claims Resolution Facility established by the Dalkon
Claimants Trust in the aftermath of the Dalkon Shield litigation in the
United States.
Some Historical Lessons
from the Dalkon Shield Litigation
After approval of a Plan of Reorganisation by the United States Bankruptcy
Court, the Dalkon Shield Claimants Trust was established
to resolve over 300,000
claims by women worldwide for personal injuries and economic loss arising out of
their use of the Dalkon
Claimants were given a
of four options. Under Option 1,
claimants could elect to receive an expedited payment of a fixed minimal amount
simply by claiming
that they had used the Dalkon Shield and had been injured by
it. No proof was required of use of the device or of any injury suffered.
Although the payment amount was modest, over 100,000 claimants chose this
Under Option 2, much higher fixed or lump sum amounts were payable according
to the type of injury suffered. To be eligible for payment
under this option,
claimants had to submit documentary proof that they had used the Dalkon Shield
IUD and medical records or other
evidence to prove that they had suffered the
particular injuries for which compensation was claimed. Importantly, it was not
to establish or prove any causal connection between the use of the IUD
and the injuries suffered. Although reasonably substantial,
the payments were
standardised for each injury and were lower in amount than what the ‘tort
value’ of the claim would
be if the matter had been determined by a court.
A very substantial number of the claimants elected this option.
Under Option 3, a claimant could seek payment of the full amount of the
‘tort value’ of the claim, which would be assessed
by independent
trustees. Claimants retained the right to have the amount determined by a court
(or, alternatively, though binding
arbitration) if the amount offered by the
trustees was rejected. However, in order to obtain compensation under this
option, claimants
had to establish not only use of the IUD and proof of injury,
but also a causal connection between use of the IUD and the injury
in question
on the basis of medical evidence.
Under Option 4, they could elect to defer resolution of their claim (for
example, if it was not yet known whether they were permanently
infertile or if
medical or other evidence was in the process of being obtained).
One obvious advantage of this claims resolution methodology is that it
provided claimants with options that could be chosen depending
on the level of
proof that they were able to provide. Whilst standardised or ‘cookie
cutter’ amounts were payable under
Options 1 and 2, claimants could elect
to proceed under Option 3, which facilitated payment of the full
individualised
amount according to the nature and severity of the
injuries suffered and the economic losses incurred. For present purposes, it is
important to note that the scheme encompassed two options (Options 1 and 2) that
were conducive to the use of electronic technology
to process claims
expeditiously and at minimal transaction cost to the parties, the Claimants
Trust or the court. Most claims were
resolved under these two options.
It is perhaps also important to note that the large amount of the fund
established to provide for payments was non-reversionary. In
other words, the
defendant did not get any of the surplus funds if all claims were resolved and
paid without exhausting the fund,
which turned out to be the case. Any surplus
was also paid to claimants, pro-rated on the amount of their first payment in
any amount for exemplary or punitive damages (which were not payable,
This methodology of combining various options, which varied according to the
level of proof required, and which can facilitate the
resolution of most claims
expeditiously and at minimal cost, can be adapted to other types of claims
resolution. Importantly, it
offers claimants options which
Some Lessons from the
Vioxx Case and Recent Class Action and Mass Tort Litigation in the United
The problem of establishing causation and quantifying damages for large
numbers of claimants looms large in many if not most class
action and mass tort
litigation. In the
product liability litigation in the United
States and Canada, innovative and interesting use was made of technology in
with the processing of large numbers of personal injury claims
following a US$4.85 billion settlement of claims in the United States
An electronic damages calculator was established on a website which enabled
individual claimants to input relevant data
with a view to calculating their
individual damages entitlement under the terms of the
settlement.
A computer based questionnaire was used to enable the Claims Administrator to
determine qualifying claimants’ ‘Basis Points’
(Step 1). Such
basis points were based upon: (a) age at the time of injury from Vioxx use; (b)
duration of Vioxx use and (c) the
level and seriousness of the injury.
Thereafter, at Step 2, there were adjustments depending on the timeframe and
frequency of Vioxx
use, leading to the calculation of a sub-total of
‘award’ points. Step 3 involved reductions based on risk factors,
Step 4 involved additional reductions for other significant risk
Finally, the total number of award points was calculated. The Qualifying
Claimant’s Total Award Point Estimate was only an estimate.
Award Points the Qualifying Claimant ultimately received was based solely upon a
review of his or her medical records by
an independent Claims Administrator. To
the extent there were discrepancies between the information entered
electronically and the
Qualifying Claimant’s medical records, the
Qualifying Claimant’s medical records took precedence.
Although the value of each Award Point could not be known until all claims
participating in the Settlement Program were evaluated,
an electronic calculator
enabled the claimant to quantify the total dollar value of the claim based on a
range of potential settlement
values for the Qualifying Claimant’s claim.
The website settlement calculator was accessible online.
The deadline for registration of claims expired on 15 January 2008.
Over 58,000 claims were registered. As of 29 February 2008, more
44,000 of 47,000 eligible claimants had enrolled in the Program. This
constituted over 93 percent of all eligible claimants.
This enrolment
percentage exceeded the 85% threshold established in the settlement agreement.
The defendant retained a right to walk
away from the Agreement unless 85 percent
of eligible claimants alleging a heart attack, stroke, death, or more than 12
months Vioxx
usage, enrolled in the Program. Eligible claimants were those who
had filed a lawsuit as of 9 November 2007, alleging that they had
heart attack or stroke as a result of ingesting Vioxx.
In order for an eligible claimant to qualify for an initial payment if their
claim was determined to be compensable, that Claimant
had to enrol his or her
claim on or before 29 February 2008. Eligible claimants who enrolled as of 29
February 2008 had a 31-day
grace period to submit to the Claims Administrator
additional documentation, including properly executed releases and medical
authorisation
forms. All eligible claimants had to enrol before 1 May 2008, in
order to participate in the Settlement Program.
Each enrolled claimant was required to submit a Claims Package before 1
July 2008. A claims package needed to include: (1) medical
records as outlined
in Exhibit 1.3.1 of the Settlement Agreement; (2) Plaintiff or Claimant Profile
Form (and amendments); and (3)
a claims form (to be completed online using a
secure server).
As has been noted elsewhere, although the use of grids and formulas has been
widespread in mass tort and class action settlements
in the United States to
address the tensions between collective and individual evaluation of claims,
there are often practical information
problems, including where exposed
individuals may not have fully manifested problems or where there are inherently
subjective claims
for psychological
There has been
critical scrutiny of settlement mechanisms in a number of the United States mass
tort cases.
Some courts have attempted to circumvent the conundrum of a choice between
individualised and mass tort resolution of claims by adopting
statistical
sampling techniques or the judicial determination of bellwether
In the Vioxx
litigation, the values adopted in the settlement matrix were derived from a
series of bellwether cases conducted over
In some instances,
judges have proposed non-binding bellwether cases for informational
Undoubtedly, economic losses by shareholders are more easily calculable than
personal injury claims in mass tort litigation. However,
even in shareholder
class action settlements, settlement distribution schemes usually need to
utilise complex statistical methods
for determining the ‘inflated’
price paid by those claiming loss. The challenge is to disentangle, using
multivariate
statistical techniques such as regression analysis, the loss said
to be due to culpable conduct from other market factors having
an impact on
share price.
settlement of the shareholder litigation against
the Settlement Notice
set out a Plan of Allocation which incorporated various tables, accessible
online, to enable calculations of
Similarly, financial losses by consumers or businesses arising out of
commercial computerised transactions are often readily calculable
by electronic
means. For example, sophisticated computer-based claims processing methods have
been developed by a commercial service
provider in connection with the recent
US$6 billion-plus settlement in the class action arising out of claims that
merchants paid
excessive fees to accept Visa and Mastercard credit cards in
violation of antitrust laws in the United
This was designed to
allow merchants to provide information to expedite claims processing. Twenty-one
million settlement notices
were sent out. The Class Administrator proposes to
provide class members with the ability to access the claims website, with a
code to permit them to view the manner in which their claim value is
calculated. Class members may accept or disagree with data on
the claim form or
the website. The claim form and website will also explain how to challenge the
data. The fairness hearing is scheduled
for 7 November 2019, but, at the time of
writing, the settlement is on appeal. Curiously, persons wishing to opt out can
so by letter sent in the post and not by email or online.
In a recent pharmaceutical mass tort settlement in the United States, a
commercial service provider developed an electronic ‘Claims
Facilitator’ that calculated monetary amounts for individual claimants
based on an award matrix that took account of the age
of the claimants and the
severity of their injuries.
Through a secure website, Special Masters appointed by the court had
unrestricted access to claimant data, whereas plaintiff law
firms were limited
to viewing data on their clients and to limited data fields. An interactive
online claims submission platform
was implemented for use by claimants and their
lawyers. This facilitated the electronic submission of medical records and other
These relatively sophisticated, reasonably expeditious and (comparatively)
inexpensive claims resolution methodologies stand in marked
contrast to some of
the labour intensive, expensive and protracted mechanisms used in resolving many
Australian class actions to
date. However, claims resolution methodologies need
to be tailored to the nature of the disputes in question. In many cases, the
preferable option is to incorporate various options that may be chosen by the
class members themselves rather than those designing
or implementing
settlements. This would enable the claimants to choose between
‘standardised’ and ‘individualised’
methods. Some recent
class action settlements in Australia have incorporated this methodology.
The only advantage (at least from the perspective of the legal profession) of
traditional claims processing procedures primarily reliant
on human resources is
that they generate substantial legal fees. Where such fees are deducted from
settlement amounts otherwise payable
to claimants, this gives rise to obvious
concern. To some extent, this revenue generator has been an impediment to the
of more cost effective digital solutions.
However, commercial service providers who have been involved in the adoption
of innovative digital technologies and processes in United
States’ class
action and mass tort litigation have recently become involved in the Australian
market. Thus, there have been
some Australian cases in which advanced computer
based technology has been used in the administration of settlements.
III CONCLUSIONS
At each end of the civil justice spectrum, traditional methods for the
resolution of civil disputes through the courts are not readily
facilitating the resolution of such matters in a quick, just and inexpensive
As with ODR platforms used for the resolution of minor civil disputes
referred to in the first part of this article, the resolution
of mass claims
through claims resolution facilities established at the conclusion of class
action or mass tort litigation should
also seek to facilitate access to justice
in an economical, expeditious, transparent and fair manner.
Recently deployed ODR methodologies for dealing with minor civil disputes may
be adapted for resolving mass claims in class actions.
Similarly, claims
resolution methods adopted in recent mass tort and class action litigation can
be adapted for resolving high-volume
but small value individual claims outside
the class action context.
There is no one-size-fits-all ODR model. Each is required to be tailored and
modified to the specific and idiosyncratic features of
the disputes in question
and the characteristics of the parties to such disputes. This requires not only
technological innovation
and creative thinking from the outset, including in the
design of ODR platforms and procedures, but also user feedback and evaluation
methodologies that will facilitate ongoing iterative adjustment in the light of
practical experience and insight. However, digital
technology is not a panacea
at either end of the civil claims spectrum. There may be increased commercial
costs associated with a
number of digital innovations. There is an ongoing need
for creative thinking and both qualitative and quantitative empirical research.
Transaction costs, timeliness, and consumer satisfaction are important variables
that need to be evaluated as an integral part of
civil justice
Although guiding
principles have been adopted in legislation and procedural rules in various
the just, expeditious and inexpensive
resolution of civil litigation, cost and delay continue to loom large in most if
not all class
action proceedings. It is not unusual for cases to take more than
5 years to resolve even prior to settlement administration and
for legal costs
to be in the tens of millions of dollars.
In the design and implementation of claims settlement procedures, rigidly
adhering to the requirements of due process and the application
substantive law in the resolution of multiple individual claims will exacerbate
the problems of delay and cost. On the other
hand, a preoccupation with
efficiency and expedited claims processing may give rise to inequality and rough
One method of circumventing these extremes is to avoid a binary choice
between individualised and mass claims resolution methodologies,
incorporate various options in the claims resolution process that vary the level
of proof with the quantum and speed of payment
so as to give the claimants a
choice as to which to elect.
Whichever approach is to be adopted, the tension between the desire for
individual justice and the need to resolve disputes quickly,
efficiently and
economically needs to be creatively resolved. In doing so, procedural due
process considerations need to be accommodated
if technological innovation is
going to be able to bring about digital justice.
Barrister and Professor of Law,
University of Sydney.
Senior Policy Officer,
Justice Strategy and Policy Branch, Department of Justice NSW.
‘Expanding Access to
Justice through Online Dispute Resolution’,
The Digital Edge
(American Bar Association, 13 February 2018)
<https://legaltalknetwork.com/podcasts/digital-edge/2018/02/expanding-access-to-justice-through-online-dispute-resolution/>.
Colin Rule, ‘Quantifying
the Economic Benefits of Effective Redress: Large E-commerce Data Sets and the
Cost-Benefit Case
for Investing in Dispute Resolution’ (2012) 34(4)
University of Arkansas at Little Rock Law Review
See, eg, Orna Rabinovich-Einy
and Ethan Katsh, ‘The New New Courts’ (2017) 67(1)
University Law Review
165, 188 (‘The New New Courts’); Ethan
Katsh and Orna Rabinovich-Einy, ‘Access to Digital Justice’ in Ethan
Katsh and Orna Rabinovich-Einy (eds),
Digital Justice: Technology and the
Internet of Disputes
(Oxford University Press, 2017) 39, 51
Digital Justice
Online Dispute Resolution
Advisory Group, Civil Justice Council,
Online Dispute Resolution for Low
Value Civil Claims
(Report, February 2015) 4 [1.3]–[1.4]
<https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Online-Dispute-Resolution-Final-Web-Version1.pdf>.
[1.3]–[1.7]; Rabinovich-Einy and Katsh, ‘The New New Courts’
Lord Justice Michael Briggs,
Civil Courts Structure Review
(Final Report, July 2016) 115 [12.6]
<https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/civil-courts-structure-review-final-report-jul-16-final-1.pdf>
Civil Courts Structure Review
Orna Rabinovich-Einy and Ethan
Katsh, ‘A New Relationship Between Public and Private Dispute Resolution:
Lessons from Online
Dispute Resolution’ (2017) 32(4)
Ohio State Journal
on Dispute Resolution
Law Council of Australia,
The Justice Project Final Report –
Dispute Resolution
(August 2018) 10.
Australian Dispute
Resolution Advisory Council, ‘Online Dispute Resolution and ADR’
(Research Paper, 16 September 2016)
<https://docs.wixstatic.com/ugd/34f2d0_cb997768a4574613b8e1d2f972769040.pdf>.
NSW Government, ‘Budget
Estimates 2018-19’(Budget Paper No 3, 30 June 2018) 6-3
<https://www.budget.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/budget-2018-06/6._Justice_Cluster-BP3-Budget_201819.pdf>.
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (VCAT), ‘VCAT Online Dispute Resolution Pilot
Online’ (YouTube, 13 September
2018) 00:03:46–00:04:03
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=45&v=1cuKRgj-0ng>.
Legal Services Commission
of South Australia, Submission No 65 to Law Council of Australia,
The Justice
quoted in Law Council of Australia (n 8) 10.
Civil Resolution
Tribunal Act
SBC 2012, c 25 (‘
Civil Resolution Tribunal
Civil Resolution Tribunal Rules
, CRC, c 2017
Civil Resolution Tribunal Rules
‘Online Dispute
Resolution & Public Interest Design, with Shannon Salter’,
(Lawyerist.com, 31 January 2018)
<https://legaltalknetwork.com/podcasts/lawyerist-podcast/2018/01/157-online-dispute-resolution-public-interest-design/>
(‘Online Dispute Resolution & Public Interest Design, with Shannon
‘Welcome to the Civil
Resolution Tribunal’,
Civil Resolution Tribunal
(Web page, 2019)
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/>.
Civil Resolution
Tribunal Act
SBC 2012, c 25, s 2(2)(a).
Shannon Salter, 'Online
Dispute Resolution and Justice System Integration: British Columbia's Civil
Resolution Tribunal' (2017)
Windsor Yearbook of Access To Justice
112, 120 (‘British Columbia's Civil Resolution Tribunal’).
Ibid 121. The
Resolution Tribunal Act
Civil Resolution Tribunal Rules
this process.
Salter, ‘British
Columbia's Civil Resolution Tribunal’ (n 19) 121.
'Online Dispute Resolution
& Public Interest Design, with Shannon Salter' (n 16).
‘CRT Statistics
Snapshot: September 2018’,
Civil Resolution Tribunal
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/crt-statistics-snapshot-september-2018/>.
‘Participant
Satisfaction Survey – April to September 2018’,
Civil Resolution
(Blog, 9 October 2018)
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/participant-satisfaction-survey-april-september-2018/>.
Committee of Public
Transforming Courts and Tribunals
(House of Commons Paper No
56, Session 2017–19) 4.
Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief
Justice and Senior President of Tribunals, ‘Transforming Our Justice
System’ (Policy Paper,
Ministry of Justice and HM Courts and Tribunals
Service, September 2016) 11
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/transforming-our-justice-system-joint-statement>.
The pilot will end in
November 2019; Sir Terence Etherton, ‘Civil Justice After Jackson’
(Conkerton Memorial Lecture
2018, Liverpool Law Society, 15 March 2018) 16 [33]
<https://www.judiciary.uk/announcements/speech-by-sir-terence-etherton-mr-civil-justice-after-jackson/>.
Sir Terence Etherton,
‘The Civil Court of the Future’ (Lord Slynn Memorial Lecture, 14
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/slynn-lecture-mr-civil-court-of-the-future-20170615.pdf>
Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief
Justice and Senior President of Tribunals, ‘Transforming Our Justice
System’ (n 29) 6.
The County Court Online
Pilot 2018, Civil Practice Direction 51S
<https://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/civil/rules/practice-direction-51s-the-county-court-online-pilot>.
Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief
Justice and Senior President of Tribunals, ‘Transforming Our Justice
System’ (n 29) 12.
Clare Galloway, Service
Manager, Civil Money Claims Team, HM Courts & Tribunals Service cited in
Nick Hilborne, ‘Judiciary
Threatens to Pull Out of Online Court Pilot over
Lack of Communication From Officials’,
Legal Futures
(Web Page, 7
March 2018)
<https://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/judiciary-threatens-pull-online-court-pilot-lack-communication-officials>;
Sir Etherton, ‘Civil Justice After Jackson’ (n 30) 17 [33].
Clare Galloway cited in
Nick Hilborne
HM Courts and Tribunals
Service, ‘Reform Update’ (Reform Update, May 2018) 4
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/717789/HMCTS_Reform_Update_19May2018.pdf>.
Robert Thomas and Joe
Tomlinson, ‘The Digitalisation of Tribunals: What We Know and What We Need
to Know’ (Research
Paper, Public Law Project, 5 April 2018) 23
<https://publiclawproject.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/The-Digitalisation-of-Tribunals-for-website.pdf>.
‘How Your Appeal will
be Decided’,
Traffic Penalty Tribunal
<https://www.trafficpenaltytribunal.gov.uk/how-your-appeal-will-be-decided/>.
JUSTICE Working Party,
What is a Court?
(Report, May 2016) 17
<https://2bquk8cdew6192tsu41lay8t-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/JUSTICE-What-is-a-Court-Report-2016.pdf>.
JUSTICE Working Party (n
Rechtwijzer 2.0:
Technology that puts justice in your hands
http://www.hiil.org/project/rechtwijzer
Joint Technology Committee,
'Case Studies in ODR for Courts: A View from the Front Lines' (Resource
Bulletin, 29 November 2017)
<https://www.ncsc.org/~/media/files/pdf/about%20us/committees/jtc/jtc%20resource%20bulletins/2017-12-18%20odr%20case%20studies%20final.ashx>.
Matterhorn’,
<https://getmatterhorn.com/tour/what-is-matterhorn>.
‘Ticket and Minor
Infraction Resolution Results: Multiple Courts’,
<https://getmatterhorn.com/get-results/traffic-court/ticket-minor-infraction-resolution-results/>.
Tyler Technologies
<https://www.tylertech.com/solutions-products/modria/ODR>.
European Union, European
Commission,
Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the
Council On the Functioning of the European Online Dispute Resolution
Established under Regulation (EU) No 524/2013 on Online Dispute Resolution for
Consumer Disputes
, COM(2017) 744 Final, 13 December 2017, 2
<https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/first_report_on_the_functioning_of_the_odr_platform.pdf>.
For an assessment of the
effectiveness of the EU Consumer platforms and a comparison with those developed
in Brazil, see Maria José
Schmidt-Kessen, Rafaela Nogueira and Marta
Cantero, ‘Success or Failure? - Effectiveness of Consumer ODR Platforms in
and in the EU’ (Research Paper No 19-17, Copenhagen Business
http://ssrn.com/abstact=3374964
Noam Ebner and John
Zeleznikow, 'No Sheriff in Town: Governance for Online Dispute Resolution'
(2016) 32(4)
Negotiation Journal
297, 307; Kanake Chinthaka Liyanage,
'The Regulation of Online Dispute Resolution: Effectiveness of Online Consumer
Protection Guidelines'
[2012] DeakinLawRw 11
(2012) 17(2)
Deakin Law Review
, 264 Robert J
Condlin, 'Online Dispute Resolution: Stinky, Repugnant, or Drab' (2017) 18(3)
Cardozo Journal of Conflict Resolution
717, 733. Recent attempts to
introduce a voluntary code of conduct include the International Council for
Online Dispute Resolution’s
Standards; ‘ICODR Standards’,
International Council for Online Dispute Resolution
<https://icodr.org/standards/>.
See generally Suzanne Van
Arsdale, 'User Protections in Online Dispute Resolution'
(2015) 21(Fall)
Harvard Negotiation Law Review
Michael Legg, 'The Future
of Dispute Resolution: Online ADR and Online Courts'
(2016) 27(4)
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
, 227 (‘The Future of
Dispute Resolution’).
Salter, ‘British
Columbia's Civil Resolution Tribunal’(n 19) 117.
Committee of Public
Accounts (n 28) 6.
Law Council of Australia,
The Justice Project
(Final Report, August 2018)
<https://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/files/web-pdf/Justice%20Project/Final%20Report/Justice%20Project%20_%20Final%20Report%20in%20full.pdf>.
Law Council of Australia,
The Justice Project Final Report – Part 1: People with Disability
(August 2018) 8
<https://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/files/web-pdf/Justice%20Project/Final%20Report/People%20with%20Disability%20%28Part%201%29.pdf>.
The Productivity Commission
has recognised that ‘[d]ata and evaluation have important and
mutually-reinforcing roles in analysing
and improving the civil justice
system’; Productivity Commission,
Access to Justice Arrangements
(Inquiry Report No 72, 3 September 2014) 880.
See generally 'Online
Dispute Resolution & Public Interest Design, with Shannon Salter' (n
‘Ensuring access to
justice’ is one of three principles that have informed HM Courts and
Tribunals Service’s court
estates reform program and the Civil Resolution
Tribunal; see Ministry of Justice and HM Courts and Tribunals Service,
on the provision of court and tribunal estate in England and
Wales’ (Consultation Paper, 16 July 2015) 7
<https://consult.justice.gov.uk/digital-communications/proposal-on-the-provision-of-court-and-tribunal-es/user_uploads/reform-estates-national-consultation_official-sensitive_final_050815.pdf>;
Sandy, CRT Resolution Support Clerk, 'How the CRT Is Improving Access to
Civil Resolution Tribunal
<https://civilresolutionbc.ca/crt-improving-access-justice/>. See below
for a discussion of the CRT’s evaluation
of access to justice and
procedural fairness.
Access to Justice
Taskforce, Attorney General's Department,
A Strategic Framework for Access to
Justice in the Federal Civil Justice System
(Report, September 2009) 2
<https://www.ag.gov.au/LegalSystem/Documents/A%20Strategic%20Framework%20for%20Access%20to%20Justice%20in%20the%20Federal%20Civil%20Justice%20System.pdf>
Strategic Framework
Universal Declaration of Human
GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, UN Doc A/810 (10 December 1948) art 8,
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for
signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976) art
Professor Dame Hazel Genn,
'Online Courts and the Future of Justice ' (Birkenhead Lecture, Gray’s
Inn, 16 October 2017) 6
<https://www.ucl.ac.uk/laws/sites/laws/files/birkenhead_lecture_2017_professor_dame_hazel_genn_final_version.pdf>.
Christine Coumarelos et al,
'How Are Legal Problems Finalised in Australia?' (
Updating Justice
Law and Justice Foundation of NSW, February 2013) 3
http://www.lawfoundation.net.au/ljf/site/templates/UpdatingJustice/$file/UJ_19_Finalisation_Aus_FINAL.pdf
Access to Justice
A Strategic Framework
Nigel J Balmer and Pascoe
Pleasence, 'From the Frying Pan to the Fire: The Impact of Small
Businesses’ Legal Problems' (
Updating Justice
No 52, Law and
Justice Foundation of NSW, June 2017)
http://www.lawfoundation.net.au/ljf/site/templates/UpdatingJustice/$file/UJ_52_Frying_pan_business.pdf
Victorian Small Business Commissioner, 'The Costs of Participating in
Business-to-Business Disputes at the Victorian Civil and
Administration Tribunal
(VCAT)' (Information sheet, 2014) 2
<https://www.vsbc.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/vsbc-business-dispute-costs.pdf>.
Access to Justice
A Strategic Framework
Rabinovich-Einy and Katsh,
‘The New New Courts’ (n 3) 169.
Shannon Salter and Darin
Thompson, 'Public-Centred Civil Justice Redesign: A Case Study of the British
Columbia Civil Resolution
Tribunal' (2016-17) 3
McGill Journal of Dispute
113, 135 (‘Public-Centred Civil Justice
Redesign’).
Rabinovich-Einy and Katsh,
‘The New New Courts’ (n 3) 203.
See, eg, Joint Technology
Committee (n 50) 7.
In his Interim Report, Lord
Justice Briggs discussed the concept of ‘The Line’, below which the
aggregate costs of legal
representation in litigation are disproportionate to
the amount in contention. Most people consulted stated that the value of the
dispute would need to be between £50,000 and £100,000 to go over The
Line. Lord Justice Briggs concluded this represented
a real barrier to access to
justice; Lord Justice Briggs,
Civil Courts Structure Review
Darin Thompson, 'Creating
New Pathways to Justice Using Simple Artificial Intelligence and Online Dispute
Resolution' (2015) 1(2)
International Journal of Online Dispute
4, 10 (‘Creating New Pathways’).
Ayelet Sela, 'Streamlining
Justice: How Online Courts Can Resolve the Challenges of Pro Se Litigation'
(2016) 26(Winter)
Cornell Journal of Law & Public Policy
(‘Streamlining Justice’).
Peter Cashman, 'Civil
Procedure, Politics and the Process of Reform' in Michael Legg and Miiko Kumar
Ten Years of the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(Lawbook Co, 2015)
Tamara Goriely, Richard
Moorhead and Pamela Abrams, 'More Civil Justice? The Impact of the Woolf Reforms
on Pre-action Behaviour'
(Research Study 43, The Law Society and Civil Justice
Council, 2002) xiii <https://orca.cf.ac.uk/44483/1/557.pdf>.
Supreme Court of New South
Practice Note No. SC CL 6:
Supreme Court Common Law Division -
Possession List
, 10 August 2012, cl 15
http://www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/practice_notes/nswsc_pc.nsf/a15f50afb1aa22a9ca2570ed000a2b08/ae3b414fa0c27a5bca2579c6007cac2e?OpenDocument
Cashman (n 89) 227.
See generally JUSTICE
Working Party,
Preventing Digital Exclusion from Online Justice
April 2018) 4
<https://2bquk8cdew6192tsu41lay8t-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Preventing-Digital-Exclusion-from-Online-Justice.pdf>;
Julian Thomas et al,
Measuring Australia’s Digital Divide: The
Australian Digital Inclusion Index 2017
(Report, 2017)
<https://digitalinclusionindex.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Australian-Digital-Inclusion-Index-2017.pdf>.
Thomas et al (n 93) 5.
Hugh M. McDonald and
Zhigang Wei, ‘Resolving Legal Problems: The Role of Disadvantage’
Updating Justice
No 19, Law and Justice Foundation of NSW, June 2018) 1
http://www.lawfoundation.net.au/ljf/site/templates/UpdatingJustice/$file/UJ_56_Resolution_disadvantage.pdf
JUSTICE Working Party (n
93); Catrina Denvir et al, ‘Assisted Digital Support for Civil Justice
System Users: Demand, Design
and Implementation’ (Final Research Report,
Civil Justice Council, April 2018)
<https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/cjc-report-on-assisted-digital-support.pdf>.
Good Things Foundation and
HM Courts and Tribunal Service, ‘HM Courts and Tribunals Service
Face-To-Face Assisted Digital
Service: A Handbook for Online Centres’
(Handbook, 20 March 2018)
<https://www.onlinecentresnetwork.org/sites/default/files/online_centre_handbook_v.1.pdf>.
Murray Gleeson,
‘The Judicial Method: Essentials and Inessentials’ (2010) 9(4)
The Judicial Review
Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police v Zhao
[2015] HCA 5
(2015) 255 CLR 46
, 60 [44] (French CJ,
Hayne, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ).
Justice James Spigelman,
‘The Principle of Open Justice: A Comparative Perspective’
[2006] UNSWLawJl 19
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 150; Chief Justice
Marilyn Warren, ‘Open Justice in the Technological Age’
[2014] MonashULawRw 5
(2014) 40(1)
Monash University Law Review
Jason Bosland and
Jonathan Gill, ‘The Principle of Open Justice and the Judicial Duty to
Give Public Reasons’
[2014] MelbULawRw 20
(2014) 38(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Justice Spigelman (n
Sharon Rodrick,
‘Open Justice, the Media and Avenues of Access to Documents on the Court
[2006] UNSWLawJl 40
(2006) 29(3)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Local Court
Hogan v Hinch
[2011] HCA 4
(2011) 243 CLR 506
, 531 [21] (French CJ);
John Fairfax & Sons Limited v
Police Tribunal of NSW
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
, 476–7 (McHugh JA, Glass JA
agreeing at 467).
Rodrick (n 103) 95.
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v Ryde Local Court
[2005] NSWCA 101
(2005) 62 NSWLR 512
(Spigelman CJ, Mason and Beazley JJ agreeing at 503).
Rodrick (n 103) 129.
See, eg, Sir Etherton,
‘Civil Justice After Jackson’ (n 30) 19 [39].
Paul Magrath,
‘Court Reform and Open Justice: Responses to the Public Accounts
Committee’s Transforming Courts and Tribunals
Transparency Project
(Blog, 12 June 2018)
http://www.transparencyproject.org.uk/court-reform-and-open-justice-responses-to-the-public-accounts-committees-transforming-courts-and-tribunals-inquiry/
See, eg, Committee of
Public Accounts (n 28) 13 [22].
JUSTICE Working Party (n
See, generally, Legg,
‘The Future of Dispute Resolution’ (n 67) 234.
Sir Ernest Ryder,
'Securing Open Justice' (Speech, Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for Procedural
Law & Saarland University,
1 February 2018) 2, 5 [8]
https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/ryder-spt-open-justice-luxembourg-feb-2018.pdf
Lord Justice Briggs,
Civil Courts Structure Review
(n 6) 50 [6.69].
Justice Spigelman (n
‘Expanding Access
to Justice through Online Dispute Resolution’ (n 1); Condlin (n 65)
Thomas and Tomlinson
Rodrick (n 103)
Sir Etherton, ‘The
Civil Court of the Future’ (n 31) 18 [56]; Sir Etherton, ‘Civil
Justice After Jackson’
(n 30) 19 [39]. Note that the Prison and Courts HC
Bill (2016-17) 170, cl 34
included provision for public participation in
proceedings conducted by video or audio. This bill did not proceed due to the
Lord Justice Briggs,
Civil Courts Structure Review
(n 6) 25 [4.11]; Sir Etherton, ‘The
Civil Court of the Future’ (n 31) 18 [56].
Lord Justice Briggs,
Civil Courts Structure Review
(n 6) 53 [6.85].
Sir Etherton, ‘The
Civil Court of the Future’ (n 31) 18 [56].
Judge Nigel Bird,
‘Open Justice in an Online Post Reform World: A Constant and Most Watchful
Respect’ (2017) 36(1)
Civil Justice Quarterly
Hollander-Blumoff and Tom R Tyler, ‘Procedural Justice and the Rule of
Law: Fostering Legitimacy in Alternative Dispute
Resolution’ [2011]
Journal of Dispute Resolution
Procedure Act 2005
Russell v Duke of
[1949] 1 All ER 109
, 118 (Tucker LJ) quoted in
R v Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission; Ex parte Angliss Group
Civil Procedure Act
Note that parties do not have the right to cross-examine
witnesses in the Small Claims Division.
National Companies
& Securities Commission v News Corporation Ltd
[1984] HCA 29
(1984) 156 CLR 296
(Gibbs CJ, Brennan J agreeing at 326).
Michael Legg,
‘Reconciling the Goals of Minimising Cost and Delay with the Principle of
a Fair Trial in the Australian Civil
Justice System’
(2014) 33(2)
Justice Quarterly
, 169 (‘Reconciling the Goals’). See
section 62(3)
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) as to directions that
a court can make that may restrict the ‘fairness’ of a trial.
Sonya Joy Willis, ‘The Case for Case Management: Justice, Efficiency
and Procedural Fairness in Australian Civil Procedure’
(PhD Thesis,
The University of Sydney, 2018).
Lord Justice Briggs,
Civil Courts Structure Review
(n 6) 41 [6.22]–[6.26];
Resolution Tribunal Act
Suzie Forell and
Catriona Mirrlees-Black, ‘Data Insights in Civil Justice: NSW Local
Court’ (Report, Law and Justice
Foundation of NSW, November 2016) 8
http://www.lawfoundation.net.au/ljf/site/templates/reports/$file/Local_Court_Report_2016.pdf
See Supreme Court of
NSW, ‘Representing yourself in civil proceedings in the Supreme Court of
New South Wales’ (Fact
Sheet, March 2015)
http://www.supremecourt.justice.nsw.gov.au/Documents/Services%20and%20Support/Self%20Represented%20Litigant%20Fact%20Sheet%20Version%2013.docx
Hodder Rook & Associates Pty Ltd v Genworth Financial Mortgage
Insurance Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 279
, [38]–[42] (Young JA) for a
discussion regarding the court’s duty in relation to self represented
Salter, ‘British
Columbia's Civil Resolution Tribunal’ (n 19) 124–5; Sela,
‘Streamlining Justice’
(n 88) 337–9; Thompson, ‘Creating
New Pathways’ (n 87) 8-9.
Hollander-Blumoff and
Tyler (n 124) 3.
‘Streamlining Justice’ (n 88) 377.
‘Streamlining Justice’ (n 88) 377, 381–2.
Youyang Hou et al,
‘Factors in Fairness and Emotion in Online Case Resolution Systems’
(Conference Paper, CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
6–11 May 2017) 2511, 2519
<https://repository.law.umich.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2995&context=articles>.
‘Streamlining Justice’ (n 88) 359–361.
Youyang Hou et al (n
Catrina Denvir et al (n
Marc Galanter,
‘Why the “Haves” Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the Limits of
Legal Change’
(1974) 9(1)
Law and Society Review
Legg, ‘Reconciling
the Goals’ (n 129) 172.
See, eg, Joint
Technology Committee (n 50) 6.
See, eg, Ayelet Sela,
‘The Effect of Online Technologies on Dispute Resolution System Design:
Antecedents, Current Trends,
and Future Directions’ (2017) 21(3)
& Clark Law Review
See, eg, Joint
Technology Committee (n 50) 8.
‘Creating New Pathways’ (n 87)
Joe Tomlinson,
‘Measuring to Know and Measuring to Manage: An ODR Access to Justice
Law, Technology and Access to Justice
(Blog, 1 August
<https://law-tech-a2j.org/odr/measuring-to-know-and-measuring-to-manage-the-proposal-for-an-access-to-justice-audit-of-odr-procedures/>.
Salter, ‘British
Columbia's Civil Resolution Tribunal’ (n 19) 124; Salter and Thompson,
'Public-Centred Civil Justice
Redesign’ (n 83) 124–5.
Salter and Thompson,
'Public-Centred Civil Justice Redesign’ (n 83) 122.
The Productivity
Commission collects basic civil justice data; Productivity Commission,
on Government Services
(24 January 2019) ch 7
<https://www.pc.gov.au/research/ongoing/report-on-government-services/2019/justice/courts>.
For an analysis of civil
justice data quality and completeness for the purposes of answering policy
questions in NSW, see Law and
Justice Foundation of NSW,
Data Insights in
Civil Justice
(Report series, 2016–8)
http://www.lawfoundation.net.au/ljf/app/5141D05E8AC0EF1D85258078004EC072.html
Common fund orders have
been endorsed by the Full Federal Court in
Money Max Int Pty Ltd v QBE
Insurance Group Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 148
(2016) 245 FCR 191
, 192 and further upheld by the recent
decisions of the Full Federal Court in
Lenthall v Westpac Life Insurance
Services Ltd
[2018] FCA 1422
(2018) 363 ALR 698
, 715 [63] and the NSW Court of Appeal in
Brewster v BMW Australia Ltd
[2019] NSWCA 35
, [117] following a joint
sitting of both courts.
In the class action
arising out of the Montara oil spill, claims for losses by Indonesian seaweed
farmers were not commenced within
the applicable limitation period. Thus, the
proceeding was commenced after individual instructions were obtained from 15,000
members with each seeking an extension of time for the purpose of pursuing
their claim. The lead applicant succeeded in obtaining
an extension of time in
respect of his claim;
Sanda v PTTEP Australasia (Ashmore Cartier) Pty Ltd (No
[2017] FCA 1272.
Some of the pitfalls of
using standard questionnaires (or online systems) rather than client interviews
are illustrated by the case
Robert v Cashman
[2000] NSWSC 770
[53]–[64] (Whealy J).
See, eg, the
off-the-shelf programs reviewed at ‘Legal Software’,
(Web Page, 15 June 2019)
<https://www.softwareadvice.com/au/legal/>.
See, eg, Justice Peter
Vickery, ‘Managing the Paper: Taming the Leviathan’
(2012) 22(2)
Journal of Judicial Administration
Justice Peter Vickery,
‘New Horizons for the Bar in the Age of Technology’ (Conference
Paper, Australian Bar Association
Conference, 7 July 2017) 17.
<https://austbar.asn.au//uploads/pdfs/abaconf2017/Vickery,%20the%20Hon.%20Justice%20Peter_New%20Horizons%20for%20the%20Bar%20in%20the%20Age%20of%20Technology.pdf>
(‘New Horizons for the Bar’).
See, eg, Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Civil Justice Review
(Report No 14, 28 May 2008) ch 6;
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Discovery of Documents in Federal
(Report No 115, 25 May 2011) chs 4–6.
George Boole was an
English mathematician who developed an algebraic method described in his book
The Mathematical Analysis of Logic
(1847) and further elaborated in
Investigation of the Laws of Thought
Douglas W Oard,
, College of Information Studies and
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland MD United
States, March 10, 2010. Oard and his co-authors have
conducted significant research and published numerous papers on the design and
evaluation of electronic methods for the review of documentary evidence in civil
litigation; ’Doug Oard’s Research Page’
(Web Page, 2 Jan 2015)
<https://ece.umd.edu/~oard/research.html#image>.
Nicholas M Pace and
Laura Zakaras, ‘
The Cost of
Producing Electronic Documents in Civil Lawsuits: Can They Be Sharply Reduced
Without Sacrificing Quality?
’ (Research Brief, Rand Institute for
Civil Justice, April 2012) 1
<https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/RB9650.html>.
Nicholas M Pace and
Laura Zakaras,
Where the Money Goes: Understanding Litigant Expenditures for
Producing Electronic Discovery
(Rand Corporation, 2012) 66
<https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monographs/2012/RAND_MG1208.pdf>.
Justice Vickery,
‘New Horizons for the Bar’ (n 160) 17.
See generally
‘Text REtrieval Conference (TREC)’,
(Web Page, 30 May
http://trec.nist.gov
. The TREC workshops encompass research in
information retrieval in a wide range of areas and disciples, not confined to
A number of scholarly articles on electronic search methodologies are
published in the journal
Artificial Intelligence and Law
(Springer). See
also Ellen M Voorhees and Donna K Harman (eds),
TREC Experiment and
Evaluation in Information Retrieval
(The MIT Press, 2005).
Victor Stanley, Inc.
v. Creative Pipe, Inc.
250 FRD 251, 262 (D Md, 2008).
US v O’Keefe
537 F Supp 2d 14
, 24 (DDC, 2008).
Erick Gunawan and Tom
Pritchards, Technology and the Law Committee, ‘Technology Assisted
Review’ (Research paper, Law
Institute of Victoria, 24 November 2017) 1
<https://www.liv.asn.au/getattachment/Professional-Practice/Areas-of-Law/Technology-and-the-Law/Resources/20171124_LP_TechnologyAndTheLaw_TAR_V04.pdf.aspx>.
These include
de-duplication technology; near duplication technology; email threading
technology; and automated privilege detection;
Justice Vickery, ‘New
Horizons for the Bar’ (n 160) 19.
For example, in
McConnell Dowell Constructors (Aust) Pty Ltd v Santam Ltd (No 1)
, Vickery J of the Victorian Supreme Court appointed a special referee
to assist with questions arising from discovery and inspection
of voluminous
documents, in particular the use of electronic discovery processes such as TAR
or predictive coding review.
See generally John
Tredennick et al,
TAR for Smart People: How Technology Assisted Review Works
and Why it Matters for Legal Professionals
(Catalyst, 3
2018); Gordon V Cormack and Maura R Grossman, ‘Evaluation of
Machine-Learning Protocols for Technology-Assisted Review
in Electronic
Discovery’ (Conference Paper, ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, 6–11
http://plg2.cs.uwaterloo.ca/~gvcormac/calstudy/study/sigir2014-cormackgrossman.pdf
Thomas Davey and Michael Legg, ‘Predictive Coding: Machine Learning
Disrupts Discovery’ (2017) 32
LSJ: Law Society of NSW Journal
Gemma Thomas,
‘Five Tips for Successful Use of Technology Assisted Review (TAR)’,
Pinsent Masons
(Web Page, 15 February 2018)
<https://www.out-law.com/en/articles/2018/february/five-tips-for-successful-use-of-technology-assisted-review-tar/>.
Da Silva Moore v
Publicis Groupe
287 FRD 182
, 183 (SDNY 2012).
McConnell Dowell
Constructors (Aust) Pty Ltd v Santam Ltd (No 1)
(2016) 51 VR 421
McConnell Dowell Constructors (Aust) Pty Ltd v Santam Ltd (No 2)
; Supreme Court of Victoria,
Practice Note SC Gen 5: Technology in
Civil Litigation,
2 July 2018.
‘Technology
Assisted Review Plays Key Role in Litigation’,
Supreme Court of
(News Update, 14 December 2016)
<https://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/news/technology-assisted-review-plays-key-role-in-litigation>.
Justice Vickery,
‘New Horizons for the Bar’ (n 160)
Pyrrho Investments
Ltd v MWB Property Ltd
[2016] EWHC 256 (Ch).
David Brown v BCA Trading
[2016] EWHC 1464 (Ch)
, 17.6 million potentially discoverable documents
were initially reduced to 3.1 million using de-duplication technology.
Irish Bank Resolution
Corporation Ltd Quinn
[2015] IEHC 175.
In that case, the High Court of
Ireland noted that technology assisted review using predictive coding is at
least as accurate as
and probably more accurate than manual or linear methods in
identifying relevant documents and would facilitate a more economical
expeditious discovery process;
Irish Bank Resolution Corporation Ltd Quinn
[2015] IEHC 175
, [66]–[67].
Rio Tinto Plc v Vale
306 FRD 125 (SDNY
Justice Vickery,
‘New Horizons for the Bar’ (n 160)
James A Sherer, David
Choi and Csilla Boga-Lofaro, ‘Court Guideposts for the Path to Technology
Assisted Review Adoption’
(2018) 35(2)
Computer and Internet Lawyer
Int Pty Ltd v QBE Insurance Group Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 148
(2016) 245 FCR 191
Superannuation Fund Pty Ltd v Bank of Queensland Ltd (No 2)
[2017] FCA 1231
(6 October 2017).
Cantor v Audi
Australia Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2017] FCA 1079.
QNI Metals Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 107
(2018) 358 ALR 88
Parbery v QNI Metals Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 180
Parbery v QNI Metals Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 276.
Justice Vickery,
‘New Horizons for the Bar’ (n 160)
‘eDiscovery in SA
- Basic guide to Technology Assisted Review for SA’,
Terry Harrison
(Web Page, 10 July 2018)
http://www.terryharrison.co/blog/2018/7/10/ediscovery-in-sa-basic-guide-to-technology-assisted-review-for-sa
Cantor v Audi
Australia Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2017] FCA 1079.
Seven Network Ltd v
[2007] FCA 1062
See Anna Olijnyk,
‘Justice and Efficiency in Mega-Litigation’ (PhD thesis, University
of Adelaide, 2014) 196
<https://digital.library.adelaide.edu.au/dspace/bitstream/2440/91442/3/02whole.pdf>.
This text is now also available as a book; Anna Olijnyk,
Justice and
Efficiency in Mega-Litigation
(Hart Publishing, 2019).
Robert Size,
‘Taking Advantage of Advances in Technology to Enhance the Rule of
(2017) 91(7)
Australian Law Journal
Master (UK) v Forty Two International (No 3)
[2009] FCA 1306
(2009) 181 FCR 152
(Buchanan J) cited in Size (n 194) 586;
Blackrock Asset Management Services
Australia Ltd v Waked (No 2)
[2011] FCA 479
[46] (Perram J) cited in Size (n
Liverpool City
Council v McGraw-Hill Financial, Inc (now known as S and P Global Inc)
[2018] FCA 1289
, [77], Lee J raised the prospect of tenders being sought for the
purpose of administration of the settlement but permitted the solicitors
appointed as administrators of the scheme, subject to external scrutiny of their
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Integrity, Fairness and Efficiency–An Inquiry into Class
Action Proceedings and Third-Party Litigation Funders
(Report 132, 24
January 2019) 9
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/publications/integrity-fairness-and-efficiency%E2%80%94-inquiry-class-action-proceedings-and-third-party>.
There is a considerable
body of literature dealing with claims resolution facilities established in
connection with class actions,
mass tort litigation and Chapter 11 bankruptcy
proceedings in the United States; see, eg, Deborah R Hensler, ‘Assessing
Resolution Facilities: What We Need to Know’ (1990) 53(4)
and Contemporary Problems
175; Deborah R Hensler, ‘Alternative Courts?
Litigation-Induced Claims Resolution Facilities’
Stanford Law
; Francis E McGovern, ‘The What and Why of Claims
Resolution Facilities’
(2005) 57(5)
Stanford Law Review
Frances E McGovern, ‘Second-Generation Dispute System Design Issues in
Managing Settlements’
(2008) 24(1)
Ohio State Journal on Dispute
; Frances E McGovern, ‘Distribution of Funds in Class
Actions - Claims Administration’
(2009) 35(1)
Corporation Law
Two examples of recently established claims
resolution facilities include the facility established in 2015 pursuant to the
Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganisation of New England Pharmacy, Inc, the Tort
Trust Agreement in respect of claims arising out of contaminated
injections, and
the claims resolution facility adopted as part of the plan of re-organisation of
Garlock Sealing Technologies LLC
et al in 2018 in connection with asbestos
claims. Claims resolution facilities have also been set up in connection with
international
disputes; see, eg, Frances E McGovern, ‘Dispute Systems
Design: The United Nations Compensation Commission’
Harvard Negotiation Law Review
In the consumer class
action in the Federal Court on behalf of purchasers of Nurofen, the settlement
agreement provided for the
appointment of an accounting firm as settlement
administrator. The settlement was approved by Nicholas J in 2017;
Reckitt Benckiser (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 341.
In class actions, any
settlement is required to obtain court approval and the court is required to be
satisfied that the proposed
settlement is fair and in the interests of the group
members. In the Federal Court context, see
Federal Court of Australia Act
; Federal Court of Australia,
Practice Note GPN-CA: Class
Actions Practice Note
, 25 October 2016, [14.1]–[14.6]. The court will
also supervise the implementation of any settlement distribution scheme.
Camilleri v The Trust
Company (Nominees) Ltd
[2015] FCA 1468
, [5] (Moshinsky J) citing
v SPI Electricity Pty Ltd
[2012] VSC 204
, [37]–[39]
, Emerton J approved a
settlement notwithstanding the possibility that the claims assessment principles
may be more generous in respect
of some group members compared with others: at
[38]. See also
Stanford v DePuy International Ltd (No 6)
[2016] FCA 1452
[118] (Wigney J).
Rebecca Gilsenan and
Michael Legg, ‘Australian Class Action Settlement Distribution Scheme
Design’ (Research Report
No 1, IMF Bentham Class Action Research
Initiative, 1 June 2017) 4
http://www.cari.unsw.edu.au/sites/cari.unsw.edu.au/files/class-action-settlement-distribution-design-CARI-paper.pdf/
Dorajay Pty
Ltd v Aristocrat Leisure Ltd
[2009] FCA 19
, [20] (Stone J);
Anderson Investments Pty Ltd v Oz Minerals Ltd
[2011] FCA 801
, [22] (Emmett
Inabu Pty Ltd v Leighton Holdings Ltd (No 2)
[2014] FCA 911
(Jacobson J). In a more recent case, Murphy J approved of the loss assessment
methodology proposed for the settlement distribution
Investments Pty Limited v Cao (No 2)
[2018] FCA 527
, [100], [106].
Milling Co Pty Ltd v F Hoffman-La Roche Ltd (No 2)
[2006] FCA 1388
(2006) 236 ALR 322
in Gilsenan and Legg (n 202) 11 nn 43;
Jarra Creek Central Packing Shed Pty
Ltd v Amcor Ltd
[2011] ATPR 42-361
cited in Gilsenan and Legg (n 202) 11 nn
Wright Rubber Pty Ltd v Bayer AG (No 3)
[2011] FCA 1172
Gilsenan and Legg (n 202) 11 nn 43;
De Brett Seafood Pty Ltd v Qantas Airways
cited in Gilsenan and Legg (n 202) 11 nn 43. As Gilsenan and Legg
note, the four class actions that settled had settlement distribution
that were structured along similar lines: at 12.
According to Gilsenan
and Legg, the types of settlement schemes adopted in product liability and mass
tort cases are varied: at
17–22. Some cases adopt global sum settlements
with individualised distribution such as the Kilmore-East Kinglake bushfire
class action in
Matthews v AusNet Electricity Services Pty Ltd
Others have adopted process settlements involving a two stage procedure for
determining individual entitlement and assessment of
quantum, such as in the LCS
® Duofix ™ Femoral Components class action in respect of components of
knee replacement implants,
which was heard in
Casey v DePuy International Ltd
[2012] FCA 1370
, and other Victorian bushfire cases, such as
Thomas v Powercor Australia Ltd
[2011] VSC 614
Perry v Powercor
Australia Ltd
[2012] VSC 113
Place v Powercor Australia Ltd
[2013] VSC 6.
Gilsenan and Legg (n
202) 22–3. They refer to the United States silicone gel breast implant
litigation and the national football
league players’ concussion injury
litigation: at 23. As they note, a matrix was used in
Amom v New South
[2016] NSWSC 1900
a case involving the false imprisonment of young
people. The matrix allocated compensation based on various factors such as false
imprisonment, strip search, degree of humiliation, degree of discomfort and age.
They also note that reference was made to a US grid
style payment scheme in
Stanford v DePuy International Ltd (No 6)
[2016] FCA 1452
, [105], [108]:
at 22, nn 92.
Multi District
Litigation (MDL) procedures provide for the transfer and consolidation of large
numbers of cases filed in different
federal courts to one judge for all
pre-trial proceedings where the cases give rise to common issues (e.g. product
liability claims
involving the same product).
Jaime Dodge,
‘Disaggregative Mechanisms: Mass Claims Resolution without Class
Actions’ (2014) 63(6)
Emory Law Journal
1253, 1253.
Mobility LLC v Concepcion
(2011). The Court held that federal
arbitration legislation preempted a Californian state law that invalidated most
class action
waivers in consumer contracts on the grounds of unconscionability;
see also the recent decision in
Epic Systems Corporation v Lewis
__ (2018) where the Court (by a 5:4 majority) upheld a binding arbitration
clause in an employment contract thus preventing
collective class action
litigation. For an examination of the status and enforceability of mandatory
foreign arbitration clauses
under Australian law, see Richard Garnett,
‘Arbitration of Cross-Border Consumer Transactions in Australia: A Way
[2017] SydLawRw 23
(2017) 39(4)
Sydney Law Review
Dodge (n 208) 1258.
The policies and
procedures of the Dalkon Shield Claimants Trust are examined in detail by the
chair of the trust: Georgene M Vairo,
‘The Dalkon Shield Claimants Trust:
Paradigm Lost (or Found)?’ (1992) 61(3)
Fordham Law Review
also Kenneth R Feinberg, ‘The Dalkon Shield Claimants Trust’
Law and Contemporary Problems
The calculator was
previously located at ‘Official Vioxx Settlement Calculator’,
Official Vioxx Settlement
<www.officialvioxxsettlement.com/calculator> but the domain website has
since been listed for sale by the owner.
American Law Institute,
Principles of the Law of Aggregate Litigation
(2010) 54 citing Paul H
Edelman, Richard A. Nagareda and Charles Silver, ‘The Allocation Problem
in Multiple Claimant Representations’
Supreme Court Economic
For example, for a
critique of the settlement in the diet drug product liability litigation, see
Alexandra D Lahav, ‘The Law
and Large Numbers: Preserving Adjudication in
Complex Litigation’
(2007) 59(2)
Florida Law Review
Law and Large Numbers’). See also Deborah R Hensler, ‘Revisiting the
Monster: New Myths and Realities of
Class Action and Other Large Scale
Litigation’
(2001) 11(2)
Duke Journal of Comparative and International
A number of examples are
cited in Lahav, ‘The Law and Large Numbers’ (n 214)
Alexandra D Lahav,
‘The Case for “Trial by Formula”’ (2012) 90(3)
571, 592 (‘The Case for “Trial by
Formula”’); see generally Howard M Erichson and Benjamin C Zipursky,
Versus Closure’ (2011) 96(2)
Cornell Law Review
Lahav, ‘The Case
for “Trial by Formula”’ (n 216) 609.
These methods are
discussed in Gilsenan and Legg (n 202) 7–9.
In re Merck & Co
Inc Vioxx Securities Litigation
MDL 1658 (SRC, 2003).
‘In re Merck &
Co., Inc. Vioxx Securities Litigation’,
Merck Vioxx Securities
(Web Page, 10 January 2019)
<https://www.merckvioxxsecuritieslitigation.com/>.
In Re Payment Card
Interchange Fee and Merchant Discount Antitrust Litigation
MDL 1720 (DEDNY,
<https://www.epiqglobal.com/en-au/results>.
As Justice Vickery has
observed, there are some fundamental design parameters for courts adopting
technology and designing workable
systems which he describes at the
’ principles:
implicity in operation;
ser consultation;
eliability;
lexibility;
fficiency and
obust security and back-up systems; Justice
Vickery, ‘New Horizons for the Bar’ (n 160) 2–3.
The competing demands
between compensation on the merits or rough justice are discussed by Michael
Legg, ‘Class Action Settlement
Distribution in Australia: Compensation on
the Merits or Rough Justice?’
[2016] MqLawJl 6
Macquarie Law Journal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (518 KB)
PDF format (948 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter