URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Serpell, Andrew J --- "The Future of Financial Services Regulatory Reform in Australia: Conduct and Disclosure Obligations" [2008] MqJlBLaw 15; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 329
The Future of Financial Services Regulatory Reform in Australia: Conduct and Disclosure Obligations
I Introduction
II The Consumer Protection Roles of ASIC and the ACCC
III The Regulation of Consumer Credit
A Overview of the current regulation of consumer credit
B Criticisms of the current regulation of consumer credit
C Commonwealth or State Regulation?
D What regulatory requirements should apply to consumer credit?
IV Mandatory Point-of-Sale Product Disclosure Requirements
A Overview of the current point-of-sale disclosure requirements
B The objectives of mandatory point-of-sale disclosure
C A key criticism of the current regime: disclosure documents are sometimes incomprehensible
V The Licensing Regime
A Overview of the current licensing regime
B Criticisms of the licensing regime
VI Conclusion
The Future of Financial Services Regulatory Reform in
Australia: Conduct and Disclosure Obligations
This paper considers the issue of regulatory reform of the conduct and
disclosure obligations that apply to participants in the financial
industry. It does so by revisiting key recommendations contained in the Wallis
Report (1996) in light of subsequent developments
notably the Productivity
Commission’s recent review of Australia’s Consumer Policy Framework
and the Australian Government’s
Green Paper on Financial Services and
Credit Reform. This paper analyses four key areas where law reform is likely to
occur in the
a. the consumer protection roles of ASIC and the ACCC;
b. the regulation of consumer credit;
c. mandatory point-of-sale product disclosure requirement;
d. the licensing regime.
Two key themes emerge from this analysis. First, the current law contains
some undesirable regulatory ‘gaps’ or uncertainties
which should be
addressed. Secondly, the law may need to be reformed to address the problem of
incomprehensible disclosure documents.
I Introduction
The Financial System Inquiry Final Report (the Wallis Report) was published
in March 1997
- more than 10 years
ago. In essence the Wallis Report recommended that there should be three main
Commonwealth regulators in the
financial services sector:
a. the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) - responsible for
consumer protection and market integrity across
most of the financial services
b. the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) - responsible for the
prudential regulation of banks, insurance companies,
building societies,
friendly societies, credit unions and superannuation funds;
c. the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) - responsible for systemic stability and
the payments system.
Further, the Wallis Report made numerous detailed recommendations regarding
the scope and substance of the law and the jurisdiction
of the regulators. Most
of the recommendations relevant to the conduct and disclosure obligations of
participants in the financial
services sector are contained in Chapter 7 of the
Wallis Report. A key theme was that a consistent regulatory regime covering
intermediary
and market licensing, conduct and disclosure should apply in
relation to all (or at least most) financial products and
This has been achieved
through the enactment of the
Financial Services Reform Act 2001
which commenced on 11 March 2002 and inserted a new Chapter 7 into the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). The law reform process did not end on 11
March 2002. Rather, the law in this area has been subject to frequent change
the past six years through two major pieces of amending legislation (the
Financial Services Reform Amendment Act 2003
(Cth) and the
Corporations Legislation Amendment (Simpler Regulatory System) Act 2007
(Cth)) as well as numerous ‘batches’ of regulations. There have
been several ‘drivers’ of this law reform
process, including
concerns about whether the regulatory burden placed on business is too
With the election of a new Commonwealth Government in November 2007, it is
timely to stand back and consider the likely future direction
of regulatory
reform in Australia. This paper will consider the issue of regulatory
specifically in relation to
the conduct and disclosure obligations of participants in the financial services
industry. It will do
so by revisiting certain key recommendations contained in
Chapter 7 of the Wallis Report in light of subsequent developments in the
financial markets and their regulation. In particular, this paper will consider
relevant recommendations and issues arising out of
the Productivity
Commission’s recent review of Australia’s Consumer Policy
as well as the Australian
Government’s Green Paper on Financial Services and Credit
This paper analyses four
key areas where law reform is likely to occur in the future:
a. the consumer protection roles of ASIC and the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (ACCC);
b. the regulation of consumer credit;
c. mandatory point-of-sale product disclosure requirement;
d. the licensing regime.
II The Consumer Protection Roles of ASIC and the
Recommendation 3 of the Wallis Report was that ASIC should have ‘sole
responsibility for administering consumer protection regulation
The Wallis Report
did not recommend that the consumer protection jurisdiction of the ACCC in
respect of financial services be ‘formally
withdrawn’ as it
considered that to do so could potentially lead to the emergence of regulatory
gaps. Nevertheless, the legislation
ultimately enacted not only conferred
consumer protection powers on
powers from the ACCC in respect of financial
This made ASIC the
sole Commonwealth consumer protection regulator with respect to financial
services generally. It also meant that
the consumer protection jurisdiction of
the ACCC now covers all parts of the economy except for one area: financial
The Productivity Commission has recently completed its review of
Australia’s consumer policy
One of the key issues
considered in the review was whether there should be a single, national generic
consumer protection regime
covering all products and services (to replace the
current myriad of Commonwealth and state-based consumer protection schemes).
As part of its deliberations, the Productivity Commission considered whether
the consumer protection jurisdiction of the ACCC with
respect to financial
services should be re-instated. A key argument for doing this is to overcome the
arise where a consumer protection issue involves a
service that is arguably - but not clearly - a ‘financial
. An example is
the promotion of a real estate investment opportunity which is arguably (but not
clearly) a ‘financial
In such cases,
it may not always be clear whether ASIC or the ACCC has consumer protection
the Productivity Commission has
recommended that the economy-wide jurisdiction of the ACCC should be
This recommendation
could be implemented by repealing ss 51AAB, 51AF and 75AZA of the
Practices Act 1974
As noted by the Productivity Commission, if this recommendation was to be
implemented there would clearly be a need for ASIC and the
ACCC to coordinate
their regulatory efforts to ensure that increased compliance costs for the
financial services industry do not
In this regard, ASIC has
indicated its confidence that it and the ACCC can ‘work together to
develop and implement effective
arrangements to coordinate regulatory activity,
avoiding unnecessary overlaps or gaps and ensuring that it is clear for
and other stakeholders which agency to take up their complaint or
issue with in the first
There is, of course, another way to overcome the jurisdictional doubts
referred to above: simply make the ACCC the
consumer protection
regulator for the entire economy, including the financial services sector. This
model has been proposed by Allan
Fels and Fred
Under this model,
ASIC would lose its consumer protection role.
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) would simply be
repealed. Fels and Brenchley argue for this model by first assuming that ASIC is
likely to take over the market
supervision role currently performed by the
Australian Securities Exchange (ASX). They then argue that there is an
clash’ between the roles of a market supervision regulator
and a consumer protection regulator. From this, they conclude that
responsibility for financial sector consumer protection should rest with the
There are several problems with the analysis of Fels and Brenchley. First,
while the ASX’s performance in supervising the market
has received much
attention lately, it is far from clear that the ASX should or will lose its
market supervision role. Even if further
market licenses are granted to
competitors of ASX (as has been envisaged), there is no reason to assume that
the sole responsibility
for supervising all these markets will be transferred to
ASIC. Of course, ASIC will retain responsibility for enforcing the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and monitoring the performance of market
licensees, but there is no obvious reason why the ASX (or any other market
should not continue to perform a market supervisory function (i.e.
monitor and enforce compliance with its own market
In any event, even if
ASIC were to assume the market supervision role currently performed by ASX, it
is not clear that such a role
would necessarily conflict or clash with its
current financial sector consumer protection role. Rather, splitting market
and consumer protection regulation would be inconsistent with the
approach taken in the Wallis
and, interestingly,
inconsistent with the approach recently recommended in the United
III The Regulation of Consumer
Recommendation 6 of the Wallis Report was that ‘the States and
Territories should retain responsibility for the
Uniform Consumer Credit
further recommended that a review of the UCCC should take place within two years
of its commencement to consider, amongst
other things, whether a transfer of
responsibility for credit regulation to the Commonwealth would be
appropriate.
A Overview of the current regulation of consumer
At present, credit is regulated at Commonwealth as well as State or Territory
At the Commonwealth
level, ASIC administers the consumer protection provisions of the
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
which apply, amongst
other things, to any financial service provided in relation to a ‘credit
provisions are designed to prevent, for example, misleading and deceptive
conduct in relation to the provision of credit to
The licensing and
disclosure provisions of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) do not apply to
consumer credit.
Current State or Territory credit regulation consists primarily of the UCCC
together with various additional requirements which differ
from jurisdiction to
proposals exist for a National Finance
Broking Scheme which, if implemented,
would require all finance brokers to hold a licence and belong to an approved
external dispute
(The proposal is for
each State and Territory to enact legislation similar to the draft Finance
Broking Bill 2007(NSW).)
B Criticisms of the current regulation of consumer
Numerous criticisms of the current regulation of consumer credit may be made.
These criticisms relate both to the substance of the
law as well as the
mechanisms for changing it. Key criticisms include the
a. the UCCC imposes complex disclosure obligations on credit providers. These
requirements are costly for credit providers to comply
with and do not lead to
disclosure documents which consumers can readily comprehend;
b. some credit products (such as margin
are not regulated by the
UCCC at all. This means that disclosure relating to such credit products is
unregulated;
c. compliance with the UCCC can be avoided too easily (for example, it does not
apply where the consumer signs a Business Purpose
Declaration);
d. the law does not require adequate complaints resolution processes to exist
for consumers;
e. the current law does not adequately address inappropriate conduct by credit
providers and brokers such as inappropriate commission-driven
inappropriate lending practices (such as lending to people who cannot afford to
repay the loan);
f. there is currently a lack of uniformity in the law relating to consumer
credit and its administration, notably the inconsistent
regulation of finance
brokers. This leads to unnecessarily high compliance costs for credit providers
and brokers operating in more
than one jurisdiction. It may also allow
unscrupulous practices to emerge in jurisdictions with lower levels of
regulation;
g. achieving necessary law reform is extremely difficult because of the need to
achieve consensus amongst all States and Territories.
There are fears that the problems relating to mortgage broker misconduct
which have occurred in the United States may occur in Australia
if these matters
are not adequately
Two broad issues need to be considered to determine the optimal future
regulation of consumer credit in Australia. The first broad
issue to consider is
whether there should be Commonwealth or State regulation of consumer credit.
Should there be any transfer of
responsibility for regulating credit products to
the Commonwealth? If so, should all credit be regulated by the Commonwealth or
some credit products continue to be regulated by the States and
Territories? Which Commonwealth agency should be responsible for
administering
the relevant laws?
The second broad issue to consider is the regulatory requirements that should
apply in relation to consumer credit. Should credit
providers and brokers be
required to hold a licence? If so, should an Australian financial services
licence (AFSL) be required? Or
should a separate, stand-alone licensing regime
for credit be enacted? In future, what regulatory role (if any) should be played
by the UCCC? If the UCCC is retained, what amendments should be made to it?
Should the National Finance Broking Scheme be implemented?
Proposals relating to these issues are contained in the Australian
Government’s Green Paper on Financial Services and Credit
Reform (the
Green Paper).
C Commonwealth or State Regulation?
The Green Paper considers three broad options for the future regulation of
Option A: No additional Commonwealth regulation of credit products (i.e.
Option B: Commonwealth regulation of all credit products;
Option C: Commonwealth regulation of
credit products (namely,
mortgages - including reverse mortgages - and, possibly, margin loans); State
and Territory regulation of
other credit products.
The Green Paper supports option C despite the fact that Option B has been
recommended by the Productivity Commission’s review
of Australia’s
consumer policy framework
well as the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance
and Public Administration.
The Green Paper suggests that mortgages (and possibly margin loans) should be
regulated by the Commonwealth. This aligns with the
in principle
decision of the Council of Australian Governments (GOAG) that the Commonwealth
should assume responsibility for the regulation of
mortgages and margin
The Green Paper appears to envisage that ASIC would be the regulator in
respect of any Commonwealth-regulated credit
There are several arguments for comprehensive Commonwealth Regulation of
mortgages and margin loans (but not other credit products).
First, most consumer
credit is provided by way of
Considerable consumer
hardship is likely to result if inappropriate advice and mis-selling occur in
relation to mortgages. It is
argued that the existing regulation of mortgages
(including reverse mortgages) appears to be inadequate to sufficiently protect
The market for
mortgages is essentially a national market. Accordingly, it would make sense for
the future regulation of mortgages
to take place at the national level.
Secondly, margin loans are provided for investment purposes. Accordingly it
would make sense
to regulate margin loans under the same laws as investment
products (such as shares), i.e. under Commonwealth law. Thirdly, the market
credit products (other than mortgages and margin loans) is often influenced by
local or regional considerations. The States and
Territories have developed
considerable expertise in regulating these types of credit product in recent
Accordingly, the case for
fully national regulation of credit products (other than mortgages and margin
loans) is not clearly made
Despite these arguments, the author of this paper strongly supports
transferring responsibility for
consumer credit products to the
Commonwealth as recommended by the Productivity Commission. There are three main
reasons for this.
First, considerable hardship can result from inappropriate
advice and mis-selling in relation to any credit products, not only mortgages
and margin loans. In this regard, it is important to bear in mind that the
credit products most commonly acquired by the most vulnerable
consumers in
society are not mortgages or margin loans but, rather, other credit products,
such as credit cards or payday loans.
Secondly, a single regulatory regime for
all credit products would be simpler and less costly for industry and consumers
than having
different regulatory regimes for different credit products. Thirdly,
any necessary future changes to the law relating to credit products
easier and less time-consuming to achieve if all credit is regulated by the
Commonwealth.
D What regulatory requirements should apply to
consumer credit?
Mortgages and Margin Loans
Assuming mortgages and margin loans (but not other credit products) are to be
comprehensively regulated by the Commonwealth the following
issues will need to
be addressed:
a. Should the existing licensing system (Part 7.6 of the
Corporations Act
(Cth)) be applied, or should a separate, stand-alone licensing or
registration system apply?
b. Assuming the existing licensing system is applied, persons dealing or
providing advice in relation to mortgages or margin loans
will need to operate
under an AFSL licence. This will mean, for example, that membership of an
approved external complaints resolution
scheme will be
It will also mean,
amongst other things, that the licensee must manage its conflicts of
and must remain
responsible for the conduct
of its representatives
who deal in or provide advice about mortgages or margin loans.
However, it is arguable that significant modifications to the
licensing provisions will be required in order to properly tailor the
to mortgages and margin loans.
For example, should the current licensing regime be modified so that financial
services relating to mortgages provided to
clients do not
require an AFSL licence (whether the provider of the service is regulated by
APRA or not)? What other exemptions from
the requirement to hold an AFSL licence
(if any) would be appropriate? What should be the definition of ‘retail
where a financial service is provided which relates to a mortgage
or margin loan? Should the reasonable basis for advice
apply at all, or apply in a
modified fashion to advice about credit? Should any special conduct requirements
relating to mortgages
be included in the law (for example in
conduct obligations already contained in the UCCC or the Finance Broking Bill
2007 (NSW), such as an obligation to ascertain
whether a person to whom credit
is provided has the capacity to repay that
c. Should disclosure and advertising relating to mortgages and
margin loans be regulated under Part 7.9 the
Corporations Act 2001
(the product disclosure provisions) or under a separate stand-alone disclosure
regime? If mortgages are regulated under
, what modifications to that
Part will need to be made? In any event, should any or all of the existing
disclosure requirements contained
in the UCCC be retained? Is there a need for
any specific disclosure requirements for reverse mortgages (for example,
the reverse mortgage product)?
d. How will the proposed regulatory regime be implemented? For example, does the
Commonwealth already have sufficient constitutional
power to comprehensively
regulate mortgages and margin loans, or will a referral of
Other Credit Products
Assuming that some credit products continue to be regulated by the States and
Territories (in the medium to long term) the following
key issues will need to
be addressed:
a. What further changes to the UCCC should be made (for example, to make
disclosure documents easier for consumers to understand)?
b. Should be National Finance Broking Scheme be implemented to apply in relation
to these other credit products?
c. Should any other changes to State and Territory law be made to protect
consumers? (For example, is further regulation of the credit-providers
IV Mandatory Point-of-Sale Product Disclosure
Requirements
Recommendation 8 of the Wallis Report was that 'disclosure requirements for
retail financial products (deposit accounts, payment instruments,
securities,
collective investments, superannuation and insurance products) should be
reviewed … to ensure they provide information
that enables comparison
between products. This information should be comprehensible and sufficient to
enable a consumer to make an
informed decision relating to the financial
A Overview of the current point-of-sale disclosure
requirements
At present, the point-of-sale disclosure requirements imposed by Commonwealth
legislation may be summarised as follows:
a. for the issue of a
(such as a share or debenture) to an
investor, a disclosure document (such as a prospectus) must generally be given
to the investor
under Chapter 6D of the
Corporations Act 2001
b. for a recommendation that a consumer acquire a
financial product
as a managed investment scheme interest, a superannuation interest or an
insurance contract), or for an issue of a financial
product to a consumer, a
Product Disclosure Statement (PDS) must generally be given to the consumer under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). The PDS disclosure
requirements are generally less onerous than the prospectus
requirements;
c. for a recommendation that a consumer acquire a
basic deposit product
(such as a typical 'at call' deposit account issued by an authorised
deposit-taking institution (ADI)), or for an issue of a basic
deposit product to
a consumer, a PDS is not required, provided certain information about the cost
of the product is given to the
and, according to the
relevant Explanatory Statement, provided industry continues to comply with the
ASIC Guide to Good Transaction Fee Disclosure for Bank, Building Society and
Credit Union Deposit and Payment
relevant industry codes, such as the Code of Banking
and the Credit Union
Code of Practice;
d. in relation to
consumer credit
, no point-of-sale disclosure
requirements apply.
B The objectives of mandatory point-of-sale
Mandatory point-of-sale disclosure requirements (where they apply) are
intended to serve two main objectives:
To promote consumer confidence
– mandatory disclosure
promotes consumer confidence which is likely to increase the level of consumer
participation in the
financial system. Consumer confidence has various elements.
First, consumers know that all material information relating to a financial
decision must be disclosed. Secondly, consumers can comprehend the information
that they are given. Thirdly, all consumers have equal
access to relevant
information. Fourthly, consumers may have access to legal remedies if the
information they are given is defective
(for example, if material information is
not disclosed or if the product issuer makes misleading or deceptive
statements);
To promote informed financial decision-making by consumers
mandatory disclosure promotes informed financial decision-making by consumers
which increases the likelihood that consumers will
acquire products that are
suitable for their particular objectives and needs.
Confident and informed consumers will invigorate competition between
suppliers (product issuers) with flow-on benefits for the
C A key criticism of the current regime: disclosure
documents are sometimes incomprehensible
A key criticism of the current mandatory point-of-sale disclosure regime
which is often made is that it does not require disclosure
documents to be
prepared which are easy for consumers to
comprehend.
Accordingly,
disclosure documents being produced are sometimes incomprehensible, or at least
very difficult to understand. This,
in turn, reduces consumer confidence and the
ability of consumers to make informed financial decisions. This is a serious
particularly bearing in mind the prevailing retirement income policy of
the Commonwealth Government, namely, to encourage consumers
to make adequate
provision for their own financial security in retirement.
Why are disclosure documents often difficult for consumers to understand?
Some of the more important reasons arguably include the
a. the general layout of disclosure documents is often 'uninviting';
b. many consumers lack the necessary financial literacy to comprehend the
information contained in a disclosure document;
c. disclosure documents frequently use legal and technical jargon which is not
readily understood by consumers;
d. disclosure documents are often far too long (often 50-100 pages);
e. there is no prescribed form for disclosure documents (which makes it
difficult for consumers to compare products);
f. disclosure documents serve multiple functions - they not only aim to inform
consumers but are also a marketing tool;
g. disclosure documents often relate to very complex products which are
difficult to explain in a simple and concise way (for example,
managed funds
with complicated fee structures and numerous investment
It is clear that not all these causes of consumer confusion can be overcome
through regulatory reform (for example, the lack of necessary
consumer financial
literacy). Further, it should be noted that some causes of consumer confusion
are already addressed to some extent
in the current law. For example, under the
current law the information included in a Chapter 6D disclosure document or in a
be 'worded and presented in a clear, concise and effective
This obligation
arguably requires product issuers to use easy-to-understand language and to
refrain from using legal and technical
However, the 'clear,
concise and effective' obligation does not restrict the permitted length of a
disclosure document; rather, it
merely qualifies how information included in a
disclosure document needs to be presented.
The current law does not impose any limits on disclosure document length,
does not require disclosure documents to be in any prescribed
form and does not
restrict the inclusion of marketing material. The current law does, however,
include mechanisms designed to facilitate
the production of shorter disclosure
documents where the issuer wishes to do this. For example, a product issuer
required to prepare
choose to rely on either of the following
a. the issuer may incorporate by reference publicly available information
instead of including that information in the
b. the issuer may prepare a short-form PDS which summarises certain required
information rather than including it in full (under
this option a PDS which
complies fully with the law must still be prepared and must be provided to a
consumer on
It is important to note, however, that product issuers are not compelled to
utilize either of these two options; rather, a product
issuer may choose to
simply prepare a PDS which contains all the required information in
In practice, product
issuers tend to err on the side of including detailed information to avoid
potential liability for omissions.
This inevitably increases the length of
disclosure documents.
The Financial Services Working Group (FSWG) established by the Commonwealth
Government is presently considering ways to mandate or
further encourage the
preparation of shorter, simpler and more readable product disclosure documents.
Its early priorities are expected
to be disclosure for First Home Saver Accounts
and superannuation interests.
In considering how to improve disclosure documents, the FSWG will take into
account the Productivity Commission's recommendation that
requirements should be 'layered' - that is, the law should require only
information
to be actually provided to the consumer before a purchasing
decision is made, with
other more detailed information
available to the
consumer (for example, via the product issuer's
While this general
approach seems sensible, several difficult issues will need to be addressed if
it is to be effectively implemented:
a. What information should be required to be included in the document containing
key information
b. Should the maximum length of the
key information
document be
prescribed?
c. Should it be permissible to include promotional material in the
information
d. Should the
key information
document be set out in a prescribed
e. To what extent should the product issuer be liable for the
detailed information
f. To what extent (if any) are different solutions necessary for different types
of financial
In order to facilitate consumer comprehension (including the ability to
effectively compare products as envisaged by the Wallis Report),
it is arguable
that regulatory reform will be necessary to
the key information
provided to consumers to either be in a prescribed form or to be restricted in
length. However, the views of
industry and consumer groups will need to be
sought, and extensive consumer testing will be required, to determine the
optimal approach.
The Licensing Regime
The Wallis Report made two key recommendations relevant to the licensing
regime. Recommendation 13 was that a single licensing regime
established to cover investment advice and
Recommendation 16 was
that real estate agents providing investment advice should be required to hold a
…[licence] unless a
review clearly established the adequacy of existing
regulation.
A Overview of the current licensing regime
At present, financial services are regulated under the licensing provisions
in Chapter 7 of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). These provisions may be
briefly summarised as follows:
a. a person who provides a
financial service
must generally either hold a
licence (an Australian Financial Services Licence or AFSL) or provide the
service as a representative
A person provides a
financial service where, amongst other things, they provide financial product
advice or deal in a financial product;
b. a licensee must comply with various obligations, including a requirement to
have adequate arrangements in place to manage conflicts
and a requirement to
have a dispute resolution system in
c. a providing entity
comply with various conduct and disclosure obligations set out in
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) where a financial service is provided to
a retail client, including the following:
i. a Financial Services Guide (FSG) must generally be given to the
personal advice
is provided to the client, the reasonable basis for advice
must be complied with and a
Statement of Advice (SOA) must generally be given to the
is provided, a
warning must be given to the
B Criticisms of the licensing regime
Several criticisms of the current licensing regime may be made, including the
a. the scope of the current licensing provisions is arguably too narrow (or at
least unclear) in certain respects;
b. superannuation product issuers face unjustifiable barriers to the provision
of simple personal advice to fund members;
c. Statements of Advice (SOAs) are often difficult for consumers to
understand.
The Scope of the Licensing Provisions
Outline of issues raised in the Green Paper
The Green Paper identifies several areas where the scope of the current
licensing provisions is arguably too narrow (or at least unclear),
a. consumer credit;
b. promissory notes;
c. debenture issuers;
d. real property investment advice (that is, advice relating to direct
investment in real
Green Paper also considers the possibility that trustees of debenture issues
should be subject to the licensing
provisions.
In addition, the Green Paper discusses the possibility that trustee
corporations that are currently subject to State and Territory
Regulation) could
be regulated under the licensing provisions. (The paper also discusses an
alternative possible approach for regulating
trustee corporations, namely,
prudential regulation).
The regulation of real property investment advice
The issue of the regulation of real property investment advice has been
subject to several reviews in recent years.
The review contemplated by the Wallis Report was completed by ASIC in 2000.
It concluded that ‘real estate agents who give
personal recommendations
as to the suitability of particular real estate investments by reference to
investors’ individual
circumstances and needs should be subject to
authorization requirements, disclosure requirements, conduct standards and
redress mechanisms that are comparable to those that are available to
retail investors obtaining personal securities
recommendations’.
In 2004, the Property Investment Advice Working Party of the Ministerial
Council on Consumer Affairs issued a discussion paper which
sought views on
three alternative options for regulating property investment advice. The options
a. retain the
status quo;
b. impose conduct and disclosure obligations on persons providing property
investment advice, but do not introduce a full licensing
c. impose a comprehensive conduct, disclosure and licensing regime on persons
providing property investment
In 2005, the Parliamentary Joint Committee (PJC) on Corporations and
Financial Services recommended that real property investment
advice should be
regulated by the Commonwealth under Chapter 7 of the
Corporations Act 2001
Recently, the Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee published a detailed
report on property investment advisers and marketeers
which recommended that
‘the Commonwealth Government regulates property investment advisers under
its financial services laws
in the same way as financial
As noted above, the Green Paper raises, yet again, the issue of how providers
of real property investment advice should be regulated.
Assuming a decision is eventually made that real property investment advice
should be regulated, numerous issues will need to be addressed,
including the
a. Should the regulation be Commonwealth or State regulation?
b. Assuming Commonwealth regulation is introduced, should the existing licensing
provisions apply (Part 7.6 of the
Corporations Act 2001
recommended by the PJC) or should a separate, stand-alone licensing or
registration system be introduced?
c. What should be the definition of ‘property investment
d. Assuming the existing licensing provisions are applied, what modifications to
those provisions will be required in order to properly
tailor them to property
investment advice? For example, what should be the definition of ‘retail
client’ in relation
to real property investment
Self-managed superannuation funds (SMSFs)
An important issue – not discussed in the Green Paper – is
whether the exemption for advice given by a recognised
relating to the
establishment of a self-managed superannuation fund (SMSF) should be
Such a review is
arguably required in light of the acknowledged problems associated with the SMSF
sector, including consumer lack
of awareness about the role and responsibilities
involved in acting as a trustee of a SMSF, as well as the costs that are likely
to be incurred in complying with the
The provision of ‘simple’ personal advice
All financial product advice is either personal advice or general advice. The
definition of personal advice is critical, since it
triggers several important
obligations. Far less onerous obligations apply to general advice.
Financial product advice is ‘personal advice’ if the advice is
given or directed to a person ‘in circumstances where:
(a) the provider of the advice has considered one or more of the person’s
objectives, financial situation and needs...; or
(b) a reasonable person might expect the provider to have considered one or more
In relation to superannuation, for example, the concept of ‘personal
advice’ may include a recommendation or statement
of opinion provided to a
client about:
a. the selection of an appropriate superannuation fund for the client;
b. the investment strategy or insurance option that the client should select
within a particular superannuation fund;
c. whether the client should make voluntary personal contributions to a
particular superannuation fund, or should arrange for his
or her employer to
make additional (‘salary sacrifice’) contributions;
d. whether the client should move funds from one superannuation fund to another
superannuation fund ('superannuation switching');
e. the taxation implications for the client associated with withdrawing money
from a superannuation fund.
Personal advice includes, but is not limited to, express or implied
recommendations to buy or sell specific financial products (or
financial product). Rather, 'personal advice' may encompass mere statements of
opinion where the provision of the opinion
by the providing entity has been
influenced by a consideration of the client's objectives, financial situation or
(a) whether or not there is any express or implied recommendation that the
client buy, sell or hold a financial product;
(b) whether or not the client buys a financial product from the providing
(c) whether or not the advice is described as ‘advice’ by the
providing entity;
(d) regardless of how the providing entity is remunerated.
An important issue which arises is how to facilitate the provision of
‘simple’ personal advice to superannuation fund
In this regard, a
Consultation Paper has recently been prepared which outlines certain regulatory
and commercial barriers to the
provision of such
The Consultation Paper
sets out several proposals, including the following:
a. amending the law to allow a licensee to take responsibility for the provision
of advice provided under the direct supervision
of the licensee (for example,
where the advice is provided by a call centre or website based on software or a
script approved by
the licensee);
b. amending the law to relieve superannuation product issuers from the
obligation to provide an FSG where the fund does not receive
any additional
remuneration in respect of the advice and where there is no material conflict of
The Consultation Paper does not recommend any changes to the definition of
‘personal advice’. However, the author of this
paper considers that
a narrowing of the definition of personal advice may be warranted.
It may be noted that the definition of personal advice under the current law
is far broader than the scope of application of the reasonable
basis for advice
rule when that rule was first introduced into Australian law in 1986 by the
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1985
(Cth). The 1986 rule provided as follows:
An adviser who:
(a) makes a recommendation with respect to securities or a class of securities
to a person who may reasonably be expected to rely
on the recommendation;
(b) does not have a reasonable basis for making the recommendation to the
contravenes this
sub-section.
The current definition of personal advice is far broader than the scope of
application of the 1986 rule in that it potentially covers
situations where no
express or implied recommendation is made to the client but where a mere
statement of opinion is given to the
client. Further, under the current law a
recommendation or statement of opinion may constitute personal advice whether or
was reasonable for the person to whom it was directed to rely on it.
In this author's view, consideration should be given to narrowing the
definition of 'personal advice' to more closely align it with
the scope of the
1986 rule, by excluding:
(a) statements of opinions which are not express or implied recommendations that
a client make a decision (such as a decision to
buy, sell or hold a financial
product); and
(b) any express or implied recommendation in circumstances where it would not be
reasonable for the person to whom it was directed
to rely on it. Disclaimers
should be relevant to, but not determinative of, whether it would be reasonable
for a person to rely on
a recommendation.
Statements of Advice
The purpose of an SOA is to help the client decide whether or not to accept
personal advice which he or she receives from a providing
entity. Specifically,
an SOA will help the client to check that the information possessed by the
providing entity about the client's
relevant personal circumstances is complete
and correct and to understand the advice (including why, in the providing
entity's opinion,
the advice is appropriate). The SOA also helps the client to
understand whether the advice may be affected by any conflicts of interest.
In practice, whether a client will be in a position to make a fully informed
decision about whether to accept personal advice he or
she receives will depend
on a range of matters, including:
a. the client's level of financial literacy;
b. whether the client actually receives an SOA and, if so, the quality of the
disclosure in the SOA;
c. whether or not the client receives an SOA, the extent to which the providing
entity explains the advice verbally to the client
and answers any questions the
client may have about the advice.
In this regard, note that the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) does not
impose any express obligation on licensees to explain their advice
to their clients. In this author's view, the current law is
defective because it places too much emphasis on written disclosure (in
of an SOA) but does not impose a clear obligation on providing entities to
verbally explain their advice. While written
disclosure is important, many
clients also need to receive a verbal explanation of the advice in order to
understand it (whether
or not they receive an SOA).
Accordingly, consideration should be given to requiring providing entities to
take reasonable steps to ensure that clients understand
the advice they provide.
There are several models which could be used as the basis for this obligation,
including the following:
(a) the Rules of Professional Conduct of the Financial Planning Association,
which provide that an FPA member must take reasonable
steps to place the client
in a position to comprehend the recommendations and the basis for the
recommendations;
(b) the Life Insurance Code of Practice (a policy of the Insurance and
Superannuation Commission, now disbanded), which required life
advisers to take reasonable steps to ensure that the customer can sufficiently
comprehend the advice and the basis for
the advice to place the customer in a
position to make an informed choice.
VI Conclusion
This paper has analyzed four key areas where regulatory reform of the conduct
and disclosure obligations applying to financial services
industry participants
is likely to occur in the future:
a. the consumer protection roles of ASIC and the ACCC;
b. the regulation of consumer credit;
c. mandatory point-of-sale product disclosure requirement;
d. the licensing regime.
There are two main themes which emerge from this analysis. First, the current
law contains some undesirable regulatory ‘gaps’
or uncertainties
which need to be addressed. For example, doubts arise about whether ASIC or ACCC
has jurisdiction where a consumer
protection issue involves a service that is
arguably - but not clearly - a ‘financial service’. Further,
consumer credit
and real property investment advice are not regulated by Chapter
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). Secondly, the law may need to be
reformed to address the problem of incomprehensible disclosure document, namely,
point of sale disclosure documents as well as Statements of
BSc, LLB (Hons) (Monash
University) SJD (University of Melbourne) Department of Business Law and
Taxation, Monash University
Financial System Inquiry,
Final Report of the Financial System Inquiry
Above n 1, 245
(Recommendations 1 and 2).
In addition, under the Wallis
Report recommendations, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(ACCC) would retain its
role as competition regulator with respect to the
financial services sector.
Above, n 1, 261-279
(Recommendations 8, 13, 15 and 19).
Taskforce on Reducing
Regulatory Burdens on Business,
Rethinking Regulation
That is, changes to
legislation or regulations, principally the
Corporations Act 2001
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
regulations made under those Acts.
Productivity Commission,
Review of Australia’s Consumer Policy Framework
, Final Report
(2008) (the Productivity Commission Report). This report considered
Australia’s overall consumer policy framework
– it was not limited
to consumer protection in the financial services sector.
Department of Treasury,
Financial Services and Credit Reform – Improving, Simplifying and
Standardising Financial Services and Credit Regulation
, Green Paper (2008)
(the Green Paper).
Above, n 1, 246-8.
See generally
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) (formerly
pt 2 of the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 1989
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) ss 51AAB, 51AF and 75AZA.
Above, n 7.
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001
For examples of
regulatory gaps, refer to the following: Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Submission to the Productivity Commission Inquiry into
Australia’s Consumer Policy Framework
http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/63896/sub080.pdf
at 19 June 2008.
Above, n 7, Volume 1, 64
(Recommendation 4.2).
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Productivity Commission Review of Australia’s
Consumer Policy Framework: second ASIC Submission
http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/76070/subdr174.pdf
at 19 June 2008.
Alan Fels and Fred
Brenchley, ‘Consumer watchdog tipped to get more bite as Rudd revolution
gains pace’,
, 5 April 2008, Business Day 2.
Under the current law, an
applicant for a market licensee cannot be granted a licence unless they possess
adequate arrangements
for supervising the market:
Corporations Act 2001
s 795B(1)(d).
For information on ASX’s market supervision role
refer to the following: ASX,
ASX’s Role in Australia’s Financial
Regulatory Framework
http://www.asx.com.au/supervision/pdf/asx_role_financial_regulatory_framework.pdf
at 19 June 2008.
Above n 1, 243-6.
Department of the Treasury
(United States),
Blueprint for a Modernised Financial Regulatory
http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/Blueprint.pdf
at 19 June 2008.
Above, n 1, 254-7.
The review of the UCCC
which was finalized in 1999 did not, in fact, consider the issue of whether a
transfer of regulatory responsibility
to the Commonwealth should occur:
Ministerial Council on Consumer Affairs,
Uniform Consumer Credit Code –
Post Implementation Review
http://www.creditcode.gov.au/content/downloads/PIR_Credit_Code_Final_Report.pdf
at 19 June 2008.
In addition, refer to
relevant industry codes of conduct, such as the following: Australian
Bankers’ Association,
Code of Banking Practice
http://www.boq.com.au/uploadedFiles/Code_Of_Banking_Practice.pdf
at 19 June 2008. This Code is currently being reviewed. One of the key issues
being considered is whether clause 25 of the Code
should be amended to clarify
the obligation of lenders to ascertain the capacity of borrowers to make
required repayments.
Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001
s 12BAA(7)(k).
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001
Note the Productivity
Commission’s recommendation that the national generic consumer law should
include a provision relating
to unfair contract terms. If implemented, this
recommendation will have significant ramifications for credit product providers:
n 7, 69 (Recommendation 7.1).
The Ministerial Council on
Consumer Affairs,
National Finance Broking Scheme Consultation Package
http://www.consumer.gov.au/html/download/Exposure%20Bill%20package_Nov07.pdf
at 19 June 2008.
See generally: The
Productivity Commission Report, above, n 7, Volume 2, 100-1.
That is, loans provided to
investors for the purpose of funding the acquisition of an underlying
investment, such as shares in a
company. The underlying investments serve as
security for repayment of the loan.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) applies
to disclosure about credit products such as margin loans. This means, for
example, that a representation about any
future matter relating to a credit
product which is made without reasonable grounds may be misleading:
. Note, however, that margin loans are not currently subject to the
mandatory disclosure requirements of the
Corporations Act 2001
whether the loan is provided by or through a licensee or not; cf the Green
Paper, above n 8, 31.
These problems are
summarised in the Green Paper, above n 8, 6-7.
Above, n 8.
Above, n 7, 66
(Recommendation 5.2).
Standing Committee on
Economics, Finance and Public Administration, Parliament of Australia,
Loan Lending
(2007) 47-9 (Recommendation 2).
Council of Australian
Governments (COAG),
Communiqué of the meeting held on 26 March 2008
http://www.coag.gov.au/meetings/260308/index.htm
at 19 June 2008.
Although the Minister for
Superannuation and Corporate Law, the Honorable Nick Sherry has suggested the
possibility that regulatory
responsibility may be vested in the Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA): ABC Television,
According to the Green
Paper, 86% of personal credit consists of housing loans: above, n 8, 2.
The following recent ASIC
reports highlight various consumer problems in relation to mortgages:
a. Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
REP 109 All we have
is this house: Consumer experiences with reverse mortgages
b. Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
REP 119 Protecting
wealth in the family home: An examination of refinancing in response to mortgage
c. Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
REP 125 Review of
mortgage entry and exit fees
Although reservations about
the level of resources devoted by the States and Territories to the
administration of credit regulation
have been expressed: see, for example, the
following submission: Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
Productivity Commission Review of Australia’s consumer policy framework
:Submission by the Australian Securities and Investments
http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/66724/sub103.pdf
at 19 June 2008.
Corporations Act
s 912A(1)(g).
Corporations Act
s 912A(1)(aa).
Division 6 of
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act
s 912A(1)(f).
Possible modifications to
the licensing regime have been considered by ASIC in its second submission to
the Productivity Commission’s
Inquiry into Australia’s Consumer
Policy Framework: above, n 17.
Corporations Act
Finance Broking Bill 2007
(NSW), cl 35.
Constitution
s51(xxxviii).
Above, n 1, 261-4.
Corporations Act
Several uncertainties arise relating to the scope of the
concept ‘security’. In particular, the issue of whether a promissory
note is a ‘security’ will depend on the circumstances: see the Green
Paper, above n 8, 37-8.
Corporations Act
Corporations Regulations
(Cth) reg 7.9.07FA. For an analysis of this regulation, refer to Andrew
Serpell 'The Impact of the FSR
Refinements Regulations
on Disclosure' (2006)
E-Law Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law
https://elaw.murdoch.edu.au/issues/2006/2/eLaw_THE%20IMPACT%20OF%20THE%20FSR%20REFINEMENTS_191003.pdf
at 23 June 2008.
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
RG 40 Good transaction fee disclosure for bank,
building society and credit union deposit and payment products (transaction
Above, n 24.
A 'credit facility' is
excluded from the definition of 'financial product' for the purposes of Chapter
Corporations Act 2001
s 765A(1)(h).
The regulation of consumer
credit is discussed in Section III of this paper.
Above, n 7, Volume 1,
This issue is also being
considered in other jurisdictions; see, for example: Financial Services
Good and poor practices in Key Features Documents
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/key_features.pdf
at 24 June 2008.
Corporations Act
ASIC has the power to issue
a stop order where a Chapter 6D disclosure document or a PDS does not comply
with the 'clear, concise
and effective' obligation:
Corporations Act 2001
ss 739(1)(a)
(1)(a)(ia).
Corporations Regulations
(Cth) reg 7.9.15DA. Incorporation by reference is also permitted under
Chapter 6D:
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Regulations
(Cth) sch 10BA. For an analysis for the short-form PDS provisions,
refer to Serpell, above n 52, 93-6.
Furthermore, a PDS may
include information even if it is not required by the law:
Corporations Act
s 1013C(1)(b)(i).
Above, n 7, Volume 1, 73-4
(Recommendation 11.1).
To help answer these
questions it may be useful to consider the work being undertaken in other
Ontario Securities Commission,
Framework 81-406 – Point of Sale Disclosure for Mutual Funds and
Segregated Funds
http://www.osc.gov.on.ca/pos-non-supp.pdf
at 24 June 2008.
Above, n 1, 271-3.
Above, n 1, 261-4.
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
s 912A(1)(aa).
Corporations Act 2001
s 912A(1)(g).
The providing entity may be
either a licensee or an authorized representative of a licensee, depending on
the circumstances. Where
advice is provided by an authorized representative of a
licensee, the authorized representative is the providing entity and not the
authorizing licensee:
Corporations Act 2001
situations, the licensee will be the providing entity.
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
s 765A(1)(h).
Consumer Credit is discussed in Section III of this
The Green Paper, above n 8,
37-8. The Green Paper concludes that a promissory note will generally (but not
necessarily always) constitute
a ‘financial product’ for the
purposes of Chapter 7 whether or not it is a ‘debenture’.
The Green Paper, above n 8,
40. The Green Paper notes that the current licensing requirements for debenture
issuers ‘lack
consistency’.
The Green Paper, above n 8,
43-5. It should be noted, however, that advice relating to investment in real
property which includes
an opinion about a financial product is already subject
to the licensing provisions.
The Green Paper, above n 8,
The Green Paper, above n 8,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
REP 05 Review of the financial advising activities of
real estate agents,
Interim Report (1999), 35.
Ministerial Council on
Consumer Affairs Working Party,
Property Investment Advice,
Paper (2004).
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia,
Property Investment Advice – Safe as Houses?
Law Reform Committee,
Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Property Investment Advisers and
, Final Report (2008), xxviii.
In this regard, the PJC
considered that property investment advice should encompass representations
of, or income derived from, real property, but
should not include mere statements of fact, such as information about past
above, n 86, 35.
As defined in
Corporations Regulations 2001
(Cth) reg 7.1.29A(2).
Corporations Regulations
(Cth) regs 7.1.29 and 7.1.29A. Note that the exemption applies to
advice relating to establishing a SMSF, but does not apply to advice
underlying investments of a SMSF.
In this regard refer to the
following: The Honorable Nick Sherry, ‘The Government’s priorities
in superannuation and
financial services’ (Speech delivered at the
Institute of Actuaries Financial Services Forum, Melbourne, 19 May 2008)
http://minscl.treasurer.gov.au/DisplayDocs.aspx?doc=speeches/2008/013.htm & pageID=005 & min=njs & Year= & DocType
at 23 June 2008. Note, however, a Parliamentary Committee has recommended that
the exemption for recognised accountants be
: Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia,
The structure and operation of the superannuation industry
Corporations Act 2001
For a general discussion of
this issue, see: Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial
Services, Parliament of
The structure and operation of the
superannuation industry
(2007), 109-127.
Financial Services Working
Simple advice on choices within an existing superannuation account,
Consultation Paper (2008).
Ibid 18 (Proposals 2 and
3). The Consultation Paper also proposes that ASIC should provide further
guidance on a range of issues
relating to the provision of personal advice.
Securities Industry Act
(ACT) s 65A, repealed by
Corporations (Repeals, Consequentials and
Transitionals)
Financial Planning
Association of Australia,
Rules of Professional Conduct
http://www.fpa.asn.au/files/PubCodeOfEthics.pdf
at 24 June 2008.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (438 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter