URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2018/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Anderson, H --- "Insolvency - It's all About the Money" [2018] UMelbLRS 6
INSOLVENCY – IT’S ALL ABOUT THE MONEY
First published in the
(2018) 46(2)
Federal Law Review
I INTRODUCTION
Broadly speaking, there are four pots of money that matter when a company
becomes insolvent. The first is the money that the failed
company owes to its
unsecured trade creditors – the general creditor pot. The second is the
tax that is lost to federal and
state revenue collectors through the non-payment
of taxes including company income tax, goods and services tax (GST),
Pay-As-You-Go
(Withholding) tax (PAYG(W)), superannuation guarantee charge (SGC)
and payroll tax – the revenue pot. The third less obvious
pot is the money
that the government must pay by way of safety net supports for employees unpaid
by the insolvent employer, either
through the Fair Entitlements Guarantee (FEG)
scheme or as extra aged pensions where superannuation is lost – the safety
pot. The fourth is the money needed for enforcement, whether in the hands of
ASIC, other government departments and agencies, or
the liquidator – the
enforcement pot. Into this fourth pot is contributed the money paid by
liquidators
ASIC by way of the industry cost recovery levy.
Since the liquidator needs to be paid from the company’s assets
before the unsecured creditors and employees are paid, the general
creditor pot,
the safety net pot and the enforcement pot interact. They also interact through
ASIC’s contribution to enforcement
via the Assetless Administration
Fund’s payments to liquidators, which is beneficial to the general
creditor pot. Because the
FEG Recovery Program (FEGRP) is now funding
liquidators to recover FEG advances, the enforcement and safety net pots further
This is not to forget that revenue authorities at federal and state
level are major creditor victims of improper behaviour at the
insolvency, such that additional contributions to the enforcement pot can
directly offset their own losses from the revenue
pot. Nor does it overlook the
fact that the new ASIC cost recovery levy imposed by the government on
liquidators reduces the money
available to liquidators in the enforcement pot
and that this might impact adversely on liquidators’ ability to recover
for the benefit of the general creditor pot and the revenue pot, causing
financial harm to the government.
This quick sketch is designed to
illustrate the point that different types of spending and losses at the time of
insolvency cannot
be considered separately. They are unavoidably connected, as a
result of which decisions in one area will have consequences in one
the other areas. The aim of this paper is to chart these connections and to make
the case for greater awareness of the
links between these expenditures and
losses. In particular, it recommends a commitment of money to the enforcement
pot, and a reallocation
of that money, that will benefit not only unsecured
creditors in general but also the government in multiple ways. Ultimately, the
most desirable outcome from corporate insolvency is one that achieves the
greatest return for all creditors including revenue authorities;
minimises the
cost of administering the system so that money is not pointlessly consumed;
lessens reliance on government safety nets;
and deters and punishes those who
would use insolvency to their own advantage.
The examination of
expenditure and savings in the insolvency context is particularly timely because
of the ongoing debate about insolvency
practitioner remuneration and their role
as law enforcers and ASIC’s gatekeepers, set against ASIC’s role in
insolvency practitioners and its own role in enforcement under the
Corporations Act
. It is clear that ASIC is not a public liquidator; what
is less clear is the division of enforcement responsibilities between ASIC,
acting in the public interest, and the liquidator, acting in the interests of
creditors. A lack of resources in the hands of liquidators,
and judicial
commentary about the public interest served by liquidators in taking
complicates the matter. Add
to that the juxtaposition of enforcement
by liquidators
directors, in lieu of ASIC action, with ASIC’s action
liquidators
themselves for wrongdoing, especially where it involves
collusion with the directors’ wrongdoing.
For the sake of length
and coherence, this paper concentrates on corporate, rather than personal,
insolvency. Part II begins by explaining
and seeking to estimate the losses and
costs from the first three pots – general creditors, revenue and safety
nets. Part III
then considers the contentious area of enforcement, including who
has the power to enforce, who has the money to enforce, and where
comes from. Part IV brings together the previous two parts by way of analysis,
integrating the understanding of the four
pots of money and making
recommendations for change. Part V summarises and concludes that neither
spending nor revenue raising should
be viewed in isolation; rather, decisions
should be made based on where the money is most effectively spent and what other
expenditure
might be saved, or losses averted, as a result.
II GENERAL CREDITORS, REVENUE AND SAFETY NETS
The General Creditor Pot
Insolvency is inevitable for a proportion of businesses whether operated
by a company or by one or more
individuals.
Since corporate
insolvency by definition means that a company cannot pay all its debts as they
become due,
some creditors will not
be paid when the company fails and enters some form of external administration:
liquidation, voluntary administration
(VA) or receivership. In general, secured
creditors will recover some or all of what they are owed by realising their
Next comes the priority
unsecured creditors, who are provided for by s 556 of the
Corporations
. They comprise, first, the costs of the
liquidation
and after those, the entitlements of
Where employees have received some of what they are owed by their employer
through an advance from FEG,
considered further below in the safety net pot, the Department of Employment
(DE) is subrogated to the employees’ rights to
recover as priority
Already it becomes
apparent that the amount available from the general creditor pot of money is
impacted by two aspects of enforcement:
the costs of liquidation and the
vigorousness of recovery actions funded by DE against corporate wrongdoers.
At the conclusion of an external administration, the insolvency
practitioner – managing controller, voluntary administrator
or liquidator
- sends a report, known as an EXAD report, to ASIC containing various pieces of
information.
The information in these reports is then aggregated and ASIC publishes an annual
summary of their
Of significance here is the quantum of losses suffered by unsecured creditors.
Returns to general creditors average 11 cents or less
According to the latest
report, ‘[i]n 42.7% of reports, the estimated liabilities of failed
companies were $250,000 or less,
and 75.9% indicated estimated liabilities of
less than $1 million.’
other words, 24.1% of the 8,425
received by ASIC
reported liabilities over $1 million.
What these figures do not capture
are the losses to creditors from abandoned companies, which are companies that
do not enter any
form of external administration. Secured creditors are likely
to be unaffected here, as they typically enforce their security by
appointment of a receiver. However, both employees and general unsecured
creditors of insolvent companies, where the directors
have not sought
liquidation or VA, are in a difficult position. They will need to fund the
company’s liquidation themselves
if they hope to recover anything of what
they are owed, and risk further losses if it eventuates that company has no
assets. As a
result, many of these creditors do nothing, and the abandoned
companies are eventually deregistered by ASIC for failure to return
documents or
It is estimated that there are five times as many abandoned companies as there
are companies in liquidation each
but the amounts lost to their creditors are unquantified.
Nonetheless, a
notional allocation of the losses to creditors of abandoned companies must be
added to the general creditor pot. At
present, very little is done for these
and it is arguable
that money spent out of the enforcement pot addressing the issue of abandoned
companies would have a beneficial
impact on the general creditor pot. This issue
is considered further in Part IV.
The Revenue Pot
Unpaid taxes are very common in insolvencies, and a broad estimate of the
extent of these is revealed in the EXAD reports to ASIC.
For the year 2016-17,
85.5% of insolvent companies had unpaid taxes, with 64% being between $1 and
$250,000, 16.8% between $250,001
and $1 million, and 4.6% over $1
That final figure alone
represents 387 companies, meaning that there is at the very least $387 million
owing in unpaid taxes from
these companies and probably a good deal more.
Bearing in mind that these figures will not include abandoned companies, it is
instructive to look at the ATO’s own data on the ‘tax
gap’ which seeks to estimate the amount of taxes unpaid for
a variety of
reasons including insolvency. Three that are commonly unpaid because of
insolvency are GST, PAYG(W) and superannuation.
For the year 2016 – 17,
they are estimated to be $4.5billion, $3.1 billion and $2.85 billion
respectively.
Superannuation is unusual in that it straddles the revenue and safety
net pots, and is subject to an unusual recovery mechanism. The
employer is
obliged to pay at least the statutory mandated
to the employee’s
chosen fund
but the fund is not
a creditor in the winding up.
Superannuation not remitted to employees’ nominated fund triggers a
superannuation guarantee charge (SGC) liability –
a tax which is collected
by the ATO.
Where the SGC is
recovered, the contribution amount and interest are then remitted in due course
to the employees’ nominated
superannuation
The revenue aspect of the
SGC is a constitutional quirk
rather than a true loss of revenue to the government. Therefore, a fuller
discussion of lost superannuation is undertaken in the
next section dealing with
safety nets.
The Safety Net Pot
There are two relevant safety nets here, both relating to employees: FEG
and the aged pension.
When a company enters liquidation, employees with
unpaid entitlements are entitled to claim on the taxpayer-funded
which covers specified
amounts of wages, leave and redundancy
entitlements.
As noted above, FEG is administered by the DE, which makes the advances of these
amounts, subject to various caps, to employees affected
employers’ ‘insolvency
The DE then
attempts to recoup these advances from the employer’s
liquidation.
The amount of FEG
paid in 2016-2017 was $186.02 million to 12,354
and the DE recovered
$47.98 million.
No advances are
made by FEG to employees of abandoned companies or those placed into voluntary
administration.
FEG cover superannuation.
may suggest that unpaid superannuation will not have financial consequences for
the government, but that is not the case. The
employee who has been deprived of
their proper superannuation entitlements during their working life will have a
greater reliance
on the aged pension. In other words, denying employees access
to the immediate safety net of FEG with respect to their unpaid superannuation
simply increases reliance on the later safety net of the aged pension.
is difficult to quantify both lost superannuation and the consequential
additional reliance on the aged pension accurately. The
superannuation tax gap was noted above, and in November 2016, a joint report was
released by two super funds that estimated
at least $3.6 billion of unpaid
superannuation in 2013–14.
External administrators’ reports to ASIC for the period 2016-17 show that
in 2,561 administrations out of a total of 7,765
(or 33%), employees’
superannuation between $1 and $100,000 was
At the other end of the
scale, there were 18 instances where over $1,000,000 of superannuation was
unpaid; there were also 164 instances
of unpaid superannuation between $250,001
$1,000,000.
More worrying still is the compounding effect of unremitted superannuation.
Stanford has estimated that a present loss of $10,000
will result in $57,000
less superannuation in 30 years’
This is not to
suggest that every dollar unpaid in superannuation due to corporate insolvency
automatically translates into the same
amount of additional reliance on the aged
pension. The superannuant may use some of their fund to travel or purchase a new
for instance. Nor is it suggested that all unremitted superannuation
could be recovered from insolvent companies if only enforcement
were improved.
As with all creditors and categories of debt, it is inevitable that there will
be losses. Nonetheless, these estimates
of unpaid superannuation act as a
reminder that at least some of the superannuation money lost to employees now
will have consequences
for the government in later years.
Each of the
pots of money discussed above – general creditors, revenue and safety nets
– are inevitably impacted upon
by the extent of enforcement undertaken by
those with the power, motivation, resources and information to do so. This will
considered.
ENFORCEMENT
Who enforces and how?
ASIC and liquidators
ASIC is required ‘to strive to
... take whatever action we can, and which is necessary, to enforce and give
effect to the law.’
has considerable powers in relation to corporate insolvency, such as enforcement
of directors’ duties
including insolvent
administrative banning
provisions,
investigative
and winding up
ASIC also has an
exclusive role in enforcing criminal provisions of the
Corporations Act
including strict liability offences relating to director
as well as more serious
criminal breaches.
addition, since 2012, ASIC has had the power to wind up abandoned companies, but
this power is exercised only for the purpose of
allowing the employees of those
companies to access
By 12 September 2017, ASIC had only used its power to wind up ‘95
companies that owed at least 287 employees more than $5 million
entitlements.’
disproportionately small, given the many thousands of abandoned companies
deregistered by ASIC annually,
so it is questionable whether this power is exercised sufficiently to achieve
its objective.
A more likely
cause of ASIC’s limited involvement is the guideline that confines ASIC to
cases large enough to make their costs
worthwhile but not so large that that the
employees could be expected to protect themselves via the appointment of a
liquidator.
Liquidators
too have extensive powers in relation to insolvency. Pursuant to s 477(2), the
liquidator exercises the company’s
own wide-ranging powers to bring legal
proceedings
and compromise
Amongst other things,
liquidators may recover preferential payments made by the company prior to its
insolvency including payments
to defeat the claims of
bring action with
respect to insolvent trading,
and examine company officers about a company’s ‘examinable
EXAD reports to
ASIC also contain information about suspected
The EXAD misconduct
reporting encompasses before and during the external administration process,
suspected civil and criminal breaches,
and whether the practitioner holds
documentary evidence to support their
suspicions.
In 2016-2017,
external administrators reported possible misconduct in 84.5% of reports, for a
total of 18,734 alleged
The apparent
aim of this reporting
enable ASIC to select those instances of wrongdoing that will generate an
investigation and possible subsequent proceedings
by ASIC, contributing to
‘(a) maintaining the integrity of the marketplace; and (b) promoting
investor and consumer
confidence.’
Implicit in
this reporting, therefore, is the assumption that ASIC will bring at least some
actions against directors and officers
relating to the company’s
insolvency.
However, ASIC has been subject to considerable criticism in
recent years over its
performance
and lack of
responsiveness to complaints about
wrongdoing,
and the sharing of
power and responsibilities between ASIC and liquidators appears to have led to
tension between the two. It is
possible that the highly improper behaviour of
liquidators such as Stuart Ariff, which triggered criticism of ASIC’s
and the 2010 Senate Inquiry into the Insolvency
has damaged relationships between the two
Both would like to see
the other do more. Although there is little detail as to precisely what ASIC
expects of liquidators in terms
enforcement,
ASIC publications and statements make clear that liquidators are to play a vital
role as one of ASIC’s
‘gatekeepers’.
ASIC’s own limited role is reflected in its published enforcement policy,
which speaks of ensuring that ‘we direct our
finite resources
appropriately’.
then ASIC Chairman Greg Medcraft said:
ASIC is not a prudential regulator, not a conduct and surveillance regulator.
The system we have is based on gatekeepers doing the
right thing and it is
self-executing. It is quite important in understanding what we are currently
resourced to do. We are not resourced
to be looking at everybody, and that is a
very important
Therefore it
would appear that liquidators are expected to do much of the enforcing
themselves. However, the
Corporations Act
expressly confirms that
liquidators are under no obligation to conduct any investigations beyond the
bare minimum required for the
While liquidators have
powers to bring actions, they have no legal duty to do
The professional body representing registered liquidators, the Australian
Restructuring Insolvency and Turnaround Association (ARITA)
noted in its
submission to the Productivity Commission Inquiry into Business Set-up, Transfer
that court ordered liquidations cost liquidators $40 million in unpaid time and
expenses. In its submission to the 2014 Insolvency
Law Reform Bill, ARITA stated
it is not reasonable for a practitioner to attend to tasks if there are no
funds from which they will be remunerated, or for which
no security can be
taken. However if the law is to require practitioners to undertake work for
which they cannot be paid it should
clearly say
The ATO simply ranks as a non-priority unsecured creditor in a
liquidation distribution but it has some unique or enhanced creditor
addition to its regulatory powers, that make it a formidable enforcement agency.
These extra powers are justified due
to its responsibility to protect the
revenue but there is also a suggestion that general creditors benefit from the
efforts of the
external administrators may refer instances of suspected misconduct to the
It makes sense therefore
to recognise and encourage the ATO’s capacity to detect insolvency
wrongdoing and to act against
In its capacity as a creditor, the ATO
can apply for the winding up of non-compliant companies, as other creditors can
do, but with
some enhanced powers. Unlike the debts owed to general
the ATO’s debt
may be an estimate of liability,
and the statutory demand is conclusive proof that the debt is
According to the
ATO’s 2016 – 2017 annual report, ‘[d]ebtrelated legal action
for creditors’ petitions and
company windups decreased from 4,801 cases in
2015–16 to 2,952 cases in
can also apply for companies to be wound up on the just and equitable
may apply to set aside a
deed of company arrangement,
apply to have the company’s assets frozen to prevent
dissipation.
powers the ATO exercises as a
have the ability to act
as a deterrent against wrongdoing, even if there is no flow-on benefit to
general creditors in terms of their
own recovery. For example, the ATO can issue
garnishee notices that enable it to recover money held in third party hands
owed to the debtor.
ATO may seek a security bond from a taxpayer who they suspect will later default
on payment.
In addition, the ATO
may issue a director of a company in default of its PAYG(W) and superannuation
obligations with a director penalty
notice (DPN) requiring them to place the
company promptly into external administration, in the absence of which they will
be personally
liable for the tax
As a regulator,
the ATO can obtain information which it is able to use in its recovery actions
as a creditor.
For example, it
has specific powers to obtain access to books and
and conduct oral
examinations.
The ATO may also
refer companies and individuals for prosecution with respect to a range of
criminal offences relating to the company’s
insolvency, including
defrauding the
Commonwealth,
and false or
misleading statements or record keeping
This is not to suggest
that all criminal tax provisions can be utilised. Some are unsuited to
insolvency, such as those that require
a scheme to avoid incurring a tax
liability rather than the actual payment of tax properly
Curiously, the
Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980
which was introduced
following ‘Bottom of the Harbour’ tax evasion in the
does not appear to be
utilised by the ATO. It imposes criminal sanctions where a person enters into an
arrangement with the intention
of securing that a company will be unable to pay
income tax or a range of other taxes including the superannuation guarantee
The penalties are 10
years imprisonment or 1,000 penalty units or both. This would seem to capture
the types of improper arrangements
entered into around the time of insolvency
that result in less money going into the revenue pot.
enforcement of superannuation comes through the superannuation guarantee charge
which is administered by the
the ATO relies on the
employer to self-declare their failure to
Alternatively, an ATO
investigation may be prompted by employee
that superannuation
has not been paid. However, for a variety of reasons, the ATO may not initiate
recovery action or may be unable
to recover the outstanding
Indeed, the employee may
be unaware of the non-payment until the employer company becomes
The director of a
non-compliant employer company may be personally liable for the company’s
unremitted superannuation via
a director penalty notice (DPN) but as noted
above, the director may avoid that liability by promptly placing the company
into liquidation
or VA. In consequence, neither the SGC liability on the
insolvent employer company, nor the DPN on the director will necessarily
in the employee’s superannuation being paid, increasing reliance on the
safety net pot through additional dependence
on the aged pension.
The Fair Work Ombudsman
While superannuation is enforceable by the
FWO where it is provided for under modern awards and enterprise agreements,
tendency for the FWO to refer complaints to the ATO for enforcement
As noted above, this will not necessarily result in recovery for the
employee’s benefit. In one particularly egregious instance
numerous vulnerable cleaning company employees where action was brought by the
FWO for underpayments of entitlements including
superannuation, the FWO did not
seek compensation with respect to unpaid superannuation even though the court
was willing to impose
penalties with respect to those
This approach is
regrettable because the tools available to the FWO – strict liability on
companies for employee entitlements
pursuant to modern awards and enterprise
agreements,
coupled with accessory liability for those ‘knowingly concerned’ in
the company’s breach
– are extremely potent with respect to unpaid entitlements in insolvency
and are arguably superior to those of the ATO. Liability
is not dependent upon
wrongdoing and is not defeated, in the case of the accessory’s liability,
by the company’s insolvency.
Directors, particularly of small companies,
and advisors are highly likely to be caught here and can be made jointly liable
the amount ordered against the
In addition,
the government has been active in improving recovery mechanisms in the wake of
scandals involving companies such as 7-Eleven
These have led to the
passage of the
Fair Work Amendment (Protecting Vulnerable Workers) Act
(Cth) which, inter alia, provides for liability on holding companies
and franchisors for the contraventions of subsidiaries and franchisees
respectively, where reasonable steps had not been taken to prevent the
contravention.
This allows
access to the potentially deeper pockets of those who pull the strings of
insolvent employer companies. Use of these
provisions by the FWO could vastly
improve recovery of unremitted superannuation in addition to other unpaid
employee entitlements.
Funding for Enforcement
Both the ATO and FWO are funded by the government to undertake the full
range of their responsibilities, including insolvency-related
enforcement.
Because this funding is uncontroversial, it will not be considered further here.
Rather, the discussion concentrates
on the ‘tug of war’ between ASIC
and liquidators.
ASIC generates revenue from both
its registry services and from those who pay to search those registers.
According to the ASIC Annual
Report for 2016-2017, it raised $920 million in
fees and charges that financial year. However, ASIC does not retain these funds;
rather, they are paid into consolidated revenue and ASIC is then funded via a
budgetary appropriation. This was $342 million with
some additional special
purposes funding.
imposed administratively and by courts are paid into consolidated revenue rather
than into ASIC’s purse. ASIC also
raises money from the industry cost
recovery levy, which is considered further in
below. In 2014, the
government announced that it would conduct a scoping study on the privatisation
of the ASIC Registry
This initiative was
motivated primarily as a means of overcoming the information technology
limitations within ASIC by placing the
registry in private hands.
government later decided not to proceed with the
ASIC’s allocation from consolidated revenue is intended to cover all of
its operations, not just those involving insolvency,
less still enforcement in
the insolvency context. The amounts allocated to insolvency enforcement are
considered below in the discussion
concerning the industry cost recovery
Liquidators
(a) What liquidators are
As noted in
, liquidators are paid as the top priority
unsecured creditors in the distribution of a company’s assets in its
liquidation.
However, this
does not mean that liquidators can charge whatever they like. Schedule 2,
division 60 of the
Corporations Act,
inserted by the
Insolvency Law
Reform Act 2016
provides for a liquidator remuneration determination to be made by members in a
members’ voluntary winding up or by creditors
or a committee of inspection
in a creditors’ winding
In the absence of a
remuneration determination, liquidators receive
remuneration is a particular concern of
The issues came
to a head in
Sanderson as Liquidator of Sakr Nominees Pty Ltd (in
liquidation) v Sakr,
a decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal, following a decision by
Brereton J cutting a liquidator’s
remuneration.
Because the
creditors had already been paid out in full, the liquidator required court
approval of his final
remuneration.
terms, the issue at stake was whether the liquidator’s remuneration should
be proportional to the amount of the company’s
assets – known as
, or whether the liquidator was entitled to be paid for the
work actually done at the firm’s standard rates – referred
‘time-based
remuneration’.
J had considered that
remuneration acts as a disincentive to
the disproportionate expenditure of
ASIC made a submission
to the court in support of the primary judge’s approach, following which
ARITA appeared
amicus curiae
to support payment for ‘necessary
work, properly
performed’.
Court of Appeal rejected the suggestion that
was appropriate
to all liquidations, because it disregarded the factors for court consideration
itemised in then s 473(10).
For the same reason, purely time based remuneration was also
Significantly, the
court confirmed that liquidators are entitled to be remunerated for their work
which does nothing to augment funds
for creditor distribution, such as statutory
reporting work,
and for work
unsuccessfully attempting to recovery
A subsequent court
confirmed that the liquidator’s work with respect to Sakr Nominees was
Assignment of rights and litigation funding
Following the example of both
the ILRA has given
insolvency practitioners the power assign any right to sue that is conferred on
them by the
Corporations
subject to a number
of limitations: first, the external administrator must give written notice to
the creditors before assigning
any right; and second, the external administrator
must seek court approval to assign the right if the relevant action has already
been commenced.
Prior to the
passage of the ILRA, the liquidator could not assign unfair preference claims
but could assign claims for breach of
In addition,
liquidators can seek litigation funding for claims including unfair preferences
where they are of the opinion that the
recovery will be sufficient to justify
the litigation. This is particularly useful where the company’s assets
have been improperly
removed, resulting in there being a lack of available money
within the company to otherwise fund their action. The power to assign
would allow the liquidator to step out of the action entirely, leaving the
funder as assignee to complete the litigation or
otherwise settle the
(c) Government assistance for liquidators
There are two
sources of government assistance for liquidators: the Assetless Administration
Fund (AAF) available from ASIC since
2006, and the FEG recovery program (FEGRP),
available from the DE since
The AAF was a
recommendation of the Stocktake Report in
It is a fund provided by the government to finance insolvency practitioners in
their work on behalf of companies with few or no assets.
The aim of the fund is
to overcome the inability of liquidators to make proper investigations due to
constraints,
primarily to enable ASIC to bring enforcement
AAF funding is
available for investigations where s 206F director banning proceedings may be
appropriate,
or where court
proceedings for serious misconduct pursuant to the
Corporations Act
Since 2012, applications for funding for the recovery of assets have been
allowed subject to constraints where fraudulent or unlawful
phoenix activity is
However, there
have been criticisms of the manner in which AAF is available and the amounts
DE’s FEGRP is funding liquidators to bring actions on their behalf as a
subrogated creditor against company directors and
others to recoup FEG payments
made to employees. This creates the possibility that both FEG as the subrogated
priority creditor as
well as lower ranking unsecured creditors will recover what
they are owed, if the liquidators are very successful in their efforts.
addition, the FEGRP sends the government’s message of deterrence against
exploitation of taxpayer funds advanced by the
FEG. In some instances, such as
with Queensland Nickel, the Department of Employment has successfully applied
for the appointment
of its own special purpose liquidator to protect its
Nonetheless,
while ensuring that liquidators are funded to pursue recovery of assets on
behalf of creditors, as well as to bring actions
against wrongdoers in
appropriate circumstances, it is important to acknowledge that liquidators
themselves may be involved in
wrongdoing.
This necessitates
regulation and supervision by ASIC, with compliance proceedings being required
in some circumstances. Liquidators
have now become subject to a cost recovery
levy, which is discussed in the next section.
The ASIC cost recovery levy and industry funding
The cost recovery levy commencing in 2017 is not targeted solely at
liquidators as a regulated population. Its genesis was a recommendation
Final Report of the Financial System Inquiry, which recommended the adoption of
an industry funding model, as had the earlier
Senate Economics Committee’s
review of ASIC’s
performance.
justifications for the levy are ensuring that costs are borne by those creating
the need for regulation, not the general public
establishing price signals about resource allocations within ASIC, creating more
incentives for self-regulation and improvement of
behaviour, and improving cost
transparency and accountability to
ASIC has stated that the ultimate rationale was ‘greater stability and
certainty in our funding, ... to ensure that we are
adequately resourced to
carry out our regulatory
justifications are hard to reconcile. The creation of price signals is intended
to deter the sorts of behaviours that require
regulatory intervention. In other
words, better behaviour will result in a lower levy. It is unclear how this
would translate into
greater certainty about ASIC’s funding. If the levy
works as intended, the behavioural responses to those price signals will
the amount of levy that is raised. This leads to funding uncertainty rather than
the opposite. It also seems somewhat disingenuous
to suggest that ASIC’s
funding is either unstable or uncertain. For an organisation which plays such a
key role in corporate
and financial services regulation and which provides such
a significant dividend to the government each year, it is difficult to
that the government’s funding of ASIC is under threat.
Even if the
justifications are sustainable in relation to other populations regulated by
ASIC, there are objections that can be made
to imposing the levy on liquidators.
ASIC has claimed that by imposing the levy only on those who need regulation by
ASIC, ‘general
taxpayers, many of whom do not use or benefit directly from
some of ASIC’s regulatory activities, are not burdened with these
However, this
approach fails to recognise that liquidators, playing a gatekeeper role for the
government, assist ASIC with its own
work as a corporate regulator, and that the
general public benefits from the contribution made by liquidators. This is not
with any of the other regulate
populations,
nor is the work
done by liquidators as detectives and reporters of insolvency related corporate
wrongdoing mirrored by any other
profession.
The currently proposed
calculation of the levy is also concerning. The focus of ASIC’s concern
(especially the adequacy of disclosure
in declarations of relevant relationships), remuneration disclosure, and
disrupting the activities
of professional facilitators (including pre-insolvency
advisers).’
Primarily, these sorts of issues occur in the liquidations of small proprietary
companies, where there is poor transparency of the
arrangements surrounding the
winding up of the companies.
However, the total levy on the 2,409,919 small proprietary companies is to be
$7,548,000, or about $3.13 per
In contrast, 711 registered liquidators will bear levies totalling $10,196,000,
or $14,340 per
liquidator.
apart from the quantum of the levy, the liquidator levy is misconceived for
three other reasons. First, as noted above, there
are vastly more companies
abandoned each year than there are companies placed into liquidation. A levy on
liquidators does nothing
to tackle the abandoned company issue. Second, not all
pre-insolvency advisors are registered liquidators and some of the most
examples are in fact lawyers, accountants and other ‘business
This contradicts one of the main justifications of the levy, that ‘the
costs of the regulatory activities undertaken by ASIC
are borne by those
creating the need for
regulation’.
Finally, every dollar liquidators pay to ASIC by way of the levy is one
spent on doing their jobs properly or one dollar
for non-priority unsecured creditors, including the government itself. Unlike
the other professions and categories of regulated person
covered by ASIC’s
cost recovery levy, every client of a liquidator is insolvent. Any additional
impost on liquidators necessarily
must be passed on to their paying clients
– insolvent companies with some assets – and exacerbates the
cross-subsidisation
already occurs for assetless administrations. In essence, a levy on liquidators
for ASIC’s services will be borne by the
creditors of companies which
enter liquidation with assets. However, the capacity of liquidators to
cross-subsidise assetless liquidations
from those with some money is
increasingly untenable because of the heavy focus of ASIC scrutinising
liquidator remuneration as evidenced
IV ANALYSIS
Bringing the Money Pots Together
It is inevitable that corporate insolvency will cause financial losses
for some creditors, government and society as a whole. Nonetheless
recognising
the connections between the four pots of money discussed above has the capacity
to minimise those losses. Focusing on
minimising what is spent from the
enforcement pot, rather than what could be saved in the general creditor, safety
net and revenue
pots, is fundamentally unsound. For example, ASIC’s
emphasis on enforcement through gatekeepers has the unfortunate consequence
ignoring the issue of abandoned companies where there is no external
administrator appointed. No-one is there to detect wrongdoing,
bring enforcement
action and recover assets for creditors. Because these losses to the general
creditor pot are by their very nature
unquantifiable, they are overlooked. But
the economic fallout exists nonetheless.
There are other less visible
costs. Poor liquidator morale and feelings of disenfranchisement are to be
expected where both government,
via new legislation such as the ILRA, and ASIC,
via their pronouncements and submissions in
, demonstrate a distrust
for liquidators. These sentiments translate into dysfunctional relations between
the various parties, and
could result in liquidators adopting a ‘work to
rule’ mentality that sees them doing little beyond the bare minimum.
an attitude might reduce liquidator costs in terms of the enforcement pot but
will have consequences on recoveries into the
general creditors and revenue
pots. Less vigilance by liquidators could easily result in more misbehaviour by
directors. More liquidators
could be tempted to give improper pre-insolvency
advice. Each of these has consequences for other pots. Proper liquidator funding
can save money, not just cost money.
It is instructive to note that the
arguments in favour of an
approach by Brereton J in
related to small liquidations where liquidators would recover
comparatively little for their efforts. No-one appears to have been
for large liquidations where the liquidator would make a
windfall gain. Liquidators might therefore lose on both the swings and the
roundabouts. This situation was obliquely acknowledged by Black J in the
determination of the liquidator’s actual remuneration
following the
Court of Appeal’s judgment relating to the basis of the remuneration
calculation.
There is a further dimension to the ‘liquidator as
gatekeeper’ concept. The statutory EXAD report submitted at the conclusion
of the liquidation takes time and costs the liquidator money to prepare. There
is no point in requiring liquidators to incur the
cost of breach reporting if
ASIC does not act in response. If the liquidators are the ones primarily tasked
to bring actions, ASIC
should be reporting information about suspected breaches
to the liquidator, rather than the other way around. ASIC obtains complaint
information from members of the public and, in 2016-2017, received about 9,000
complaints.
of enforcement and recovery actions, it makes sense that whoever has the power
to act is adequately funded to ensure they
can fulfil their responsibilities
properly. It does not make sense to squabble over who pays for it, as though the
costs could be
quarantined and not passed on. In the end, enforcement costs are
always socialised, whether that enforcement is carried out by liquidators,
ASIC or by another agency. The costs of government agencies are borne by
taxpayers. As discussed above, liquidators can be paid
from a number of sources:
from specific funding provided by ASIC or the Department of Employment; paid for
out of the assets of the
failed company, meaning less money for its creditors;
or from cross-subsidisation from profitable liquidation engagements, meaning
less money for
creditors. Directly or indirectly, society meets
these costs. The economy is impacted by non-enforcement in relation to
wrongdoing,
through unfair competition in the market, unpaid taxes and
superannuation, and additional support for FEG.
ASIC’s current
level of enforcement is inadequate. This conclusion can be justified by
comparing the numbers of reports of wrongdoing
sent by external administrators
to ASIC with the number of actions apparently taken by
Wrongdoers would be emboldened, rather than discouraged, to read of the five
year disqualification of a director found by ASIC to
have, in relation to 12
improperly used his corporate position by causing his companies to make loan
repayments to related companies ahead of third party
creditors whilst they were
in financial difficulty;
failed to prevent some of the companies from trading
whilst insolvent;
failed to ensure that proper financial records were
failed to assist the liquidators of the companies after the companies had
been wound up;
failed to exercise his duties as a director with due care and
diligence; and
lacked the skills and expertise to manage the
concerning still is the accompanying press release statement of ASIC Deputy
Chair Peter Kell:
ASIC is extremely vigilant when it comes to protecting small businesses and
will take firm action to protect creditors, consumers
and investors from
directors who fail to manage companies to the standards imposed by the law.
The maximum banning period imposed reflects the number of failed companies
involved and the poor manner in which those companies were
statement might appear to suggest that ASIC was doing as much as possible in
relation to this individual. That is not the case.
ASIC could have brought civil
penalty action or even criminal action in relation to the directors’ duty
breaches and the insolvent
trading breach. There are also criminal sanctions for
failing to assist the liquidator and keep proper financial records. Indeed,
failure to have proper financial records creates a conclusive presumption of
insolvency, overcoming the greatest hurdle to an insolvent
trading prosecution.
Yet none of this was attempted. This response appears to typify ASIC’s
Recommendations
The following discussion contains a number of linked recommendations to
enhance enforcement,
doing so, reduce reliance on the safely net pot and increase the amounts in the
general creditor and revenue pots. The threads
joining them are money,
motivation, power and information. If the present system of liquidator
appointment is to remain, more must
be done by ASIC to recognise the role of
liquidators as valuable allies, providing them with additional information to
assist their
cases and funding to bring them. Suggestions to improve the sharing
of information with liquidators is noted further below.
A Government
Funded Liquidator
Funding for enforcement should be decided on the basis
of who can investigate and prosecute wrongdoers in deliberate company failures
most efficiently and effectively. The government appears to have a choice
– either trust liquidators, with appropriate supervision,
primary enforcement agents in relation to insolvency-related misconduct, or else
bring the function in-house in some way.
If the government decides it cannot
trust private profession liquidators to act independently, especially in small
liquidations,
it should consider either creating a pool of private practice
liquidators as recommended by the Productivity Commission or establishing
‘government
liquidator’,
similar to the Official Assignee in New
This model is also
followed in Australia for bankruptcies where there is no registered trustee
two main justifications for government intervention in small insolvencies. The
first is to overcome the perception of inadequate
performance on the part of
liquidators, whether due to collusion with wrongdoers or lack of effort,
justified or otherwise.
The second is to deal with abandoned
companies. A government funded pool of private-practice liquidators may well
deal with the first
but it is difficult to see how it would deal with the
Providing a pool of liquidators, allocated on a ‘first cab
off the rank’ process, may have value if it helps to nullify
the tension
described above between ASIC and liquidators. The Productivity Commission was in
favour of a pool of insolvency providers
for small ‘streamlined’
liquidations for two reasons.
First, the fees could be set via a tender process to ‘preserve competition
and allow innovation on the basis of fees (hourly,
fixed, event based or a
hybrid form).’ This would ensure that there are adequate numbers of
available practitioners but that
none were profiting excessively from this
The second reason for
the pool was to support practitioner
independence.
However, the
report did not state how the ‘next cab off the rank’ system would
reconcile with the tender process. In
addition, there is no indication of how
liquidator excellence would be encouraged if reputations become irrelevant
because jobs were
allocated via the cab rank. If the government does decide to
pursue the cab rank idea as Treasury has suggested it
a method of ensuring
that there is sufficient funding for all the required liquidators is vital to
such a scheme’s
A government
liquidator as a government agency could be effective in relation to abandoned
companies but given their volume, there
would need to be guidelines to select
appropriate cases. Proper data analysis of potential directors and company
registrations, considered
further below, could lead the government towards those
who walk away from their companies repeatedly. Where ASIC proposes to deregister
a company for failure to submit documents or pay
the companies formerly
run by repeat offenders could qualify for further scrutiny. The cost of running
this sort of service could
be justified by the recovery of unpaid taxes and
superannuation, and reduced reliance on FEG. In addition, increased enforcement
activity has the capacity to result in the deterrence of the ‘dump and
run’ strategy, in turn benefiting both revenue
and general creditors. The
downsides of a government liquidator are that it may lack the sort of
efficiency, expertise and cost-competitiveness
found in the private sector, and
that there is arguably a conflict of interest between the government as both
liquidator and significant
Widening the Pool of Enforcers
and Improve Information Flows
This discussion will focus on other parties
who could assist with insolvency-related enforcement, justifying the allocation
towards their work and improved access to information and cooperation
between them. As Part III showed, both the ATO and the
have powers to bring
actions relating to conduct which takes place around the time of a
company’s insolvency. The new
Protecting Vulnerable Workers
extend the FWO’s jurisdiction well beyond the parties that either ASIC or
the ATO currently reach.
It was also discussed above that the ATO has
considerable powers as a revenue regulator as well as significant exposure to
from insolvency as a creditor. Information gathered by either ASIC or the
ATO can assist both regulators in discharging their functions
and recovering tax
revenue. It is therefore pleasing to see that ASIC has recently had its powers
to share confidential information
with the ATO
However, there
needs to be greater sharing of
confidential information in both
directions. Three examples are particularly relevant in the insolvency context.
First, an application
to the ATO by those seeking an Australian Business Number
(ABN) for their company requires ‘associate details’, including
name, date of birth, position held and tax file number of all Australian
resident directors. At present, the ATO does consult
with ASIC regarding company
ABN applications but only to check the validity of the Australian Company Number
(ACN). It does not check
whether any associates of the company are disqualified
from managing corporations or what other companies those associates own or
control. This is an oversight that should be addressed.
Second, ASIC
currently provides the ATO-administered Australian Business Register (ABR) with
information about companies entering
external administration or being
deregistered for a variety of reasons, including failure to return documents and
pay fees. This
prompts the ABR to cancel the company’s ABN. If the ABR
discovers that the people associated with a cancelled ABN are seeking
it should alert ASIC to this activity. This would assist ASIC in determining
whether those associated with an abandoned
company were seeking to create a new
company that plans to trade and therefore to expose creditors to the possibility
of unrecoverable
Third, there needs to be better sharing by ASIC
with the FWO and ATO of superannuation non-compliance
information.
In addition to
complaints from employees, superannuation non-compliance is detected and
reported to the ATO through third party referrals.
As noted above, ASIC does
have this information through EXAD reporting. However, the ATO submission to the
Senate Economics References
Committee inquiry on non-compliance with the
superannuation guarantee did not provide a figure for ASIC
Rather than the
FWO referring complaints about unpaid superannuation to the ATO, they should
investigate and take action directly
where they have
also a notable lack of involvement by professional bodies other than ARITA in
the policy development and enforcement domains
relating to insolvency. While
there is a heavy emphasis by ASIC on liquidators acting professionally and
charging appropriate
remuneration,
there are no
references to similar requirements of accountants, tax advisors or lawyers
offering insolvency advice. Some of the most
notorious phoenix activity advisors
have been lawyers or
accountants.
Rather than
concentrating on liquidators as the sole ‘gatekeepers’ of proper
conduct during insolvency, ASIC should leverage
the accreditation requirements
of the legal and accounting professions as a means of deterring and punishing
advice leading to director
misconduct.
Money for Fraud Prevention and Detection Systems
There are many ways
in which misconduct relating to insolvency could be deterred, disrupted or
detected if it occurs.
few examples are mentioned here; these are ones that require significant money
to be spent, justified on the basis that these
costs will either save further
expenditure on enforcement or safety nets, or will reduce the loss of
ASIC currently charges all parties to access much of the
information on their registers. This
liquidators undertaking
insolvency engagements as ASIC’s ‘gatekeepers’. These
documents include searches of directors
and their associated
contradictory to expect liquidators to perform this work using the insolvent
company’s limited funds, and simultaneously
for ASIC to charge them for
the documents that are essential to perform it. Recall that the costs of the
liquidation take priority
over payments to employees and unsecured creditors.
These search charges therefore involve funds going
the DE administering FEG and
the ATO as an unsecured
In addition, ASIC’s information systems should be
overhauled or augmented to allow information to be more readily available
person to construct the history of a director
and their present and previous
directorships without either paying an information bureau or credit rating
agency to undertake the
the picture together, one search at a time, themselves. This type of information
allows potential employees, lenders and customers of companies to avoid those
whose management have a history of insolvency-related
misconduct. Improving
access to information could result in a saving on enforcement action and avoid
additional losses particularly
to the general creditor pot and the safety net
pot. Therefore, money should be invested in an integrated search tool that
a person to obtain this information easily and cheaply.
federal budgetary concerns, it may be politically unpalatable to suggest that
all registry search information is free, but doing
so would be consistent with
the approach being taken to this issue in the
According to UK Secretary
of State for Business, Innovation and Skills, the Rt Hon Dr Vince Cable,
[t]he government firmly believes that the best way to maximise the value to
the UK economy of the information which Companies House
holds, is for it to be
available as open data. By making its data freely available and free of charge,
Companies House is making
the UK a more transparent, efficient and effective
place to do
replacement source of funding would make this sort of proposal more appealing.
The earlier discussion on the industry cost recovery
model opposed a levy on
liquidators; however, a levy on companies does not suffer from the same
objections. The government favours
cost recovery levies that are imposed
regulated populations.
noted above, there is already such a levy proposed on small proprietary
companies, to be met from an increase in their annual
with more significant
amounts levied on larger
Given that it is
the insolvent company which causes losses to the general creditor, revenue and
safety net pots and which may generates
the need for enforcement action, it is
justifiable that all companies pay a reasonable levy. They enjoy the privilege
of being separate
legal entities, allowing for the protection of their
shareholders who benefit from limited liability. Undoubtedly, levy costs would
be socialised by the companies through the cost of their products and services.
However, because there are just under 2.5 million
companies in
providing billions
of dollars worth of goods and services, socialising these costs would be barely
perceptible.
V CONCLUSION
Some creditors will inevitably lose money as a result of corporate
insolvency, and this paper has not suggested otherwise. Nonetheless,
ways of dealing with the various pots of money touched by insolvency that
maximises the returns to creditors and minimises
reliance on various forms of
government support. While it is impossible to accurately estimate either the
current losses caused by
insolvency-related wrongdoing or how much of this could
be saved by a new approach, better policies can be developed and improved
outcomes for creditors and the government can arguably be achieved by looking at
all the pots of money at the same time.
In terms of enforcement and
recovery actions, whoever has the power should be adequately funded to ensure
they can fulfil their responsibilities
properly. Much emphasis is placed by ASIC
on liquidators as gatekeepers, so imposing a levy on liquidators is the very
place at which
no further costs should be imposed. Money paid by liquidators to
ASIC as an incentive to perform their roles more effectively is
likely to have
the opposite effect. Rather, placing a levy on the companies that are registered
makes more sense. These are the ones
causing losses through their insolvency,
whether they enter liquidation or are abandoned. Because the costs of the levy
on companies
can be socialised widely, these levies could easily absorb the
$10.196 million currently imposed on registered
liquidators.
with, there should be a statutory clarification of the liquidator enforcement
role. Once this has been done, attention should
be paid to a review of their
funding and the information that is supplied to them. The FEGRP exemplifies the
sorts of recoveries
that can be achieved where a self-interested creditor
provides funding for liquidators. If the government is unwilling to recast
role of liquidators because it does not believe that liquidators can act with
sufficient integrity and independence, it should
consider a government
liquidator or a government allocated panel of private liquidators. Maintaining
the current antagonism is counter-productive.
This is not to say that
insolvency related enforcement is the exclusive domain of ASIC and liquidators.
The ATO has an important role
to play in protecting the revenue through its own
enforcement and in providing funding to liquidators for recovery. These sorts of
activities can achieve both specific and general deterrence of
insolvency-related wrongdoing, filling an apparent enforcement gap
left by ASIC.
The ATO should look to bring more actions under the
Crimes (Taxation
Offences) Act
which is highly suitable for insolvency-related defaults in a
way that other anti-avoidance laws are not. Better information sharing
the relevant regulators will underpin the success of the ATO as a valuable
insolvency enforcement agency.
One area currently dominated by the ATO is
superannuation recovery yet in this area, the contrary argument can be made. The
both extensive jurisdiction in relation to superannuation governed by
modern awards and enterprise agreements, as well as growing
recovery powers, but
is reluctant to take on superannuation enforcement. This is regrettable given
their excellent track record against
companies failing to pay other employee
entitlements, in addition to their actions against accessories ‘knowingly
in the company’s
These powers have
recently been extended to cover holding companies and franchisors in certain
circumstances and are superior to
the recovery powers of the ATO in relation to
superannuation. While unpaid superannuation has no immediate effect on either
or the government because it is not covered by FEG, it must be
remembered that those employees are likely to receive significantly
they retire and will therefore have a greater reliance on the government-funded
aged pension.
The losses caused to employees and general creditors by
abandoned companies seem to fall between the cracks. They are neither the
concern of liquidators nor of ASIC except in a very limited way. To the extent
that wrongdoing by those who abandon companies is
undetected, unprosecuted and
therefore undeterred, society as a whole is the loser. There is a strong
argument, therefore, for a
means of looking at these companies and working to
prevent repeated company abandonment by the same offenders. Improvements are not
costless. It’s all about the money, and where it is most effectively
* Professor, Melbourne Law School, University of Melbourne. The author thanks
the Australian Research Council for its generous support
for this research:
40102277, ‘Phoenix Activity:
Regulating Fraudulent Use of the Corporate Form’, and also thanks the two
anonymous referees
for their helpful comments.
See cases noted
and accompanying
For a discussion of the
causes of company failure, see Rose Kenney, Gianni La Cava and David Rodgers,
Reserve Bank of Australia Research
Discussion Paper, ‘Why Do Companies
Fail’, RDP 2016-09.
Corporations Act 2001
Those holding security
over a non-circulating security asset take priority over all other creditors,
and those holding security over
a circulating security asset take priority over
unsecured creditors except for employees.
Corporations Act
Corporations Act
(1)(a) – (df).
(1)(e) - (h).
discussed below at
Corporations Act
This reporting is done in compliance with ASIC, Regulatory Guide 16: External
Administrators – Reporting and Lodging (July
2008) (‘ASIC Regulatory
Guide 16’). The form completed by the external administrator is ASIC, Form
EX01: Schedule B of
Regulatory Guide 16 – Report to ASIC under
Corporations Act 2001
or for Statistical Purposes (13 January
The latest is
Report 558: Insolvency Statistics – External
Administrators’ Reports (July 2016 to June 2017)
(December 2017)
ASIC Report 558’
Ibid 7, table 2. In
2015-2016 and 2014–15, it was 97% of cases, ibid. The average returns are
for all forms of external administration
and are likely to be even less if only
liquidations were
considered.
Corporations Act
Adrian Brown to author, 18 March 2016, indicating that about 37,600 companies
are deregistered by ASIC every year for
failing to lodge documents or pay fees.
(University of Melbourne Ethics ID: 1341343). This dwarfs the number of
companies that enter
liquidation: 6,235 companies in 2016–17: ASIC,
‘Australian Insolvency Statistics: Series 1 – Companies Entering
External Administration, January 1999–August 2017’ (October 2017),
Table 1.3 . This figure has been calculated by aggregating
the annual figures
for ‘[c]ourt wind-up’, 2,432, and ‘[c]reditors wind-up’,
3,803, in 2016–17.
This is discussed further below at n
and accompanying text.
Report 558, above n
, table 39. Note
that table 26 also records external administrator reports of alleged criminal
and civil breaches relating to unpaid
https://www.ato.gov.au/About-ATO/Research-and-statistics/In-detail/Tax-gap/Australian-tax-gaps-overview/?anchor=Overview#Overview
State taxes are also lost to insolvency and other causes, and to consider
Victoria alone, its estimate of unrecoverable taxes due
to insolvency in 2016-17
was $65.7 million. Over $30 million in unremitted payroll tax was written off
during 2016-2017. See
http://annualreview1617.sro.vic.gov.au/content/analysis-debt
This amount is currently
9.5% of eligible wages.
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
), inserted by
Superannuation Legislation Amendment
(Choice of Superannuation Funds) Act 2004
(Cth) sch 1 item 22.
Superannuation is one of
the entitlements which are subject to employees’ statutory priority:
Corporations Act
s 556(1)(e)(i).
The SGC enjoys that same statutory
s 556(1)(e)(ii).
Difficulties in recovering this tax are examined below in
To ensure that
superannuation coverage is as wide as possible, the constitutional basis of the
SGC is the taxation power: Australian
Constitution
, supported by the
‘invalid and old aged pensions’ power in Australian
Constitution
The taxation underpinnings of the SGC were challenged in
Morgan Research Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2011] HCA 35
(2011) 244 CLR 97
majority upheld the constitutional validity of the charge, at
Department of
Employment (Cth),
Fair Entitlements Guarantee
https://www.employment.gov.au/fair-entitlements-guarantee-feg
Entitlements Guarantee Act 2012
‘employment entitlement’ means annual leave, long service leave,
payment in lieu of notice, redundancy pay and wages.
FEG covers both companies
and unincorporated employers including sole traders and partnerships:
s 5 definition of ‘insolvency
Corporations Act
Department of
Employment,
Annual Report 2016 – 2017
Ibid 54. In 2015-2016,
the DE recovered $54.43million,
49(2)(a) does permit the Minister to declare that employees of companies in
voluntary administration can claim where the company’s
liquidation is
and accompanying
Construction and
Building Unions Superannuation and Industry Super Australia,
Overdue: Time
for Action on Unpaid Super
(November 2016) 3.
ASIC Report 558, above n
Ibid. See also the
supplementary submission of Industry Fund Services to the Senate ERC inquiry
into superannuation non-payment,
submission no 53, at 4: ‘In 2015/16 the
IFS insolvency team managed 9,725 cases. ... Of the insolvency cases managed by
28% of cases closed returned a dividend for 23,362 members from 1,472
employers, recovering $23.4
Stanford, ‘The Consequences of Wage Suppression for Australia’s
Superannuation System’, Centre for Future Work,
Australia Institute,
September 2017, fig 2, 10.
Annual Report 2016-2017
Corporations Act
, enforceable as civil penalty breaches under
as a civil penalty breach under
and directly under
Corporations Act
In 2016 -2017, 51 people were disqualified or removed from
directing companies. ASIC,
Annual Report 2016-2017
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001
Corporations Act
For example, ASIC may
bring action against directors for failing to provide books and records to
liquidators or to assist liquidators:
Corporations Act
2016-17, ASIC prosecuted 409 directors of failed companies for 723 offences of
this type: ASIC,
Annual Report 2016-2017
These include criminal
breaches of directors’ duties under
Corporations Act
criminal insolvent trading under
, and fraud offences such as
Corporations Act
, which was introduced by the
Corporations Amendment (Phoenixing and
Other Measures) Act 2012
http://asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2017-releases/17-310mr-asic-winds-up-11-abandoned-companies-owing-more-than-650-000-in-employee-entitlements/
See above n
and accompanying
The Hon David
Bradbury, ‘Legislation Introduced to Help Workers Access Their
Entitlements’, Media Release No 006 (15
February 2012); See also
Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
ASIC’s Power to Wind
Up Abandoned Companies, Consultation Paper 180
Guide 242 ASIC’s Power to Wind Up Abandoned Companies
, January 2013,
Corporations Act
s 477(2)(a).
s 477(1)(d).
A compensation order can be granted for breach of civil penalty
provisions under
Corporations Act
Featherstone v Ashala Model Agency Pty Ltd (in liq) & Anor
[2017] QCA 260
, where the Queensland Court of Appeal considered that
allowed the recovery of payments made to defeat creditors in an apparent phoenix
transaction. The payments had been made five years
prior to the company’s
eventual liquidation.
Corporations Act
Liquidators are ‘eligible applicants’ as defined in
and accompanying
ASIC Regulatory Guide
16, above n
ASIC Report 558, above n
ASIC Regulatory Guide
16, above n
, [RG16:4(c)]. See also [RG
16.122] regarding documentary evidence and the substantiation of allegations of
wrongdoing.
See the lengthy
debate on the issue in Senate Economics References Committee,
Performance of
the Australian Securities and Investments Commission
, June 2014 (Senate ERC,
Performance of ASIC
), chap 15 and
Australian Government,
Fit For the Future: A Capability Review of the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission – A Report to Government
, Australian
Government, Canberra, December
Economics References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
The Regulation,
Registration and Remuneration of Insolvency Practitioners in Australia: the Case
for a New Framework.
(September 2010),
registered liquidators who are members of a professional association such as
ARITA are subject to a code of professional
practice, breach of which renders
them subject to disciplinary proceedings including termination of their
membership. The
Insolvency Law Reform Act 2016
(Cth) inserted sch 2 into
Corporations Act
and now contains extensive new provisions including
with regards to the registration of liquidators, their remuneration and
disciplinary
proceedings against
For example, in the
ASIC Corporate Plan 2017-18 to
2020-2021, Focus 2017-2018
, ASIC presents
‘what good looks like’ for insolvency practitioners:
‘Registered liquidators: act independently
and competently; ensure
cost-effective, timely and appropriate outcomes; [and] perform their role in
accordance with proper standards
of professional conduct’ at
Annual Report
[3.2.2]. Also, Treasury (Cth),
Proposed Industry Funding Model
for the Australian Securities and Investments Commission: Consultation Paper
(28 August 2015), 49
Information Sheet 151: ASIC’s approach to enforcement
February 2012, 3.
Medcraft, Chairman, Australian Securities and Investments Commission,
, 12 September 2012, 15, quoted in
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Statutory Oversight of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission:
the role of gatekeepers in Australia’s financial
services system
2013. From 1 February 2018, the ASIC chair is James
Corporations Act
recognition of the public interest role of liquidators in bringing litigation in
Hall v Poolman
(2009) 75 NSWLR 99, [128] – [129];
Sanderson as
Liquidator of Sakr Nominees Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Sakr
[2017] NSWCA 38
Restructuring Insolvency and Turnaround Association (ARITA),
Submission No 31
to Productivity Commission, Inquiry into Business Set-up, Transfer and
, 2 March 2015 at
http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/187387/sub031-business.pdf
30; Productivity Commission,
Business Set-up, Transfer and Closure Final
(2015), 15.
ARITA, Submission to
Treasury, Insolvency Law Reform Bill 2014, 18 December 2014 at
Inspector General of
Debt Collection: A Report to the Assistant Treasurer
2015), [2.84] ‘In taking debt recovery actions, certain stakeholders have
advised that creditors often rely on the ATO
to take quick and appropriate
action in relation to insolvent
taxpayers.’
Report 558, above n
, [78]. For
reports in 2016-17 where external administrators reported possible misconduct,
167 indicated the external administrator
had referred, or was intending to
refer, the matter to another authority. The three highest number of referrals to
other authorities
were to the Australian Taxation Office (105 reports), state or
territory police (18 reports) and Fair Trading/Consumer Affairs (18
Corporations Act
Ability to make estimates:
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Taxation Administration
’) sch 1, div
Australian Taxation
Annual Report 2016-2017
Corporations Act
s 461(1)(k).
See, for example,
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Casualife
Furniture International Pty Ltd
Corporations Act
447A. See for example,
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Woodings
(1994) 13 WAR 189.
for example,
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Gashi
[2010] VSC 120
where an order was made under Order 37A of the
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure) Rules
also the ATO’s privileged position in relation to appeals and AAT reviews:
s 14ZZMR and s 14ZZM respectively: also, the ATO’s ability to
recover against liquidators and receivers: eg
sch 1, ss 260-45,
See further Sylvia
Villios, ‘Tax Collection, Recovery and Enforcement Issues for Insolvent
Australian Tax Forum
; Sylvia Villios,
‘Director penalty notices – promoting a culture of good corporate
governance and of successful corporate
rescue post insolvency,’ (2016)
Revenue Law Journal
Criminal Code Act
(Cth) sch, s 135.1 (fraud); s 135.4 (conspiracy to
(Cth) s 29D.
ss 8K and s 8L.
See for example, the general anti-avoidance rule (GAAR):
the promoter penalty regime:
sch 1, div 290. Because the company has
committed no offence by simply not remitting their properly incurred tax,
accessory liability
pursuant to
s 8Y is ineffective, as are
reparation orders under
Crimes Act 1914
The court can only order a
person to make reparation for any Commonwealth loss where there is a tax
Crimes (Taxation
Offences) Act 1980
(Cth) (‘CTOA’);
(arrangements to avoid
payment of tax);
(accessory liability for arrangements to avoid payment of
See Peter Grabowsky,
‘Wayward governance : illegality and its control in the public
sector’ (Australian Institute of
Criminology, 1989) ch
also Lidia Xynas, ‘Tax Planning, Avoidance and Evasion in Australia
1970-2010: The Regulatory Responses and Taxpayer Compliance’
(2011) 20(1)
Revenue Law Journal
Superannuation Guarantee
Charge Act 1992
ss 46, 64A.
Unpaid Super
https://www.ato.gov.au/Individuals/Super/In-detail/Growing/Unpaid-super/
Questions You May
Have About this Step in the Process
https://www.ato.gov.au/Individuals/Super/In-detail/Growing/Unpaid-super/?page=4
See Helen Anderson and Tess
Hardy, ‘Who Should be the Super Police? Detection and Recovery of
Unremitted Superannuation’
[2014] UNSWLawJl 6
UNSW Law Journal
Mr Michael Campbell,
Deputy Fair Work Ombudsman, Operations, Fair Work Ombudsman,
Committee Hansard
, 3 March 2017, 39: ‘In simple terms, the work we [as
the FWO] focus on is that which is clearly within our jurisdiction. The
a broader jurisdiction than ours. It reaches more employees and employers and it
has a better toolkit and set of powers to
seek out and recover unpaid
superannuation. So we refer it to them and we think that is an appropriate
approach’. In 2015-2016,
the FWO made 2,405 referrals to the ATO:
Australian Taxation Office, Submission No 6 to Senate Economics References
Inquiry into Superannuation Guarantee Non-payment
2016–17, [53].
Fair Work Ombudsman v Grouped Property Services Pty Ltd (No 2)
, [115], [151], [496], and [507].
Fair Work Act 2009
respectively.
See, for example,
Fair Work Ombudsman v Step Ahead Security Services & Anor
[2016] FCCA
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Fair Work Amendment (Protecting Vulnerable Workers) Bill 2017
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) div 4A.
Annual Report 2016-2017
, [1.6.2] – [1.6.3]. The government provided
ASIC with an additional $61.1 million over four years to enhance its data
and analysis capabilities. At
It was described as
‘market testing for private sector interest to upgrade, operate and add
value to the ASIC Registry’.
http://www.finance.gov.au/procurement/scoping-studies/asic-faqs/
For some of the history
behind this legislation, see Australian Government, Treasury,
Paper: A Modernisation and Harmonisation of the Regulatory Framework applying to
Insolvency Practitioners in Australia
Corporations
Templeton v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2015] FCAFC 137.
matter of Sakr Nominees Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 709.
The remuneration
determination by the court was under
Corporations Act
s 473(3)(b)(ii)
it then was, prior to the passage of the remuneration provisions in the ILRA
noted above.
relevant factors for the court to consider were set out at
Corporations Act
matter of Sakr Nominees Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 709
http://www.arita.com.au/imis_prod/ARITA/News/ARITA_News/Major_victory_for_reasonable_and_proper_liquidator_remuneration.aspx
[2017] NSWCA 38
In the matter of Sakr
Nominees Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWSC 668
Insolvency Act
(UK) s 246ZC and ZD, introduced by
Small Business, Enterprise and
Employment Act 2015
Companies Act
(NZ) s 260A(1).
Corporations Act
and (3) respectively.
Re Cant; Re Novaline Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2011] FCA 898
(2011) 282 ALR 49.
After an initial pilot
program, the FEG Recovery Program has become ongoing since 1 January 2017:
https://www.employment.gov.au/feg-recovery-program
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Corporate Insolvency Laws:
A Stocktake
, 2004, recommendation 28 at [7.50]. The Stocktake Report found
assetless administrations ‘one of the more difficult, longstanding
important issues that it had to consider’: at
Assetless Administration Fund: Funding Criteria and Guidelines
Regulatory Guide 109 (November 2012), [RG109.1].
[109.5]–[109.8].
According to ASIC,
Annual Report 2016-2017
, 186, ASIC received 562
banning applications under the AAF scheme. They resulted in 34 out of 36
bannings made by ASIC during that
ASIC Regulatory Guide,
, [RG109.26].
For example, ARITA
submitted that insolvency practitioners ‘report that funding may be
difficult to obtain and doesn’t
fully remunerate for the work
involved’ (sub. 31, p. 30). This was noted in Productivity Commission
Business Set Up, above
This application was
granted by Dowsett J in the Federal Court on 18
(unreported). PPB Advisory will be attempting to recover approximately
$69million paid by FEG towards Queensland Nickel
entitlements.
See above n
and accompanying text; also, for
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Dunner
Government,
Proposed Industry Funding Model for the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission
Consultation Paper
, 28 August 2015,
Australian Government,
Proposed Industry Funding Model for the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission, Proposals Paper,
November 2016, 5.
Cost Recovery
Implementation Statement: Levies for ASIC Industry Funding (2017-18)
October 2017, 5, 7.
Securities and Investments Commission,
Treasury consultation paper: Proposed
industry funding model for the Australian Securities And Investments
Commission’, Submission
, October 2015, [17
The full list of
regulated populations subject to the levy is contained in ASIC,
ASIC Cost Recovery Arrangements: 2017-2018
, July 2017, Appendix. These
include companies of different types and sizes, credit providers, margin
lenders, superannuation trustees,
securities exchange operators, credit ratings
agencies and financial services
‘Proposed Industry Funding Model for ASIC: Supporting Attachment to the
Government’s Proposals Paper’ (November
2016) [107].
Small proprietary
companies are defined as those with two out of the following three
characteristics: consolidated revenue of less
than $25million, consolidated
gross assets of less than $12.5million and less than 50 employees:
Corporations Act
, [93]. This includes $455,000 for
surveillance, or 18.9 cents per company, and $4.511 million, or $1.87 per
company, on enforcement.
Ibid [109].
example, Timothy Somerville, a solicitor found to be an accessory to multiple
directors’ duty breaches:
ASIC v Somerville & Ors
[2009] NSWSC
Also Phillip Whiteman, raided by both ASIC and the ATO, who ran AHW
Solicitors, A&S Services, Bolton & Swan Solicitors, and
DNV Accountants.
See further
http://asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2015-releases/15-031mr-gold-coast-chartered-accountant-sentenced-following-asic-investigation/
https://www.ato.gov.au/Media-centre/Articles/Media-releases/Phoenix-Taskforce-swoops-on-pre-insolvency-industry/
and accompanying text.
Note the comments of
Brereton J in
In the matter of Dungowan Manly Pty Limited
[2016] NSWSC
See above n
, [31]. ‘I should note,
however, that in some cases and possibly in this case, the amount of
remuneration ultimately recoverable
by a liquidator on a time basis, after
deducting the costs of leading adequate evidence to establish it, may be less
than the amount
that may have been allowed on a percentage basis on the basis of
less detailed
Annual Report 2016 – 2017,
ASIC Report 558,
, [41] indicates that there
were 18,734 alleged breaches for the year 2016-17. Compare this with the
half-year results in ASIC,
Report 536 ASIC enforcement outcomes: January to
, August 2017, table 6, which lists ‘actions against
directors: 2 criminal, 1 civil and 1 administrative; insolvency: 1 civil’.
Unfortunately the report provides no details as to the nature of these
‘ASIC disqualifies director from managing companies for maximum five
year’. Media release 17-360MR, 27 October
http://asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2017-releases/17-360mr-asic-disqualifies-director-from-managing-companies-for-maximum-five-year-period/
and accompanying
In terms of
improving enforcement, note also the government’s adoption as policy of
the Director Identification Number (DIN):
The Hon Kelly O’Dwyer, ‘A
comprehensive package of reforms to address illegal phoenixing’ (Media
Release, 12 September
Government Illegal Phoenixing
’). In January 2018, the government also released an exposure
draft of legislation, inter alia to improve the Single Touch
Payroll system of
tax liability reporting: Treasury Laws Amendment (Taxation And Superannuation
Guarantee Integrity Measures) Bill
Treasury has sought
Combatting Illegal
, (‘Combatting Illegal Phoenixing’), September 2017,
http://www.insolvency.govt.nz/cms/financial-trouble/business-debt/company-liquidation/liquidation-freqently-asked-questions/multipagedocument_all_pages
Bankruptcy Act 1966
This is the Official Trustee in Bankruptcy, administered by the
Australian Financial Security Authority (‘AFSA’). See
https://www.afsa.gov.au/practitioner/trustees/official-trustee-in-bankruptcy
Productivity Commission
Business Set Up Report, above n
Illegal Phoenixing
The Productivity
Commission recognised funding issues, above n
, at 410-412. Where Assetless
Administration Funding is reallocated to a ‘cab rank’ system, the
Productivity Commission
recommended it be renamed the Public Interest
Administration Fund, to recognise the protective role of the liquidators’
and accompanying
and accompanying
Section 127(2A)(g)
was added to the ASIC Act by
Treasury Laws Amendment (2017 Measures No
also a recommendation of the Senate Economics References Committee, Parliament
of Australia,
‘I just want to be paid’: Insolvency in the
Australian Construction Industry
(2015), recommendation 5,
Taxation Office, Submission No 6 to Senate Economics References Committee,
Inquiry into Superannuation Guarantee Non-payment
[49]–[53]. It noted that in 2015–16, the Fair Work Ombudsman (FWO)
made 2,405 referrals, with 73 from
super funds, 651 community referrals, 70
internal ATO referrals and 57 from
and accompanying
See for example,
ASIC, ‘Proposed Industry Funding Model for ASIC: Supporting
Attachment’, above n
also, ASIC,
2017–18 ASIC business plan summary by sector: Insolvency
practitioners
and accompanying
Legal Profession
Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2015
; Accounting
Professional and Ethical Standards Board,
APES 110 Code of Ethics for
Professional Accountants
Helen Anderson, Ian
Ramsay, Michelle Welsh and Jasper Hedges,
Phoenix Activity: Recommendations
on Detection, Disruption and Enforcement
(Research Report, Centre for
Corporate Law and
Securities Regulation
, The University of Melbourne, February
http://asic.gov.au/online-services/search-asics-registers/
See UK Companies House,
‘Launch of the New Companies House Public Beta Service’ (News Story,
22 June 2015): ‘[i]n
line with the government’s commitment to free
data, Companies House is pleased to announce that all public digital data held
on the UK register of companies is now accessible free of charge, on its new
public beta search service. This provides access to
over 170 million digital
records on companies and directors including financial accounts, company filings
and details on directors
and secretaries throughout the life of the
Department for Business, Innovation & Skills, ‘Free Companies House
Data to Boost UK Economy’ (Press Release,
15 July 2014).
Australian Government,
Department of Finance, Australian Government Cost Recovery Guidelines, Resource
Management Guide No. 304,
July 2014 – Third edition,
and accompanying
Ibid [92] (large
proprietary companies); [91] (unlisted public companies); and [86] – [88]
(listed public companies).
Ibid, table
, [109], table
A recent example is
Fair Work Ombudsman v NSH North Pty Ltd trading as New Shanghai
Charlestown
[2017] FCA 1301
where an HR manager who falsified payroll
records to deceive the FWO was penalised for her actions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (437 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter