URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2022/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:52:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Young, Molly --- "Law vs Science: Genomic Evidence, Wrongful Convictions and the Requirement for a Statutory Framework" [2022] CanLawRw 2; (2022) 19(1) Canberra Law Review 1
Law vs Science: Genomic Evidence, Wrongful Convictions and
the Requirement for a Statutory Framework
MOLLY YOUNG*
DNA has gained a reputation as an infallible ‘gold standard’ of
forensic identification. Although DNA is a powerful forensic
identifying the guilty and excluding the innocent, this perception has resulted
in an overreliance on DNA evidence in criminal
convictions. This article
explores the limitations of DNA evidence and subsequently how these limitations
contribute to wrongful
convictions in Australia. This includes examining how
technical, scientific and statistical evidence is misunderstood, miscommunicated
and misinterpreted by the typically lay participants of the criminal justice
system. This has been exacerbated by fallacies and phenomenon
such as the
Effect, in which jurors enter the court with preconceived (and often
incorrect) ideas about scientific evidence based on fictional
portrayals of
forensic processes. The article then constructs case studies which demonstrate
how flawed DNA evidence has led to miscarriages
of justice in Australia and
provides some commentary from the High Court on the inability of DNA to
conclusively convict. Following
this, the article recommends several areas for
reform, including the incorporation of innocence testing and post-conviction
schemes, improved training and education for expert witnesses, legal
professionals and lay jurors, and increased reporting and oversight
obligations.
These reforms will mean that genomic evidence will have significant probative
value in reliably securing the convictions
of the guilty and acquittal of the
I INTRODUCTION
In other words, the DNA evidence was, like Ozymandias’ broken statue in
the poem by Shelley, found isolated in a vast desert.
And like the inscription
on the statue’s pedestal, everything around it belied the truth of its
assertion. The statue, of course,
would be seen by any reasonably perceptive
observer, and viewed in its surroundings, as a shattered monument to an
arrogance that
now mocked itself. By contrast, the DNA evidence appears to have
been viewed as possessing an almost mystical infallibility that
enabled its
surroundings to be disregarded.
The presentation of DNA in court provides two competing authorities for legal
participants to balance: the law and science. In the
criminal justice system,
DNA evidence is a powerful forensic tool for identifying the guilty and
excluding the innocent. DNA is widely
perceived as infallible and has gained
significant attraction as the ‘gold standard’ of forensic
identification.
DNA evidence is
highly probative and is associated with longer custodial
sentencing.
However, in reality,
the presence of DNA cannot conclusively determine a suspect’s
Further, the presentation of
DNA evidence is associated with complex scientific concepts, technical language
and statistical data
which is notoriously difficult for laypeople to understand.
Therefore, there is a tendency for legal practitioners, judges, and jurors
assign inaccurate levels of probative value to DNA evidence.
Australia’s existing legislative framework currently does little to
address these misunderstandings or the criminal justice
overreliance on DNA evidence. As demonstrated by Australia’s recent
history, this failure has the potential
to result in serious miscarriages of
justice. Australian case law reveals that DNA evidence is highly probative in
the determination
of wrongful convictions. For example, the conviction of Frank
Button for rape was overturned only after DNA testing performed following
trial excluded him as the
perpetrator.
Contamination of DNA
samples resulted in the wrongful conviction and imprisonment of Farah Jama
despite a complete lack of corroborating
The judge and jurors
associated with the conviction of Thomas Keir were influenced by
prosecutor’s fallacy.
cases, among others, demonstrate the potential consequences of genomic evidence
being miscommunicated, misunderstood, or relied
The implications of these
miscarriages of justice include ongoing psychiatric dysfunction, difficulties
reintegrating into society
and societal distrust in DNA evidence and the broader
criminal justice system.
The inadequate regulation of analysis and communication of genomic evidence
provides a framework which fails to adequately mitigate
the likelihood of
miscarriages of justice. Recommendations to address these failures have
previously been provided by the Australian
Law Reform Commission
state and territory
Parliaments,
and various
academics and subject matter experts. To date, these recommendations have not
been implemented to a sufficient standard
to preserve the probative value of DNA
evidence and prevent wrongful convictions. To address this, this article
recommends a more
holistic approach for reform, including innocence testing and
post-conviction review schemes, improved training and education for
witnesses and legal professionals, and increased reporting obligations. These
reforms mean that genomic evidence will have
significant probative value in
accurately and reliably securing convictions of the guilty and acquittal of the
Failure to implement
these recommendations has the potential to result in further injustices –
that is, more innocent people
in prisons – and increased distrust of DNA
The primary research question underpinning this article is: ‘Is there a
Genomic Evidence Act
and what would that statutory framework
look like?’
A number of sub-questions are required to provide context for the primary
research question. These questions will initially provide
insight into the
jury’s understanding of genomic evidence, which must be addressed to
identify common areas of bias from a
lay perspective. Next, the article aims to
determine how genomic evidence contributes to wrongful convictions. The article
then examines
whether legislative reforms are necessary to mitigate wrongful
convictions. The sub-questions are as follows:
1. What is the jury’s understanding of genomic evidence and its
application?
2. How does genomic evidence contribute to wrongful convictions?
3. What reforms, if any, are required to mitigate the risk of wrongful
convictions?
This article centres on a qualitative analysis of DNA evidence in criminal
litigation, focusing on its role in wrongful convictions.
In doing so it adopts
a mixture of doctrinal and non-doctrinal approaches to researching the use of
DNA, analysing case law, statute,
and secondary sources from a scientific
perspective. Australian common law will be evaluated to construct case studies
of wrongful
convictions and compare judicial perspectives on the reliability and
admissibility of DNA evidence with the scientific reality of
Analysis of this case
law will enable empirical determination of trends and the categorisation of
contributing factors of wrongful
convictions.
This combination of doctrinal and non-doctrinal legal research will extend
into the reform-orientated aspect of the article, with
a critical analysis of
existing Commonwealth and state/territory statutory frameworks. The
identification of limitations in the legislation
is essential for identifying
areas for reform and mitigating the risk of miscarriages of
alongside a comparative
component to this article which will provide examples of successful
international law reform. Analysis of
international regimes will have a twofold
purpose of identifying limitations with Australian’s legislative framework
proposing essential components of a uniform legislative scheme.
Ultimately, this comparative lens allows the merits of the existing
analysed to determine whether legal reform is necessary from this scientific
perspective.
There are severe consequences of misunderstandings, miscommunication and
misuse of DNA evidence, including wrongful convictions and
other miscarriages of
justice. Considering this, there is inadequate existing legislation governing
the use of this evidence. This
research is necessary to address the inadequacies
of the legal system and the uncertainty surrounding the legal profession’s
understanding of genomic evidence. Currently, there is minimal relevant research
in this field, and this gap in knowledge must be
filled. This article offers a
unique perspective into this issue by analysing the interactions between the
legal and scientific frameworks
of DNA evidence and offering practical and
theoretical contributions to existing literature.
The following pages argue that the drafting and implementation of a
comprehensive uniform statutory framework is warranted and achievable,
an effective structure for developing legal best-practice. The necessity of
reform has been recognised internationally,
as evidenced by the recent
introduction of the
Forensic Science Regulator Act 2021
in the United
Kingdom (UK).
proposed here aim to standardise forensic procedures and communication with the
objective of minimising wrongful convictions.
Due to length requirements and other practical limitations, this article is
restricted to the application of genomic evidence in prosecuting
offences, such as murder and sexual assault. Offences of this nature are the
primary crimes investigated using DNA
Discussion surrounding
ethical and privacy concerns and the application of DNA in civil litigation,
such as paternity, custody or
proof-of-death instances, will be excluded for the
purposes of the article. Privacy concerns associated with the use of DNA are
well-integrated
within the literature, thus literature has been selectively
chosen to ensure the article remains focused on criminal proceedings
incorporating genomic evidence. Although discussion of civil DNA analysis and
the application of genomic
evidence, the length requirements will prevent these topics from being addressed
in the necessary depth.
In Part One this article contextualises the forensic relevance of biological
evidence and how this evidence is collected, stored,
managed and subsequently
used in litigation. From this context, Part Two considers the factors which
contribute to wrongful convictions,
focusing on misconceptions,
misunderstandings and fallacies. The article then constructs case studies in
Part Three to profile how
these factors ultimately result in wrongful
convictions. Finally, Part Four compares existing Australian, United States (US)
UK statutory approaches to assess the merits of these frameworks. This Part
provide recommendations for legislative reforms which
govern the use of DNA in
legal proceedings. The article concludes that these reforms are necessary to
standardise the scope of DNA
application in court and prevent further
miscarriages of justice.
PART II GENOMIC EVIDENCE
This Part introduces the scientific foundations of DNA and provides
background on the collection, analysis and presentation of genomic
evidence for
the purpose of criminal proceedings. The presentation of DNA in litigation is
generally expressed using statistics and
technical language. Out of necessity,
the contents of this Part are scientific and technical. This technicality is
inescapable; the
ability to comprehend the probative value of DNA evidence is
dependent on a comprehension of the mechanics and significance of DNA
There is an expectation that jurors understand genomic evidence to a competent
enough level to determine guilt or innocence
on this evidentiary basis. However,
even forensic experts commonly miscommunicate statistical data and most legal
practitioners lack
the necessary comprehension of this category of evidence.
The Science of Genomic Evidence
DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is a molecule composed of nucleotides
connected in the shape of a double helix. DNA contains the unique
material of all known organisms, which can be used for general identification or
specific individualisation.
genome is the complete sequence of an organism’s genetic material and is
made up of coding and non-coding regions. Coding
regions, known as exons,
contain all the genetic regions which code for proteins. Therefore, exon
analysis can reveal physical characteristics
and traits of an individual
(phenotypes), including hair and eye colour, height, facial features, ethnic
backgrounds, and predisposed
genetic medical conditions. Non-coding regions,
known as introns, are not involved in gene expression. Interestingly, forensics
the non-functional, non-informative
Although intron analysis began due to technological limitations, it has
deliberately persisted as an ethical consideration. Current
DNA testing does not
obtain information about race, predisposal to disease or phenotypical
information. Screening for personal traits,
particularly physical and
psychological illnesses, is arguably an invasion of privacy, and currently is
not regulated under Australian
legislation.
Conversely, there
are arguments that phenotypical analysis should be adopted into intelligence and
law enforcement practices due
to the invaluable assistance it could offer
investigations. Further consideration of this is outside the scope of this
Approximately 99.9% of the human genome sequence is identical amongst
individuals. Excluding identical twins, the remaining 0.1% of
the genome is
specific to the individual.
any particular locus,
two alleles (alternatives of a gene) – one on each chromosome. The
combination of alleles at a locus forms a genotype.
The construction of DNA
profiles allows for polymorphisms (variations in the genome) to be observed.
These are compared with samples
stored within databases or DNA collected from
suspects, to determine whether the samples have originated from the same source.
DNA profiles may be used to ‘identify, confirm or eliminate a
suspect in a criminal
investigation’.
forensic techniques is to establish links between the crime and suspect.
Collection of Genomic Evidence
Genomic evidence is predominantly collected following offences against the
person, including sexual
homicide and other
serious criminal offences.
most relevant biological sources include blood, hair roots, skin cells, urine,
bones, saliva and seminal fluid.
In accordance with Locard’s Exchange Principle, ‘every contact
leaves a trace’.
crimes are committed, perpetrators deposit biological trace material which is
typically fragile, microscopic and
transitory.
The recovery of
trace evidence from crime scenes is essential for reconstructing events and
linking or excluding suspects.
Where possible, investigators will utilise all available biological trace
sources to obtain a DNA profile. DNA has previously been
lawfully obtained from
cigarette butts,
intoxication test instruments,
and assorted items of rubbish.
The collection and analysis of forensic evidence found at crime scenes is not
subject to any legislative sampling
Following crime scene recovery, investigators are often required to collect
reference samples for
comparison.
The collection of
forensic samples from suspects, convicted offenders and volunteers is regulated
Crimes Act 1914
, and corresponding laws in state and
territory jurisdictions (see Appendix
In the Commonwealth,
Australian Capital Territory (ACT), New South Wales (NSW) and Victoria, forensic
samples may only be taken from
a suspect where there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the forensic procedure will likely produce evidence confirming or
The threshold
for reasonable belief is low and is likely to be met where a biological sample
has been recovered from the crime
Similarly, Western
Australia requires ‘reasonable suspicion’ that the procedure will
afford evidence of whether or not
the suspect committed the
No other jurisdictions
expressly require reasonable belief or suspicion prior to forensic procedures
being undertaken.
DNA Analysis and Identification
DNA analysis aims to detect polymorphisms to assist with identification.
Forensic analysis focusses on Short Tandem Repeat (‘STR’)
polymorphisms, which are repeating units of
STR alleles are made of
varying lengths of repeated DNA
The combination of STR
alleles across several loci are unique for an individual. Degraded STRs can be
amplified, which is a major
advantage in a field where recovery of complete DNA
sequences is not guaranteed.
DNA profiles are composed of genotypes from a panel of independent loci. The
more STR loci used, the greater the discrimination between
individuals.
The likelihood of a
random individual in the population possessing identical numbers of repeat units
at all STR loci decreases as
more loci are introduced. The number of STR loci
analysed for criminal investigations vary internationally. In the US, the
Bureau of Investigation uses 20 core STR loci in their Combined DNA
Index System (‘CODIS’) for criminal
identification.
Many countries
worldwide, including Australia, have mirrored the CODIS system and adopted
commercial kits which amplify 20 loci (see
Modern DNA profiling involves four main steps: (1) extraction; (2)
quantification and amplification; (3) separation, and (4) visualisation
Appendix 2). Extraction produces pure DNA by freeing it from cellular fluids and
proteins. The extraction method depends on
the biological sample matrix. For
example, solid samples, such as hair, must undergo lysis to be broken down prior
to extraction.
DNA is amplified
using Polymerase Chain Reaction (‘PCR’), which creates many
identical copies of the DNA fragments. Real-Time
PCR simultaneously quantifies
the DNA. Capillary electrophoresis is a separation technique that utilises an
electric current run
across a fine capillary tube. This forces the
negatively-charged DNA molecules to move through the gel towards the positive
Shorter DNA strands move faster than longer strands, and thus
separate based on fragment size. These are detected by a sensor or
are attached
to fluorescent dyes. The output is a visualisable DNA profile which must be
interpreted by an expert.
DNA profiles may be compared with suspects’ profiles or profiles
contained in a DNA database. The use of Commonwealth and state/territory
Crimes Act 1914
The Australian National
Criminal Investigation DNA Database (‘NCIDD’) currently holds more
than 1.2 million DNA profiles
‘collected by Australian police from crime
scenes, convicted offenders, suspects, volunteers, items belonging to missing
and unknown deceased
The NCIDD is
accessible to law enforcement agencies and forensic scientists across all state
and territory jurisdictions.
Two DNA profiles may be considered a match if the alleles are identical at
all loci. This will have significant probative value due
to the improbability of
a random member of the population having the exact same profile as the
This provides
probabilistic support for inferring that that the suspect is the source of the
DNA recovered from the crime scene.
However, DNA matches do not necessarily
establish guilt beyond reasonable doubt since coincidental matches cannot be
completely discounted.
Conversely, a ‘non-match’ conclusively excludes the individual from
being a suspect.
suspects and establishing innocence is equally as important as establishing
Presentation of Genomic Evidence
Once two DNA profiles have been ‘matched’, the significance must
be calculated.
Interpretation of
the match must be expressed in a manner which gives weight to the evidence.
Likelihood ratios (‘LRs’)
are the preferred method of communicating
the strength of statistical forensic evidence due to their ability to convey the
‘subjectivity
and uncertainty associated with forensic science
calculation involves a ratio of the probability that the sample DNA and
suspect’s DNA originated from the same source
(the prosecution hypothesis)
to the probability that the DNA originated from different sources (the defence
hypothesis). LRs can
be used for other forms of forensic evidence where there
are two competing hypotheses, including ballistics, shattered glass, and
fingerprints.
Morrison has
suggested that the LR framework is the ‘logically correct framework for
the evaluation of
LRs must be communicated in litigation in a manner which conveys the support
offered for either hypothesis. Clear communication is
essential for the
‘effectiveness and perceived trustworthiness of the criminal justice
The audience of
genomic evidence includes investigators, lawyers, judges and jurors who
generally lack scientific
backgrounds.
The presentation of
DNA in court is highly probative and influential, and is associated with longer
custodial sentencing.
these statistics must be presented in a manner that conveys the expert’s
intention and is appropriate for the audience.
LRs can be expressed verbally or
numerically (see Appendix 2). As was communicated by an expert witness in
Forbes v the Queen
The probability estimates in a legal context are the prosecution hypothesis
and the defence hypothesis. If the likelihood ratio is
one million that means
that one of the probabilities is favoured over the other by a factor of 1
million. The verbal equivalent of
that likelihood ratio is extremely strong...
The likelihood ratio does not mean that there is only one person in a million...
the particular DNA profile.
Martire et al conducted a study aimed at understanding how presentation
methods were interpreted by laypeople to determine the most
appropriate method
to communicate LRs to judges and
The study showed that
numerical communication was the most effective way to produce belief-change and
convey the expert’s
intentions.
Other methods were
less effective due to the observed ‘weak evidence effect’. There was
a tendency for participants to
interpret evidence in the ‘weak to limited
support’ category as the opposite of ‘strong support’,
supporting the defence. This is a significant misinterpretation, as
evidence within this category still favours the prosecution.
Therefore, numerical approaches should be adopted where possible to ensure
the expert’s intentions are appropriately and accurately
communicated and
understood. This will mitigate the potential for miscommunication and
misunderstandings.
The ability
of DNA to produce probative and reliable results is dependent on proper and
adequate communication.
Limitations of Genomic Evidence
The application of DNA should be restricted to corroborating other forms of
because ‘a DNA
profile match does not necessarily establish guilt beyond reasonable
Coincidental
matches cannot be completely discounted, as there may have been contamination,
laboratory error or tampering. There
is also the possibility of
‘innocent’ contamination, in which the suspect’s DNA is
located at the scene for a reason
unrelated to the crime. This may occur due to
primary (direct) or secondary (indirect)
In the case of
secondary transfer, biological specimens from a suspect may be located at a
crime scene without the suspect ever having
been to the location. As noted in
Riley v Western Australia
, courts are required to consider statistical
DNA evidence in conjunction with other
To achieve this,
judges may instruct jurors that ‘mathematical expressions of probability
must not be substituted for proof
of guilt beyond reasonable
Additionally, often only small quantities of trace evidence are recovered
from crime scenes. Small quantities of starting DNA greatly
increases the risk
of contamination which may be amplified during the DNA profiling
As such, experts must
consider ‘the impact of background contaminating DNA to confuse the
evidential significance’ of
any recovered
uncertainties around the extent to which background DNA of the victim may
overwhelm DNA transferred by the
Therefore, the
recovery of DNA – other than that of the victim – is not always an
indication that it belongs to the true
Moreover, the DNA of identical twins is
indistinguishable.
complicated cases such as the 2008 Atlanta twin murder case in which Donald
Smith was arrested for his brother’s crime
based on DNA
Ultimately, DNA cannot
provide truly granular individualisation. Caution must be exercised against an
overreliance on DNA evidence,
as this may contribute to wrongful
convictions.
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS OF WRONGFUL
CONVICTIONS
The principle underpinning the entirety of the criminal justice system is the
pursuit of justice. The public assumes that interactions
with the legal system
will result in fair and just outcomes; that is, people who do bad things will be
punished accordingly, and
people who suffer at the hands of those people will
receive just compensation. The inherent complexities of the legal system prevent
the execution of this perception. The adversarial system is not strictly a
of the judge in Australia’s adversarial system is as a passive and
impartial party ‘who holds the balance between
the contending parties
without himself taking party in their
disputations’.
any evidence presented to the court is limited to that which is brought by the
Miscarriages of justice, such as wrongful convictions, occur when there is a
failure to achieve a fair or just outcome in a legal
proceeding.
There are two
categories of wrongful convictions: those relating to the ‘true’
sequence of events (factual innocence)
and those relating to the principles of
natural justice (legal
innocence).
This article
primarily explores the former category – the conviction of individuals for
offences they did not commit –
in the context of DNA evidence. This Part
will investigate factors which contribute to wrongful convictions of this
nature, including
the perceived infallibility of forensic evidence,
miscommunication and misunderstanding, common fallacies and biases, and the
“Infallibility” of Forensic Evidence
Firstly, there is a common misconception amongst legal practitioners and the
general public (from which jurors are selected) that
forensic evidence,
particularly DNA, can conclusively determine a suspect’s identity.
Overreliance on forensic evidence has
contributed to many criminal convictions
which are later overturned. In arguably Australia’s most controversial and
high-profile
criminal case, Lindy Chamberlain was convicted and imprisoned for
murdering her daughter at Uluru in 1980, despite claims that baby
been taken by a dingo.
husband, Michael Chamberlain, was convicted as an accessory after the fact. At
trial, the prosecution primarily relied on the
expert statement of a forensic
biologist, who testified that foetal haemoglobin had been found in the
Chamberlain’s car.
‘blood’ was later found to be a fluid used in car manufacturing,
known as a ‘sound deadening
In September
1988, the Northern Territory Court of Criminal Appeal unanimously quashed both
convictions and Lindy Chamberlain was
released after serving three
In 2012, the fourth
inquest into this case officially concluded that a dingo had caused
Azaria’s death.
The legal system both reflects and shapes the public’s understanding of
science. With the public perception of forensic evidence
as infallible, it is
unsurprising that the legal system shares and further perpetuates this view. In
a critique of
Chamberlain
, Bourke states that the publicity to an
international audience ‘has only served to distinguish it from other
cases, so that
it is now commonly thought of as an aberration, a
‘one-off’ legal
In reality,
wrongful convictions due to flawed forensic evidence have occurred on numerous
occasions, and there are likely many more
which have not been discovered. The
conviction of Edward Splatt for
was associated with poor
reporting methods, an inability to retest hypotheses, and a narrow analysis of
the trace evidence ‘without
the benefit of a broader
Eastman’s conviction for the murder of an Australian Federal Police
(‘AFP’) officer was founded on gunshot
residue evidence by an
‘expert’ lacking relevant tertiary
qualifications.
expert’s flawed methodology relied on a database of ammunition profiles
constructed using insufficient quantities of reference
These cases demonstrate a tendency to accept the opinions of scientific
experts with absolute trust in their methods. However, the
interpretation of
forensic results is a human process, and thus there is the possibility of human
error. As noted by Moles:
When Australia used a truth-seeking method (a Royal Commission) in the case
of Lindy Chamberlain it found out that virtually all of
the scientific evidence
which has been given at the trial was wrong. When it used the same method (a
Royal Commission) in the case
of Edward Splatt, it found out again that of the
numerous pieces of scientific evidence given at the trial, not one of them was
While the flaws of other forensic disciplines have been increasingly
criticised, DNA has gained significant attraction as ‘a
bullet’ and the ‘gold standard’ of forensic
identification.
DNA has been
praised as the source of ultimate truth; able to undisputedly answer the
questions of the criminal justice system. In
some cases, such as
, convictions have been made where DNA is the prosecution’s only
supporting evidence.
is created as DNA evidence is utilised more regularly in criminal investigations
and judgments. This in turn builds a
body of knowledge and becomes more
normative. However, although legal professionals may encounter DNA more
frequently, it ‘does
not follow that increased familiarity equates to
understanding’.
Moreover, jurors expect DNA evidence to be present in almost all criminal
cases. Where DNA has not been recovered because it is not
relevant or is not
able to be interpreted due to degradation or mixed-DNA samples, prosecutors must
find ways to explain the lack
of relevance or scientific limitations to
They must anticipate and
address the (often fallacious) expectations jurors possess about the nature and
availability of genomic
evidence. DNA is a powerful forensic tool which may
provide credible evidence only if used appropriately and contextualised in the
Miscommunication and Misunderstanding
Secondly, as DNA evidence progresses to court, technical, scientific and
statistical processes and findings must be conveyed to lay
jurors and judges.
The challenge for expert witnesses is to present their opinions, findings and
interpretations in a manner which
can be understood by these non-scientists. The
complexities of DNA evidence are notoriously difficult for laypeople to
understand.
This is further complicated by inconsistent communication between
forensic scientists and legal
professionals.
Consequently,
jurors and judges are required to make decisions based on DNA evidence which
they cannot be expected to fully understand,
or which has been miscommunicated
to them. As acknowledged by the High Court in the conviction of Colin Ross (who
was pardoned posthumously):
if there be evidence on which reasonable men could find a verdict of guilty,
the determination of the guilt or innocence of the prisoner
is a matter for the
jury and for them alone... It is of the highest importance that the grave
responsibility which rests on jurors
in this respect should be thoroughly
understood and always
maintained.
An understanding of forensic science is required to interpret the associated
language. The readability of forensic reports has been
criticised due to styles
of writing and technical or scientific language
These reports are often
misinterpreted by the police, lawyers and judges who use them. Howes et al
conducted a study to assess readability
of forensic DNA reports across six
Australian jurisdictions.
results indicated that reports were generally written in an objective and
scientific style, but tended to assume knowledge
of specialist technical
Of note, the study
identified a disparity between Australian jurisdictions in communicating the
uncertainty and probative value of
genomic evidence in police and court
This demonstrates the
lack of harmony across jurisdictions in relation to appropriate forms of
communication for non-scientists to
understand.
Additionally, criminal juries are made up of laypeople who are presented with
complex scientific findings to support the competing
claims of the prosecution
and defence. Jurors are typically unable to consider evidence holistically,
accurately evaluate the probative
value of the evidence, or make necessarily
informed decisions. Scientific, statistical and technical evidence is
challenging for
jurors to comprehend, and their reasoning and decisions in
relation to statistical arguments are often influenced by fallacies and
Jurors consistently
misinterpret the contexts in which DNA may be present, leading to jurors both
undervaluing and overvaluing genomic
evidence. The demographic characteristics,
educational backgrounds and attitudes of jurors are important predictors of
their likely
comprehension.
Individuals with
minimal formal education tend to devalue DNA evidence, while those with higher
levels of education generally make
more knowledgeable
assessments.
Common Fallacies and Biases
Thirdly, fallacies and biases may be introduced into the forensic process at
any stage involving interpretation or subjective judgment.
Investigators and
analysts may ignore or reject exculpatory evidence based on prior
expectations.
For example,
analysts often interpret faint bands in DNA autoradiographs as factual to
produce a match with a suspect’s
At trial, jurors
must interpret genomic evidence during which they may be affected by
There is minimal
current research about the effect of fallacies on the outcomes of criminal
trials. The National Academy of Sciences
(‘NAS’) has criticised
forensic disciplines that rely on subjective assessments of matching
characteristics.
report advised that these disciplines would benefit from the development of
research programs which considered ‘findings
of cognitive psychology on
the potential for bias and error in human
observers’.
Confirmation bias is the ‘unconscious tendency to seek out, select, and
interpret new information in ways that validate one’s
pre-existing
beliefs, hopes, or
expectations’.
forensic context, this may influence the collection and interpretation of
Investigators and
analysts may approach cases narrow-mindedly, ignore broader evidence and produce
erroneous judgments. This bias
may extend to the legal system as ‘beliefs
concerning the likelihood of... the guilt of a defendant’ and subsequently
impact judicial
decision-making.
closely associated with contextual bias; the tendency for judgements by
investigators and analysts to be influenced by their
knowledge of extraneous
information.
This may include
knowledge of previous criminal histories, alibis, or gender and racial
assumptions. These biases may influence subjective
interpretation of DNA
analysis, particularly where partial or mixed DNA profiles are
‘Prosecutor’s fallacy’ is a statistical fallacy which
misapplies Bayes’ Theorem. It incorrectly assumes that
the probability of
is equal to the probability of
This fallacy reasons
that (1) if the defendant is guilty, the probability of a DNA match would be
high, therefore (2) given the DNA
match, there is a high probability that the
defendant is guilty.
fallacy arises where the prosecution incorrectly asks what the probability is
that the DNA would be present if the defendant
were innocent. The correct
question to ask is: what is the probability that the defendant is innocent given
the presence of the DNA?
The former question will produce a much smaller
statistical probability. This fallacy incorrectly assumes that a LR of 1,000
to a 1,000:1 chance of the suspect contributing the
This was contemplated in
It is easy, if one eschews rigorous analysis, to draw the following
conclusion:
(1) Only one person in a million will have a DNA profile which matches that
of the crime stain.
(2) The defendant has a DNA profile which matches the crime stain.
(3) Ergo there is a million to one probability that the defendant left the
crime stain and is guilty of the
Conversely, ‘defendant’s fallacy’ assumes that in any given
population, any individual with a DNA profile ‘matching’
collected from the crime scene is equally as likely to have left the sample as
the suspect. However, suspects are often identified
using additional evidence,
such as eyewitness and expert testimonies, forensic analysis, and conflicting
This evidence is
unlikely to exist for other individuals in the
population.
There are further fallacies affecting the genomic evidence process. The
‘naïve investigator effect’ is the tendency
for DNA evidence to
override neutral or exculpatory
observation fallacy’ relates to doubt of a jury’s non-guilty verdict
following subsequent evidence of
the defendant’s previous similar
convictions.
‘interrogator’s fallacy’ has a counterintuitive effect in
which guilty confessions obtained by police may offer
weight to the view that
the suspect is innocent, unless corroborated by other
The effect of these
errors on jurors’ legal reasoning significantly increases the likelihood
of wrongful convictions. Understanding
the role of human subjectivity in
forensic processes is essential for correctly conceptualising DNA analysis and
recognising limitations
which must be addressed.
The CSI Effect
Finally, fictional television shows depicting forensic procedures have gained
significant popularity amongst Australian audiences.
These shows, such as
, portray investigators single-handedly solving crimes with modern
forensic techniques. Although some techniques are factual, most
are inaccurate
or hyperbolic demonstrations of forensic processes. Wyer and Adaval conducted a
study on how verbal and nonverbal
information obtained from the media affects
attitudes, beliefs, and judgment. They suggest that:
[C]oncepts and knowledge that become easily accessible in memory as a
resolute of exposure to movies and television can affect the
interpretation of
new information and the implications that can be drawn from it. To this extent,
the concepts can influence the
impact of the information on judgments and
decisions to which it is
There is a tendency, known as the
Effect, for jurors to be
influenced by the portrayal of ‘infallible’ forensic procedures in
crime shows. Jurors are under
the impression that they are being ‘educated
as well as entertained’ when watching these shows, effectively
quantitative survey of jurors, Shelton noted that ‘although
viewers had higher expectations for scientific evidence than non-
viewers, these expectations had little, if any, bearing on
respondents’ propensity to
Regardless,
it is difficult to dispute that fictional portrayals of crime influence the
public’s views regarding the nature
of crime and the infallibility of
and subsequently may
shape opinions relevant to making legal
It is generally accepted that the
Effect causes jurors to
underestimate the probative value of genomic evidence, altering standards of
reasonable doubt and resulting
in higher rates of acquittal. Jurors expect that
techniques such as DNA profiling are widely available for all forms of crime.
DNA is available to support the prosecution, jurors believe a conviction
cannot be made.
evidenced by Wheate in her survey of jurors’ perceptions of DNA during a
sexual assault trial. The study indicated
that DNA evidence was more important
to jurors than other forms of evidence, including alibis, medical expert
evidence, and police
and witness
testimonies.
quantitative analysis determined that 22% of respondents expected to see DNA
evidence in every criminal case, without
which jurors were reluctant to
The limitations of
DNA analysis should be clearly and concisely contextualised to juries to ensure
that they do not acquit offenders
exclusively based on a lack of DNA evidence.
An alternative hypothesis is that the
Effect works in reverse;
jurors instead
overestimate
the probative value of genomic
Crime shows portray
forensic techniques as fast, effective and accurate, with the ability to
conclusively identify offenders. This
leads jurors to readily accept any
evidence presented to them by forensic experts. Tyler suggests that the
exaggerated infallibility
of forensic processes in crime shows allows jurors to
justify their motivation to convict, thus lowering juror standards and
conviction rates.
In response to studies supporting the primary hypothesis, Tyler criticises their
experimental approach, claiming that they ‘may
not reflect the complexity
or richness of real
However, these
alternate hypotheses do not necessarily compete with one another, nor are they
mutually exclusive. Rather, the consequence
Effect is as a
benefit to the prosecution where
DNA evidence is presented to the
court, while the benefit lies with the defence where there is a complete lack of
DNA evidence.
WRONGFUL CONVICTIONS IN AUSTRALIA
The factors discussed in the previous Part have contributed to numerous
wrongful convictions worldwide. In the US, 2,857 exonerations
have been recorded
since 1989.
Of these, DNA
contributed to 543 convictions. This number is high relative to other countries
due to extensive innocence testing
in the US. In comparison, the UK Criminal
Cases Review Commission (‘CCRC’) has referred 763 cases for appeal
since 1997,
of which 527 appeals have been
The Scottish CCRC
has referred 134 cases to the High Court since 1999, of which 88 have been
successful.
Innocence Canada
has helped exonerate 24 people since
Although there are no
conclusive statistics of Australian miscarriages of justice, a study conducted
by Dioso-Villa revealed at least
71 wrongful convictions between 1922 and
Although there is no way of knowing the true number of innocent Australians
currently in prison, estimates may be made by extrapolating
data from other
countries. Whilst Australia’s legal system reflects the emergence of
discrete national and state/territory
law, it continues to share many
characteristics with the UK, therefore allowing a comparison of conviction
statistics (see Appendix
3). There are 78,324 incarcerated individuals in the
The 527 convictions the
CCRC has helped overturn averages to approximately 22 convictions overturned per
year. This means 2.8% of
convictions each year are wrongful. According to the
Australian Bureau of Statistics, there are currently 43,073 prisoners in
Assuming the
wrongful conviction and imprisonment rate is equivalent to the UK, this equates
to approximately 12 wrongful convictions
in Australia per year. In total, this
indicates that roughly 289 innocent individuals have been convicted in Australia
in the same
24-year timeframe.
It should be stressed that the CCRC does not categorise these wrongful
convictions. The available information does not allow an authoritative
assessment of how many UK wrongful convictions cases can be attributed to DNA
evidence. Similarly, there is little information available
in Australia and care
must be taken with inferences from the data. The case studies presented in this
Part highlight the legal issues
associated with using DNA and provide insight
into the courts’ engagement with this evidence. Analysis of recent case
potentially enables empirical determination of trends and categorisation
of common errors during DNA analysis and presentation, particularly
resulting in miscarriages of justice.
Flawed DNA Evidence from Collection and Analysis
1. R v Jama
In July 2008, Farah Jama, a 19-year-old Somalian man, was convicted of raping
a 48-year-old woman, referred to as M during trial,
in a Melbourne nightclub.
Vaginal swabs were taken from M by a medical officer in a Crisis Care Unit
(‘CCU’) and analysed
spermatozoa.
Twenty-eight
hours prior, the same medical officer took forensic samples in the same CCU from
a woman who had engaged in sexual activity
Upon analysis, one of
the swabs was found to contain one intact sperm and fifteen heads. This is a
comparatively insignificant amount
of genomic material in relation to typical
penile/vaginal rape but was not flagged by experts at the time. It was
established that
the DNA was attributable to Jama.
The prosecution’s case was exclusively founded on the presence of
Jama’s DNA on the swab.
This DNA evidence was perceived as ‘possessing an almost mystical
infallibility that enabled its surroundings to be
disregarded’.
no other evidence to support the prosecution; there were no witnesses, no camera
surveillance, no fingerprint evidence
and, following investigation, no
indication that Jama had ever been in the
It was later speculated
that it was likely no sexual assault had occurred. Jama was exonerated once
reasonable doubt was introduced
regarding contamination of the DNA swab. Jama
served 15 months of his six-year sentence prior to the Victorian Court of Appeal
aside the conviction and delivering a verdict of
During appeal, the
prosecutor admitted that a ‘substantial miscarriage of justice’ had
In response to
, Vincent conducted an official inquiry into the
use of DNA evidence within the criminal justice system. His report was highly
It observed that:
It became clear that the DNA evidence was perceived as so powerful by all
involved in the case that none of the filters upon which
our system of criminal
justice depends to minimise the risk of a miscarriage of justice, operated
effectively at any stage until
a matter of weeks, before Mr Jama’s appeal
was expected to be heard.
The perception of DNA evidence as infallible is concerning in any case where
DNA is the only inculpatory evidence; that is, the only
evidence available which
identifies a suspect or indicates guilt. As described by Robertson, whether or
not DNA ‘can be seen
to be reliable and probative in the determination of
disputed issues of fact involves consideration of a range of
The perceived
probative value is dependent on ‘extreme care [being] taken at every stage
from the collection, handling, testing
of the materials and the interpretation
of the results’.
, the DNA evidence provided the ‘only foundation for
concluding that a crime had been committed at all, and then constituted
means of identifying the
perpetrator’.
evidence was not collected, handled, tested or interpreted with appropriate
care. It was not considered in conjunction with
the lack of corroborating
evidence, and further, it caused all exculpatory material to be disregarded.
Subsequently, it lacked the
probative value required for a conviction based
solely on this type of evidence. Vincent was accordingly highly critical of the
prosecution’s
decision to proceed with the
Contamination and error are inherent in human systems, particularly those
involving collection and analysis of biological samples.
As noted by Kirby,
‘contamination would rarely be occasioned by scientists and technicians
with a deliberate purpose of convicted
the wrong person’ in
Despite this, some
extent of contamination is inevitable, and thus laboratory errors rates should
be measured and revealed.
Although the exact source is uncertain, Vincent speculates that the DNA match
was the result of contamination which likely occurred due to poor collection
standards and inadequate cleaning in the
Laboratory contamination
disregarded as unlikely or remote. Analysts and prosecutors exclusively
considered the risk of contamination
at the laboratory, without considering
other locations at which the samples were present.
The need for holistic
consideration of the entire process from collection to interpretation is
essential to prevent overlooking sources
of contamination and avoiding
miscarriages of justice.
In what was described as ‘a black day in the history of the
administration of criminal justice in
Queensland’,
Button was convicted for the rape of a minor. The conviction was based on
vaginal swabs taken from the victim, which revealed
the presence of spermatozoa
but failed to yield a conclusive DNA
DNA testing of
seminal fluid stains on bedsheets from the crime scene was only conducted after
the conviction.
the swabs were retested and a DNA profile was obtained which matched the profile
obtained from the bedsheets.
This excluded Button as the source of the seminal fluid, and thus as the
perpetrator. The profile was then matched to the DNA of
a convicted
Considering this new
evidence, there was a unanimous decision by the Queensland Court of Appeal to
quash the conviction. Button was
released after serving ten
This was the first
Australian post-conviction exoneration relying on DNA evidence that had not been
considered at trial.
Kirby identified several principles that must be adopted to ensure
reliability and accuracy of forensic evidence. These include: (1)
avoiding human
error, (2) avoiding fraudulent error, (3) maintaining rigour of analysis, (4)
upholding supervisory regulation, and
(5) securing
transparency.
acknowledges, by reference to
, that wrongful convictions occur
when these characteristics are not given the required attention. The original
DNA testing on the
vaginal swab had been performed
imperfectly.
initial inconclusive result, the swab was not thoroughly re-tested or subjected
to rigorous (or any) confirmation testing.
It should be noted that the further
tests conducted on appeal did not incorporate any developments in technology.
Rather, the DNA
profile was the result of ‘the persistent application and
reapplication of tests on various areas of the swab
Button’s conviction could have been prevented had adequate DNA testing
been performed initially. This case highlights the potential
consequences of
‘selective testing’ – that is, a failure to completely analyse
material recovered from the crime
The prosecution chose
not to conduct the testing because ‘it would not [have been] of material
assistance in identifying the
appellant as the perpetrator of the
The focus of
investigation had been on guilt-testing, rather than
innocence-testing.
emphasises the importance of using DNA evidence for its twofold purpose:
identifying offenders
excluding the innocent.
Flawed DNA Evidence from Presentation at Trial
Thomas Keir was convicted of murdering his wife after bone fragments of a
woman were discovered under her house.
A DNA profile was obtained and
compared with her parents’ DNA for identification. Goetz, a forensic
biologist, gave evidence
that the DNA profile was 660,000 times more likely to
have originated from a child of Mrs Keir’s parents, rather than a random
couple in the Australian population. He concluded that this ‘very
strongly’ supported the hypothesis that the bones belonged
to an offspring
of the parents. Since Mrs Keir was their only child, the prosecution argued that
there was very strong support that
the bones belonged to her.
While directing the jury, the trial judge incorrectly expressed that the LR
equated to a ‘660,000 to one’ chance that
the bones belonged to Mrs
In this case, there is
more accurately a ‘30 to one’ chance of the bones belonging to her.
At appeal, the NSW Court of
Criminal Appeal held that the prosecution and trail
judge had committed prosecutor’s
The conviction was
quashed and new trial ordered. In doing so, Giles JA reasoned:
The jury was likely to be very much influenced by this in deciding whether
Mrs Keir was dead and had been killed by the appellant,
and to find the
identification evidence unreliable or
incredible.
The Court considered previous instances of prosecutor’s fallacy in
to explain that
‘the statistical probability within the relevant population does not
translate to the same statistical probability
for a given member of the
population’.
instance court overlooked that there could statistically be other matings within
the Australian population capable of producing
an identical DNA profile. In
Australia’s population, there are approximately 30 random matings which
could produce the DNA
profile recovered from the bones (hence the ‘30 to
one’ chance of the bones belonging to her). Courts are reluctant to
express statistical probabilities in this manner, due to the potential for other
evidence to be disregarded.
Regardless, in contrast to the figure presented to the jury, this illustrates
how the real figure is likely to be much less probative
in the jury’s
assessment of guilt. Subsequently, the ‘660,000 to one’ figure used
to direct the jury was ‘a
misleading and prejudicial
criterion’.
Statistical interpretations of database matches have not been fully
As such, care must
be taken to explain the ‘basis on which the calculation is made, including
relevant characteristics of the
population database used’ and avoid
misrepresenting
probabilities.
None of the
professionals recognised the fallacious reasoning at
Giles JA caveated his
reasoning in
by noting that ‘even if the Crown had not
introduced the prosecutor’s fallacy into the trial, there was a danger
the jury would reason for themselves in the way the Crown put to them at
the trial’.
despite attempts to instruct the jury correctly, the complexities of technical
and statistical DNA evidence may cause
all legal participants to enter into
fallacious conclusions.
2. Aytugrul v The Queen
Yusuf Aytugrul was
of the murder of
his ex-girlfriend after mitochondrial DNA
of a hair sample
found under her nail linked him to the crime. The DNA profile recovered from the
hair was consistent with the profile
obtained from his saliva sample. At trial,
the DNA specialist testified that approximately 1600 people in the community had
profile identical to that obtained from the hair sample. This was
expressed as an exclusion percentage of 99.9% – that is,
99.9% of the
population would not be expected to have this DNA
On appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal, Aytugrul claimed that ‘a
miscarriage of justice occurred because of the prejudicial
way in which DNA
evidence was expressed to the
The primary
concern was that presenting the exclusion percentage directed the jury to
subconsciously round this figure to one, thus
implying mathematical certainty of
Aytugrul’s guilt. Although Simpson and Fullerton JJ agreed that
‘some formulations
[of equivalent statistical statements] have a greater
educative force or persuasive appeal than others’, they did not agree
this amounted to unfair
McClellan CJ, in a
dissenting judgment, agreed with Aytugrul’s contention that this
expression was unfairly prejudicial due
to juror comprehension of statistical
evidence. The appeal was dismissed by a two to one majority.
In the High Court, French CJ, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ stated that
‘no sufficient foundation was laid, at trial or on appeal...
creation or application of a general rule’ that would prevent DNA results
being expressed as an exclusion percentage
circumstance.
It would be an
improper exercise of judicial notice to consider general psychological studies,
rather than the parties’ specific
submissions.
If the probative
value of evidence is outweighed by the danger that it is unfairly prejudicial,
misleading or confusing, the court’s
general discretion to exclude
evidence is enlivened under
Evidence Act 1995
The High Court
It was evidence adverse to the appellant but it was in no sense
prejudicial, or misleading or confusing... As the trial judge
pointed out to the jury, the evidence that was given did not, and was
to, establish that the mitochondrial DNA profile found in the hair definitely
came from the appellant. There was no risk
of rounding the figure of 99.9 per
cent to the certainty of 100 per
Unlike ‘exclusion’ results, ‘inclusion’ results are
not definitive.
There may be
alternative explanations for DNA matches, since there is a ‘non-zero
probability’ that the DNA profile is
identical to that of a random
Urbas stresses that
this should be carefully conveyed to jurors and legal practitioners, by
‘correctly stating and explaining
the relevant probabilities, how they are
calculated, and what they
Although it
was held that the presentation of DNA evidence in
sufficient, care must be taken to ensure jurors are accurately presented with
explanations of statistical results. This will ensure
positive steps are taken
to prevent the probative value of evidence being outweighed by unfair prejudice.
Commentary from the High Court
1. Fitzgerald v The Queen
Daniel Fitzgerald was convicted for murder and aggravated assault following a
2011 Adelaide home invasion after DNA recovered from
a didgeridoo linked him to
the crime scene.
no other evidence indicating his involvement. A mixed DNA profile was recovered,
made up of DNA from the two victims,
several unknown people, and
Fitzgerald.
At trial, the
prosecution successfully argued beyond reasonable doubt that this DNA profile
was the result of Fitzgerald being struck
with, and subsequently bleeding onto,
the didgeridoo.
sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment.
On appeal, Fitzgerald contended that his DNA could have been transferred to
the digeridoo via secondary
identified offenders testified that he had shaken Fitzgerald’s hand
earlier that evening.
Although Henry, the forensic expert, was unable to exclude the possibility of
secondary transfer, she indicated that primary transfer
was the most likely
reason for the DNA profile. On this basis, Gray and Sulan JJ determined that a
secondary transfer was ‘extremely
was dismissed.
In the High Court, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Gageler JJ noted that the
Court of Criminal Appeal failed to consider the expert
evidence relating to
secondary transfers and the impossibility of DNA
High Court identified three primary faults: (1) it had not been made out beyond
reasonable doubt that Fitzgerald’s DNA
was derived from his blood, (2) the
expert testified that primary transfer was the most likely scenario, but
nevertheless that a
secondary transfer was possible (which was misinterpreted by
the Court of Appeal), and (3) the time and circumstances in which the
deposited could not be
determined.
The High Court
unanimously and summarily freed and acquitted Fitzgerald. It was concluded:
For those reasons, it could not be accepted that the evidence relied on by
the prosecution was sufficient to establish beyond reasonable
doubt that the
appellant was present at, and participated in, the attack. The jury, acting
reasonably, should have entertained a
reasonable doubt as to the
appellant’s guilt.
Gans criticises both that this case progressed so far and the High
Court’s reasons, stating that they ‘do too little to
address the
risks arising from the criminal justice system’s overuse of DNA
that ‘but for a succession of unlikely events’, Fitzgerald would
‘almost certainly have remained in prison
until at least 2032’,
based on ‘flimsy’
Via comparison with
the English Court of Appeal, Gans infers that the Australian criminal justice
system is too comfortable with
convicting individuals on DNA
Further, Weathered et al highlight that
raises concerns as
to whether the assumptions and limitations associated with DNA evidence are
properly understood by legal professionals,
particularly from the perspective of
transfer scenarios.
suggest that experts should ‘more clearly articulate the assumptions,
limitations and sources of error associated with
activity level DNA evidence
– or alternatively, not provide an expert opinion of this form of
reforms targeted at improved training and communication are required to mitigate
variations in reporting and standardise
the presentation of DNA
Forbes v The Queen
Forbes was convicted of sexually assaulting a Canberra woman in
, with DNA providing the
‘central evidentiary link between the applicant and the
provided a vague description of her attacker, including reference to a
circumcision. Despite having an alibi and being
uncircumcised, Forbes was
convicted based on mixed DNA profiles recovered from seminal deposits on the
victim’s clothing. The
prosecution’s experts declared that the DNA
was 20 billion times more likely to have originated from Forbes than a randomly
selected member of the
population.
This probability
was calculated using a ‘small cross-section’ of the ACT population
consisting of 620 people.
trial, experts qualitatively testified that there was ‘strong’ and
‘extremely strong’ evidence that the
DNA belonged to
The quantitative
calculations were not expressed until appeal to the High
This matter was appealed to the Court of Appeal of the
and later to the High
On appeal, Forbes
argued that excessive reliance had been placed on the DNA evidence. He claimed
that convictions should not be allowed
where DNA is the only inculpatory
evidence because this does not allow for the requisite standard of proof to be
met. Forbes’
proposition, as phrased by Hayne J, was that:
there is a particular class of evidence, DNA evidence, which regardless of
its particular content, should be held legally insufficient
to support a
conclusion that a disputed proposition of fact is established beyond reasonable
Courts have typically been reluctant to define ‘beyond reasonable
doubt’ as this is ultimately a matter for the
Therefore, it was up to
the jury to find that Forbes was guilty beyond reasonable doubt considering the
experts’ description
of the DNA evidence as ‘strong’ and
‘extremely strong’. In doing so, the jury was entitled to reject
alibi, regard his wife’s testimony as unreliable, and ignore
the inconsistencies in the victim’s testimony. The Court
of Criminal
Appeal rejected the proposition that convictions cannot be made exclusively on
This implies that DNA
evidence alone is adequate to achieve a guilty verdict.
The application for special leave was refused by the Full Bench of the High
Court based on French CJ’s reasoning that it was
open to the jury to
convict the defendant on the evidence before
This matter was found
unsuitable for the High Court to consider the broader questions Forbes was
seeking to have answered: whether
DNA evidence is admissible where it is the
only evidence against an accused and how the jury should be instructed in such a
In a study addressing the shortcomings of
, Ligertwood suggests
that DNA evidence alone may conclusively constitute proof beyond reasonable
doubt where there is a complete
absence of ‘any evidence raising the
reasonable possibility of an innocent
explanation’.
this conclusion assumes that DNA is completely reliable. As addressed in
previous Parts, the reliability of DNA evidence
is largely uncertain and not
immune from human error and contamination. French CJ’s reasons fail to
comprehensively identify
how the High Court would deal with this broader
question. Until this is addressed, there is no legal rule preventing individuals
from being convicted where a DNA match is the central element connecting them to
PART V RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REFORM
The overarching purpose of the criminal justice system is the administration
of justice. The system should strive for nothing less
than perfection to ensure
this purpose is achieved.
previous case studies highlighted that Australia’s current legislative
framework fails to adequately mitigate the likelihood
of miscarriages of justice
where DNA is involved. Additionally, the lack of investigative and legal avenues
makes it difficult to
correct wrongful convictions for individuals who have
exhausted their avenues for
Recognition of
limitations is essential to identify areas requiring reform. In his analysis of
forensic evidence used in the High
Court, Kirby stated:
Unattended and unrepaired, such injustices will be bound to cast doubt on
modern forensic evidence. Properly safeguarded, such evidence
will be a vital
weapon in the endeavour of our society to secure the conviction of those guilty
of crimes and to ensure the acquittal
of those who cannot be proved guilty by
admissible and reliable
To address these limitations, this Part provides several recommendations for
reform including the incorporation of innocence testing
and post-conviction
review schemes, improved training and education, and increased reporting
obligations.
Many similar
reforms have previously been recommended by various academics, inquiries, and
law reform commissions, including the
The failure of the
legal system to adopt these recommendations is disquieting, but not surprising
given that substantial legislative
change may take several
Without actively
embracing these changes, more innocent people will be imprisoned. This is more
important than ever due to the increased
use of DNA evidence. The
recommendations proposed in this Part will ensure that genomic evidence has
significant probative value
in reliably securing convictions of the guilty and
acquittal of the innocent.
Failure to implement these recommendations has the potential to result in
further injustices and increased distrust of DNA evidence.
Australia’s Legislative Framework
1. Existing Framework
Crimes Act 1914
provides the primary statutory
framework regulating forensic
procedures.
These provisions
primarily regulate forensic procedures on convicted offenders, suspects, and
volunteers, including collection and
destruction of ‘intimate’ and
‘non-intimate’ samples.
, and corresponding laws in state and
territory jurisdictions (see Appendix
also regulate the
operation of DNA databases.
, any evidence obtained through forensic procedures or databases is
inadmissible if there has been a breach of any obligations or
regulated by
the court may exercise discretion to admit evidence if satisfied that the
admission is justified despite lack of
compliance.
Consideration must also be given to the
Evidence Act 1995
equivalent uniform state and territory
Under under
opinion evidence is only admissible if it is ‘wholly or
substantially’ based on a person’s specialised knowledge,
turn is based on their ‘training, study or
experience’.
evidence is a form of opinion evidence that falls within this exception.
Therefore, DNA is admissible provided that it is relevant
to the proceeding and
is not excluded under another exclusionary rule or by judicial
discretion.
NSW is the only jurisdiction with enacted legislation relating to innocence
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
(NSW) imposes a duty on police
officers to retain certain biological material
Commissioner of Police may arrange for retained biological material to undergo
DNA testing at the request of the convicted
No other jurisdiction
possesses statutory rights to access and re-test DNA evidence, or duties to
preserve such evidence.
Scope of Reform
Since each state and territory administers individual criminal justice
systems, the benefits of any reform to federal law will be
Further, ‘the
great majority of criminal proceedings in which DNA evidence is of any relevance
occur under State or Territory
structured legislative reform across all Australian jurisdictions is needed to
facilitate effective change.
The creation of new uniform state/territory legislation which encompasses the
entirety of the DNA process, such as a
Evidence Act
, is the most
ideal solution for regulating DNA in criminal proceedings. However, amendments
to existing state and territory laws
will be sufficient to mitigate the risk of
wrongful convictions, provided that they wholly adopt the below recommendations.
Recommendations
Innocence Testing and Post-Conviction Review Schemes
The first recommendation proposed by this article is that reforms should
incorporate powers for retrospective investigations in the
pursuit of innocence
The Commonwealth
should establish a statutory process by which post-conviction review may be
applied for where DNA evidence may provide
reasonable doubt of a
conviction’s legitimacy. Weathered and Blewer identify that no DNA-related
post-appeal exonerations have
been performed in Australia to date due to the
lack of necessary mechanisms facilitating these
exonerations.
wrongful convictions is essential for ending injustice for wrongly incarcerated
individuals and identifying actual perpetrators.
However, it is important to
recognise that DNA innocence testing is limited to aiding cases in which
biological material is
Although NSW has statutory mechanisms for post-appeal exonerations, these are
largely inadequate. NSW previously established an Innocence
Panel and DNA Review
which aimed to review
claims for innocence that could potentially be supported by
These panels, criticised
as being a ‘toothless
have since been
abolished. The effect of these panels was greatly restricted due to inabilities
to locate relevant evidence, unsatisfactory
retention, destruction and storage
of forensic samples,
statutory time limitations.
Currently, the only remaining provisions relating to innocence testing under the
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
(NSW) are the duty to retain
biological material and the ability of the convicted person to request
retesting. The remaining statutory
framework is ‘too restrictive to enable
proper investigation and correction of DNA-based claims of wrongful
conviction’.
adoption of this framework by other states and territories will be insufficient
to address the absence of post-conviction
review schemes.
Innocence Projects in overseas jurisdictions have successfully facilitated
exonerations of many wrongfully convicted individuals.
For example, the UK
adopted a commission-orientated approach to post-conviction review. The CCRC,
established under s 8 of the
Criminal Appeal Act 1995
independent from the three limbs of
government.
This enables the
body to remain impartial while investigating alleged miscarriages of
The CCRC may refer
convictions or sentences to the Court of Appeal if there is additional evidence
which may vary the verdict. Although
the UK’s approach is broadly useful,
it fails to overcome issues with the retention of, and ability to retest genomic
Although establishing a Review Commission may assist in developing
post-conviction review processes in Australia, it ultimately fails
the problem on a holistic scale.
The US’s approach primarily targets the preservation of, and access to
genomic evidence for DNA innocence testing. All 50 US
states have enacted some
form of post-conviction DNA statute regulating preservation after acknowledging
that traditional appeal
processes were
insufficient.
Additionally,
there is a federal scheme under the
Justice for All Act of 2004
permitting inmates convicted of federal offences to apply for post-conviction
DNA testing if certain criteria are
Weathered and Blewer acknowledge the foundational principles from the
Innocence Project and New York statutory framework that can
be adopted into the
Australian context.
significant of these principles include: (1) developing reasonable standards to
establish proof of innocence, (2) allowing
access to post-conviction DNA testing
wherever it can establish innocence, (3) excluding sunset provisions or
statutory timeframes
for expiration of access to post-conviction DNA testing,
and (4) requiring proper preservation of biological evidence for a reasonable
period of time.
This article
acknowledges that adoption of these principles is essential for an effective and
holistic review scheme. The exclusion
of statutory timeframes is particularly
important because advances in DNA technology may establish new matches in
instances where
previous technology could not. This will ensure all individuals
have equitable access to justice.
Following this, the second recommendation in this area relates to retention
of biological material. The success of innocence testing
is dependent on
adequate long-term storage of the
There is currently
no minimum retention period for crime scene samples in the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth). Although permanent retention of genomic evidence provides logistical
challenges for storage and quality preservation, long-term
retention is
essential to ensure samples are available for testing. Most US states require
preservation of DNA evidence from serious
offences. For example, in Illinois,
evidence must be maintained until completion of the sentence, including the
period of mandatory
There are currently
more than two million incarcerated individuals in the
in contrast to
Australia’s prison population of
Consequently, storage
requirements in Australia are significantly more manageable, leading to a
straightforward adoption of statutory
provisions relating to evidence
Submissions to the ALRC from government and police agencies noted that
permanent retention was unnecessary and
impractical.
The Institute of
Actuaries of Australia submitted that samples should be retained ‘for a
period long enough to cover any conceivable
need for post-conviction
analysis’ and ‘in practice, a fixed retention period, such as fifty
or a hundred years, might
these submissions, the ALRC recommended that amendments should be made to the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) to require long-term retention of forensic material
for the purpose of post-conviction
Weathered and
Blewer have similarly recommended that all DNA samples and biological material
‘collected during investigations
and/or prosecution be preserved
indefinitely or for a minimum 10 years following release from
incarceration’.
article recommends the adoption of a statutory requirement for retention of
biological material indefinitely or for a fixed
period of at least fifty years.
These amendments should incorporate appropriate measures to ensure the integrity
of evidence is maintained.
To facilitate this, financial incentives may be
provided to states who preserve evidence for fixed time periods, as has been
for in the US.
Training and Education
Training and education programs should be targeted towards individuals
involved in all stages of the DNA process, including collection,
interpretation and presentation. The case studies demonstrated the necessity for
reforms targeted at educating those involved
in the criminal justice system.
Training is necessary to ensure biological material is handled appropriately to
safeguard its evidentiary
and probative value. Additionally, education programs
are necessary to address fallacious reasoning and improve understanding of
processes, statistical conclusions and terminology associated with genomic
The first recommendation proposed in this area is the development of legal
education programs to address the weaknesses of the presentation
of DNA evidence
in criminal proceedings and the inabilities of laypeople to comprehend this
Judges and juries may need some form of education or training to consider
properly the relevance and weight of the evidence in particular
proceedings.
Additionally, legal practitioners may need training to competently present DNA
evidence and identify any issues regarding
reliability or
admissibility.
ALRC’s recommendations target the understanding of all participants in
trials, suggesting continuing legal education programs
for judges and legal
practitioners regarding the use of genomic information in criminal proceedings.
Furthermore, ALRC recommends
that ongoing guidance should be provided for
forensic scientists and legal practitioners regarding reliable methods of DNA
statistical calculation and presentation of evidence in criminal
proceedings.
, Vincent recommended that training and education be
made essential for legal participants. Vincent suggested that Victorian legal
organisations
should conduct
courses to instruct legal practitioners and members of the judiciary involved in
cases incorporating DNA evidence.
This article argues that national legal and
forensic agencies
collaboratively develop and conduct continuing legal education programs to
assist presentation and comprehension of DNA evidence
in an appropriate and
reliable manner.
The second recommendation specifically targets the limited scientific
understanding of jurors involved in criminal trials. The Victorian
Law Reform Committee has recommended legal education programs to assist judicial
officers with giving jury directions
Similarly, the ALRC
has suggested that a model jury direction should be
Goodman-Delahunty
and Hewson demonstrated that exposure to pre-recorded expert tutorials
significantly improved mock-jurors’
knowledge of DNA evidence by an
average of 37%.
This enabled
mock-jurors to understand critical issues associated with DNA evidence,
including limitations of DNA profiling and the
significance of random
This article
recommends that pre-trial information sessions should be mandated for all trials
involving genomic evidence to ensure
jurors are appropriately educated on DNA
processes. This will reduce the tendency for lay jurors to convict based on
‘inculpatory
forensic evidence that they do not fully
understand’.
Finally, this article recommends that police training processes should be
improved, particularly where DNA is the only inculpatory
evidence. DNA-only
cases, such as
, illustrate the minimal appreciation of the
limitations of DNA. Vincent further recommended the review and improvement of
That police training in this area be reviewed with a view to developing a
greater level of understanding of investigators with respect
to the use of DNA
evidence for both intelligence gathering and evidentiary purposes, and
particularly in cases where there is minimal
corroborative evidence to support
proposed or pending charges.
Recent studies in the UK demonstrate that deficiencies in forensic awareness
are universal.
from ‘insufficient training of investigators, and their perceptions that
forensic knowledge is not a core part of
their required skill
This article
recommends that police training processes in Australia should be reviewed and
revised with an emphasis on educating
police officers and investigators on the
use of DNA evidence for intelligence gathering and evidentiary purposes. The
limitations
of DNA analysis should be particularly stressed in instances where
DNA is the only evidence identifying or inculpating the suspect.
Reporting Obligations
Accurate and thorough reporting is essential for transparency and effective
oversight. The research conducted for this article has
revealed limitations in
the available information on the role, impact, and effectiveness of DNA evidence
in criminal prosecutions.
The NAS Report criticised the lack of research on the
accuracy, reliability and validity of forensic methods, particularly on the
impact of context bias.
Further research is necessary to ensure ‘evidentiary reliability’ is
based on ‘scientific
This article
firstly recommends the development of oversight reporting frameworks to obtain
this data. This will allow for adequate
planning and provision of forensic
services to criminal investigations and prosecutorial processes, alongside early
identification
of DNA-related weaknesses in the criminal justice
Sherman and the Victorian Law Reform Committee have also advocated for the
collection of data and reporting of DNA evidence in criminal
proceedings to
Parliament.
They recommended
that reports be made detailing the number of cases involving DNA evidence, the
amount of guilty pleas, the verdicts
of each case, and the role of DNA
This will enable
‘informed decisions to be made in relation to the effectiveness of current
collection and investigative
This article
recommends a statutory requirement for reports of this nature to be provided to
Parliament or an independent body of
review, such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
The second recommendation targets reports for forensic purposes. Vincent
recommends that ‘in cases where DNA testing is carried
out for forensic
purposes, a full report be provided to the investigating police
He suggests
that these reports should include:
(1) the history of the samples,
(2) a statement indicating the findings of the examination, including when,
where and by whom the examination was performed, and
(3) a statement setting out any opinions and limitations.
Reporting of this nature is essential for re-tracing the collection,
transport, storage, and analytical processes the biological material
undergone to reveal potential contamination. This article recommends that
consistent reporting obligations for forensic purposes
should be regulated by
statute. Statutory obligations will ensure each participant in the DNA process
is held accountable for the
integrity of their operations and quality processes.
Finally, reports for oversight and general forensic purposes should be
written in simplified language to assist the court. As recommended
by Howes et
al, reports directed at non-scientists should be simplified to a Grade 7-9 high
school level, as many legal practitioners
have not studied science past the
compulsory level.
scientific and technical language should be defined in appendices to the
reports. Any inferences that can be drawn from numerical
LRs should be stated by
reference to a verbal scale.
This article supports these suggestions to mitigate miscommunication and
misinterpretation. This will facilitate the presentation
of DNA evidence to a
predominantly legal audience with varying scientific backgrounds.
Additional Considerations
Appointment of a Forensic Science Regulator
In the UK, the
Forensic Science Regulator Act 2021
(UK) recently
received Royal Assent on 29
The enactment of this
legislation addresses the shortcomings of the regulation of forensic science
activities in England and Wales.
The Act requires the appointment of a Forensic
Science Regulator who has a duty to establish and enforce a statutory code of
This ensures forensic science services are carried out impartially and
with an appropriately high standard of scientific
The remit of the
Regulator includes all ‘forensic science activities’, such as the
application of scientific methods
for the detection and investigation of crime
and the giving of forensic evidence in criminal
proceedings.
Gary Pugh was appointed as the Forensic Science Regulator, commencing in May
Pugh notes that the
statutory powers relating to investigation and enforcement are unlikely to be
Regardless, Pugh
acknowledges that the existence of these powers provides ‘an important
safeguard to the Criminal Justice System
which can be utilised if
appropriate’.
codes of practice and conduct, as well as criminal procedure rules relating to
expert evidence, will be reviewed and replaced
by statutory codes and policies.
This process is estimated to take 18
Although it is too
early to determine the effect this legislation will have the UK’s approach
to genomic evidence regulation,
it is a significant acknowledgement of the
importance of forensic activities and the subsequent need for high-quality
regulation.
Monitoring the progress of the Regulator in coming years will be
important for assessing whether this is a potential option for implementing
regulating quality standards for DNA evidence in Australia.
Uniform Language for Testimony and Reports (‘ULTR’)
The US Department of Justice has made a series of quality assurance guidance
documents designed to regulate forensic
statements.
The documents aim
to standardise language used when testifying and writing reports for various
forensic DNA disciplines.
relation to DNA, there are guidance documents relating to autosomal DNA with
probabilistic genotyping, mitochondrial DNA and Y-STR
DNA. These documents
provide qualifications and limitations of each type of DNA analysis, and the
conclusions that can be made. Examiners
are required to prepare reports and
testify in compliance with these standards. Despite this, if different
terminology is used, it
should not be construed that the findings are erroneous
or incorrect. The relevant documents should be referenced in testimony, attached
to laboratory reports and included in case files.
The development of these documents has been critical in addressing the lack
of standardisation of forensic evidence. However, there
has been some criticism
of the ULTR documents’ categorical reporting framework. The ULTR provides
three distinct categories
which results must fall into: (1)
‘identification’, (2) ‘inconclusive’, and (3)
‘exclusion’.
This framework assumes all evidence distinctly fits
within these categories and distorts actual probabilities by creating a binary
of results. Anything defined as ‘identification’ should have a
probability of one (certainty), while evidence within
‘exclusion’ category should have a probability of zero
(impossibility).
categorical framework overvalues identification by assuming absolute certainty.
In reality, probability is a spectrum in which
actual probabilities of DNA
evidence originating from a source lie between zero and one.
The Criminal Bar Association proposed that steps should be taken in Australia
to increase uniformity of language and presentation
of expert DNA evidence in
criminal trials.
miscommunication and misconceptions must be addressed through development of
uniform language guidance documents. However,
these documents should incorporate
a ‘weight of evidence’ framework in place of the ULTR’s
categorical reporting
framework. This framework utilises numerical measures of
weight of evidence, such as standardised
This approach has been
supported for DNA evidence
specifically.
Further Research and Considerations
Practical adoption of these recommendations will require further research,
particularly ethical and financial considerations, which
are outside the scope
of this article. The cost of innocence testing is likely to be significant, but
ultimately less than the cost
of continued incarceration of innocent
individuals.
To overcome the
financial limitations of post-conviction review, eligibility testing may be
introduced in which specific criterion
must be met before individuals can pursue
these avenues for review.
Additionally, statutory schemes for compensation should be made available for
wrongfully convicted individuals. This will take positive
steps to rectify
injustices and provide incentives to improve regulation of the criminal justice
PART VI CONCLUSION
In summary, this article contemplates the interactions between science and
law. To create meaningful change and ensure the administration
of justice is
achieved, the role of DNA evidence in the criminal justice system and its
potential for contributing to miscarriages
of justice must be understood. In
doing so, the article identified limitations of the analysis and presentation of
DNA evidence in
criminal investigations and litigation. In particular, lay
jurors and legal participants often misunderstand the significance of
statistical and technical evidence, and enter into fallacious conclusions. This
can largely be attributed to the perception of DNA
as infallible and
inconsistent methods of communication and reporting. The consequences of these
faults in the criminal justice system
are significant, resulting in innocent
people, such as Jama, being imprisoned for crimes they did not commit.
Following the qualitative investigation, this article proposed practical
recommendations for reform to address these limitations.
Firstly, the article
recommended the establishment of avenues for post-conviction review to overcome
the limitations of traditional
appeal processes. Secondly, recommendations were
provided for the development of education programs and training targeted at all
participants of the DNA process. Finally, the article acknowledged that
increased reporting obligations are essential for effective
transparency and
traceability. These reforms will allow genomic evidence to have significant
probative value in reliably securing
convictions of the guilty and acquittal of
the innocent. Failure to implement these recommendations has the potential to
to the further imprisonment of innocent people.
Appendix 1: Existing Legislative Frameworks in
Commonwealth and State/Territory
legislative frameworks.
Legislation
Regulations
Commonwealth
Crimes Act 1914
Australian Capital Territory
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Regulations 2000
New South Wales
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Regulation 2014
Northern Territory
Police Administration Act 1978
Police Administration Regulations 1994
Police Powers and Responsibilities 2000
(Qld) ch 17
Police Powers and Responsibilities Regulation 2000
South Australia
Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Act 2007
Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Regulations 2007
Forensic Procedures Act 2000
Forensic Procedures Regulations 2010
Crimes Act 1958
Western Australia
Criminal Investigation (Identifying People) Act 2002
Criminal Investigation (Identifying People) Regulations 2002
Appendix 2: Background of Genomic Evidence
Likelihood ratios and verbal
equivalents.
*A likelihood ratio of 1,000 means the prosecution hypothesis is
favoured over the defence hypothesis by a factor of 1,000.
Likelihood Ratio
Verbal Equivalent
Explanation
Weak/limited support
The probability that the DNA profiles have originated from the same person
is 1 to 10 times more likely than if they originated from
different people.
Moderate support
The probability that the DNA profiles have originated from the same person
is 10 to 100 times more likely than if they originated
from different
100 – 1,000*
Moderately strong support
The probability that the DNA profiles have originated from the same person
is 100 to 1,000 times more likely than if they originated
from different
1,000 – 10,000
Strong support
The probability that the DNA profiles have originated from the same person
is 1,000 to 10,000 times more likely than if they originated
from different
10,000 – 1,000,000
Very strong support
The probability that the DNA profiles have originated from the same person
is 10,000 to 1 million times more likely than if they originated
from different
> 1,000,000
Extremely strong support
The probability that the DNA profiles have originated from the same person
is over 1 million times more likely than if they originated
from different
The 20 CODIS Core Loci: CSF1PO, FGA, THO1, TPOX, VWA, D3S1358, D5S818,
D7S820, D8S1179, D13S317, D16S539, D18S51, D21S11, D1S1656,
D2S441, D2S1338,
D10S1248, D12S391, D19S433,
STR loci used
in the CODIS database. The 13 original CODIS Core Loci are shown in yellow and
the additional seven loci are shown
modern DNA profiling.
Appendix 3: Projected Wrongful Conviction
Reported and projected wrongful
conviction statistics in the UK and Australia.
Prison Population
Total Overturned Convictions (since 1997)
Average Convictions Overturned (per year)
Percentage of Wrongful Convictions (per year)
Reported Wrongful Conviction Statistics based on
CCRC’s Success Rate
United Kingdom
Projected Wrongful Conviction Statistics based on the
Appendix 4: Summary of Recommendations
Recommendation 1.0.
Innocence Testing and Post-Conviction
Review Schemes
Recommendation 1.1.
The Commonwealth should establish a statutory process by which applications
for post-conviction review, made by offenders serving
terms of imprisonment for
serious offences, may be considered if it is alleged that DNA evidence exists
which would provide reasonable
doubt of the legitimacy of the conviction. There
should be no statutory time limitations imposed upon applications.
Recommendation 1.2.
Amendments should be made to the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) to require
retention of biological material found at crime scenes indefinitely or for a
fixed period of at least fifty years
for the purpose of post-conviction DNA
analysis. These amendments should incorporate appropriate measures to ensure the
of the biological material is maintained.
Recommendation 2.0.
Training and Education
Recommendation 2.1.
National legal and forensic professional societies, such as the National
Judicial College of Australia, the Law Council of Australia,
the National
Institute of Forensic Science, and the Australian and New Zealand Forensic
Science Society, as well as corresponding
state and territory associations,
should collaboratively develop and promote continuing legal education programs
for judges and legal
practitioners. These programs should be aimed at improving
knowledge and understanding of reliable methods of DNA analysis, statistical
calculations, and presentation of evidence in criminal proceedings.
Recommendation 2.2.
Pre-trial information sessions should be mandated for all criminal trials
involving genomic evidence. These sessions should cover
critical issues
associated with DNA evidence, including limitations of DNA profiling and the
significance of random matches.
Recommendation 2.3.
Police training processes should be reviewed and revised with an emphasis on
educating police officers and investigators with respect
to the use of DNA
evidence for both intelligence gathering and evidentiary purposes, and
particularly in instances where DNA evidence
is the only evidence identifying or
inculpating the suspect.
Recommendation 3.0.
Reporting Obligations
Recommendation 3.1.
Consistent processes for oversight reporting to Parliament or an independent
body of review, such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman, should
be developed and
provided for in statute. These reports should include details such as the number
of prosecutions involving DNA evidence,
the associated outcome of each case, and
the role, impact and effectiveness of DNA evidence in producing that outcome.
Recommendation 3.2.
Reports for general forensic purposes should include the following
information: (1) the history of the samples, (2) a statement identifying
items examined and indicating the findings, including details like when, where
and by whom the examination was performed and
whether a DNA profile was
obtained, and (3) a statement setting out the basis upon which any opinion rests
and limitations within
which it is expressed.
Recommendation 3.3.
Wherever possible, forensic reports should be simplified to a Grade 7-9 high
school level, with scientific and technical terms clearly
defined in appendices
to the report. Additionally, any inferences that can be drawn from numerical LRs
should be stated by reference
to a verbal scale in the appendices.
Frank H R Vincent,
Inquiry into the Circumstances that Led to the Conviction of Mr Farah Abdulkadir
(Parliamentary Paper No 301, 29 March 2010) 11.
Johanne Yttri Dahl,
‘Another Side of the Story: Defence lawyers’ views on DNA
evidence’ in Katja Franko Aas, Helene
Oppen Gundhus, Heidi Mork Lomell
Technologies of InSecurity: The Surveillance of Everyday Life
(Routledge, 2008) 219, 219.
Michael Briody, ‘The
Effects of DNA Evidence on Sexual Offence Cases’
(2002) 14(2)
Issues in Criminal Justice
Andrew Haesler, ‘DNA in
(2008) 8(1)
The Judicial Review
Court of Appeal, Warren CJ, Redlich and Bongiorno JJA, 7 December 2009).
[2002] NSWCCA
Brandon L Garrett and Peter J
Neufeld, ‘Invalid Forensic Science Testimony and Wrongful
Convictions’
Virginia Law Review
Adrian Hoel,
‘Compensation for Wrongful Conviction’
Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
(Report 96, 20 May 2003) 973-1130.
See, eg, Law Reform
Committee, Victorian Parliament,
Forensic Sampling and DNA Databases in
Criminal Investigations
(Report No 58, March 2004) 403; Vincent (n 1)
Michael Kirby,
‘Forensic Evidence: Instrument of Truth or Potential for
Miscarriage?’ (2009) 20(1)
Journal of Law, Information and Science
(Victorian Court of Appeal, Warren CJ, Redlich and Bongiorno JJA, 7 December
[2001] QCA 133
[2002] NSWCCA 30
Aytugrul v The Queen
[2012] HCA 15
Forbes v the Queen
HCATrans 45
Fitzgerald v The Queen
[2014] HCA 28.
Chester Porter,
Conviction of the Innocent: How the Law Can Let Us Down
(Random House
Australia, 2007) 8-9.
Forensic Science
Regulator Act 2021
(UK). This will be discussed further in Part 4.
Cheryl Brown, Alastair Ross
and Robyn G Attewell, ‘Benchmarking Forensic Performance in
Australia-Volume Crime’ (2014)
Forensic Science Policy &
In a forensic context
identification
is a form of classification (ie it may distinguish between
species or groups of people), while
individualisation
excludes all
individuals except the perpetrator (ie it may conclusively determine that a
suspect is the source of the evidence):
See generally David H Kaye,
‘Identification, individualization and uniqueness: What’s the
difference?’
Law, Probability and Risk
Mark Benecke, ‘Coding
or non-coding, that is the question’ (2002) 3(6)
EMBO Reports
499. It should be noted that there is increasing evidence that introns may be
involved to some extent in gene regulation, and
thus may contribute to phenotype
expression, see: Nicole Wyner, Mark Barash and Dennis McNevin, ‘Forensic
Autosomal Short Tandem
Repeats and Their Potential Association with
Phenotype’ (2020) 11(884)
Frontiers in Genetics
Marcus Smith and Gregor F
Urbas, ‘Regulating New Forms of Forensic DNA Profiling Under Australian
Legislation: Familial Matching
and DNA Phenotyping’
(2012) 44(1)
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences
See David H Kaye and George
Sensabaugh, ‘Reference Guide on DNA Evidence’ in Federal Judicial
Center (ed),
Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence
(National Academies
ed, 2000) 485, 491–492.
A locus is any fixed,
physical location of a gene or sequence of DNA on a chromosome.
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 975.
Briody (n 3) 159.
Michael Briody, ‘The
Effects of DNA Evidence on Homicide Cases in Court’
(2004) 37(2)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
Margarita Guillen,
‘Ethical-legal problems of DNA databases in criminal investigation’
Journal of Medical Ethics
See, eg, Ewelina Mistek,
‘Toward Locard’s Exchange Principle: Recent Developments in Forensic
Trace Evidence Analysis’
(2019) 91(1)
Analytical Chemistry
Trace is any remnant of a
crime, particularly resulting from a physical presence or an event, see: Claude
Roux and James Robertson,
‘Trace Evidence Overview’ in Jay A Siegel,
Pekka J Saukko and Max M Houck (eds),
Encyclopedia of Forensic Sciences
(Elsevier, 2013) 279, 280. See also James Robertson and Claude
Roux, ‘Trave evidence: Here today, gone tomorrow?’ (2010)
Science & Justice
To collect this evidence,
investigators typically utilise wet/dry swabbing, scraping, tape lifting or
cutting techniques depending
on the texture and permeability of the substrate,
see: Angela L Williamson, ‘Touch DNA: Forensic Collection and Application
to Investigations’ (2012) 18(1)
Journal of The Association for Crime
Scene Reconstruction
1, 2; Australian Police, ‘Forensic DNA’,
The Thin Blue Line – Australian Police
(Blog Post)
<https://www.australianpolice.com.au/forensic-scientists/forensic-dna/>.
R v Truong Hong Phuc
& Truong Thi Van
[2000] VSC 242.
Regina v Daley
NSWSC 1211.
R v Truong Hong Phuc
& Truong Thi Van
[2000] VSC 242
, [16]. See also Jeremy Gans,
‘Extra-bodily DNA sampling by the police’
Law and Medicine
, 367-368; Linzi Wilson-Wilde and Fiona Pitman,
‘Legislative and Policy Implications for the use of Rapid DNA Technology
the Australian Context’ (2017) 8(1-2)
Forensic Science Policy &
In practice, this often
involves taking buccal swabs (via scraping the cheek), vaginal and anal swabs,
blood samples, or hair samples
from victims or suspects, see: Australian Law
Reform Commission (n 10) 974.
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Crimes Act 1958
See also Guillen (n 25) 266.
Guillen (n 25) 266.
Criminal Investigation
(Identifying People) Act 2002
Guillen (n 25) 266.
A base pair is a pair of
nucleotides bonded together to form a ‘rung of the DNA ladder’. See
‘Genetics Review:
Base Pair’,
National Center for Biotechnology
Information
(Web Page, 29 September 1999)
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Class/MLACourse/Original8Hour/Genetics/basepair.html>.
For example, D7S820 is an
STR locus located on chromosome 7. Alleles at this locus have between 5 to 16
repeats of GATA. This means
there are 12 different possible alleles at each
chromosome, and 78 possible pairs of alleles (genotypes). See Karen Norrgard,
‘Forensics,
DNA Fingerprinting, and CODIS’
Nature Education
(Web Page, 2008)
<https://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/forensics-dna-fingerprinting-and-codis-736/>.
Benecke (n 18) 500.
Ibid. See also Australian
Law Reform Commission (n 10) 974.
An additional seven CODIS
Core Loci were introduced by the FBI on January 1, 2017. Prior to this date,
there were 13 loci utilised
(the Original CODIS Core Loci) between October 1998
and December 2016. See ‘Frequently Asked Questions on CODIS and
Federal Bureau of Investigation
<https://www.fbi.gov/services/laboratory/biometric-analysis/codis/codis-and-ndis-fact-sheet>.
The 20 core STR loci are
shown in Appendix 2. Prior to this, only ten loci were analysed in Australia,
including the amelogenin sex
marker, and as such, conservative language was
encouraged to convey the results of DNA analysis, see, eg,
Forbes v the Queen
[2009] ACTCA 10
(2009) 232 FLR 229
M Almeida et al,
‘Efficient DNA extraction from hair shafts’ (2011) 3
Science International: Genetics Supplement Series
319, 319–320.
Crimes Act 1914
THE NCIDD is managed by the
Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission (previously CrimTrac) and has been
operational since April
2001, see: ‘Biometric and forensic
Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission
<https://www.acic.gov.au/services/biometric-and-forensic-services>.
Smith and Urbas (n 19)
Gareth Griffith and Lenny
Roth, ‘DNA Evidence, Wrongful Convictions and Wrongful Acquittals’
(Briefing Paper No 11/06,
NSW Parliament Library Research Service, August 2006)
11; Australian Law Reform Commission (n 10) 975.
Smith and Urbas (n 19)
Allan Jamieson and Scott
A Guide to Forensic DNA Profiling
(John Wiley & Sons, 2016) ch
K A Martire et al, ‘On
the Interpretation of Likelihood Ratios in Forensic Science Evidence:
Presentation Formats and the Weak
Evidence Effect’ (2014) 240
Science International
61, 61. See generally Charles EH Berger et al,
‘Evidence Evaluation: A response to the court of appeal judgment in
Science & Justice
In this instance, the LR
would convey a ratio of the prosecution’s hypothesis (ie a fingerprint
found at a crime scene has
the same origin as the suspect’s fingerprint)
and the defence’s hypothesis (ie a fingerprint found at a crime scene has
a different origin from the suspect’s fingerprint).
Geoffrey Steward Morrison,
‘Special issue on measuring and reporting the precision of forensic
likelihood ratios: Introduction
to the debate’ (2016) 56
Science and
Loene M Howes, ‘The
communication of forensic science in the criminal justice system: A review of
theory and proposed directions
for research’ (2015) 55(2)
Science and
Briody (n 3) 176-177.
Forbes v the Queen
[2009] ACTCA 10
(2009) 232 FLR 229
Martire et al (52) 61.
Ibid 66-67.
Garrett and Neufeld (n 8)
Haesler (n 4) 140.
Griffith and Roth (n 49)
primary transfer
occurs where the suspect has been to the scene or directly handled an object
and as a result has shed a biological source from which
DNA can be extracted
(generally hair or skin cells). A
secondary transfer
occurs where the
suspect has shed a biological source in a different location, and an
intermediary individual or object, acting as
a vector, has transferred the
source to the scene where the crime took place. See generally Duncan Taylor et
al, ‘Helping to
distinguish primary from secondary transfer events for
trace DNA’ (2017) 28
Forensic Science International: Genetics
Riley v Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 190
(2005) 30 WAR 525
Russ Scott, ‘Medical
issues: DNA Evidence in Jury Trials: The “CSI Effect”’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Peter Gill,
DNA Evidence
(Academic Press, 1
ed, 2014) 12.
Jennifer J Raymond et al,
‘Trace DNA and street robbery: A criminalistic approach to DNA
evidence’ (2009) 2(1)
Forensic Science International: Genetic
Supplement Series
544, 544-546.
A J Jeffreys, V Wilson and S
L Thein, ‘Individual-specific ‘fingerprints’ of human
DNA’ (1985) 316
Lee Ferran, ‘Rare Twin
Murder Case Echoes Bizarre Fingerprint Origins’,
23 February 2010)
<https://abcnews.go.com/TheLaw/atlanta-twin-murder-case-echoes-fingerprint-origins/story?id=9909586>.
Rachel Dioso-Villa et al,
‘Investigation to Exoneration: A Systemic Review of Wrongful Conviction in
(2016) 28(2)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
159. See also Garrett and Neufeld (n 8) 36.
Ray Finkelstein, ‘The
Adversarial System and the Search for Truth’
[2011] MonashULawRw 8
University Law Review
Jones v National Coal
[1957] EWCA Civ 3
(1957) 2 QB 55
, 63 per Denning LJ.
Barbara Etter, ‘The
contribution of forensic science to miscarriage of justice cases’
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences
Richard Nobles and David
Understanding Miscarriages of Justice
(Oxford University Press,
2000) 16-17.
Chamberlain v The Queen
[1982] FCA 235
(1982) 69 FLR 445.
Foetal haemoglobin is
present in the blood of infants six months and younger. See especially T R
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Chamberlain
Convictions
(Parliamentary Paper No 192, June 1987) 40. See also ‘AFP Forensics
recruits get rare access to Chamberlain collection’,
Page, 7 May 2018)
<https://www.afp.gov.au/news-media/platypus/afp-forensics-recruits-get-rare-access-chamberlain-collection>.
Lynne Weathered, 'Wrongful
Conviction in Australia'
(2012) 80(4)
University of Cincinnati Law Review
, 1396-1937.
Re Chamberlain
per Asche CJ, Nader and Kearney JJ.
Inquest into the death of
Azaria Chantel Loren Chamberlain
[2012] NTMC 020
Judy Bourke, 'Misapplied
Science: Unreliability in Scientific Test Evidence'
Australian Bar
Carl Reginald Shannon,
Report of the Royal Commission of the Inquiry into the Conviction of Edward
Charles Splatt
(Report, 1984).
The experts failed to
consider the case holistically when they ‘linked’ trace evidence
from the crime scene to material,
including spherical paint and metal particles
and seed endosperm, collected from Splatt’s trouser turn-ups, see: James
and Claude Roux, ‘Trace evidence: Here today, gone
tomorrow?’ (2010) 50
Science and Justice
David Hamer, ‘The
Eastman Case: Implications for an Australian Criminal Cases Review
Commission’ (2015) 17
Flinders Law Journal
433, 439-441.
‘Foreword’ in Evan Whitton,
Our corrupt legal system: why
everyone is a victim (except rich criminals)
(Book Pal, 2009) 6, 8.
Dahl (n 2) 219.
Court of Appeal, Warren CJ, Redlich and Bongiorno JJA, 7 December 2009).
Loene M Howes et al,
‘The readability of expert reports for non-scientist report-users: Reports
of DNA analysis’ (2014)
237 Forensic Science International 7, 8.
Donald Shelton, ‘The
'CSI Effect': Does it Really Exist?’ (2008) 259
National Institute of
Justice Journal
Dioso-Villa et al (n 72)
Ross v The King
[1922] HCA 4
(1922) 30 CLR 246
Howes et al (n 90) 8.
Ibid 12-14.
Valerie P Hans et al,
‘Science in Jury Box: Jurors’ Comprehension of Mitochondrial DNA
Evidence’ (2011) 35
Law and Human Behaviour
60, 61. See also J S
Cecil, Valerie P Hans and E C Wiggins, ‘Citizen comprehension of difficult
issues: Lessons from civil jury
American University
Hans et al (n 98) 69.
National Research Council
(US) Committee on DNA Forensic Science,
The Evaluation of Forensic DNA
(National Academies Press, 1996) ch 3.
For a full description of
each fallacy or effect: see generally Gill (n 68) 12-17.
See especially National
Research Council of the National Academies,
Strengthening Forensic Science in
the United States: A Path Forward
(Report, August 2009) 7-9.
Jeff Kukucka,
‘Confirmation Bias in the Forensic Sciences: Causes, Consequences, and
Countermeasures’ in Wendy J Koen
and C Michael Bowers (eds),
Psychology and Sociology of Wrongful Convictions: Forensic Science Reform
(Academic Press, 2018) 223, 223.
Amos Tversky and Daniel
Kahneman, ‘Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases’ (1974)
1124, 1124. See also Saul M Kassin, Itiel E Dror and
Jeff Kukucka, ‘The forensic confirmation bias: Problems, perspectives,
proposed solutions’ (2013) 2
Journal of Applied Research in Memory and
Jeff Kukucka (n 106) 223,
Itiel E Dror and Greg
Hampikian, ‘Subjectivity and bias in forensic DNA mixture
interpretation’ (2011) 51
Science and Justice
Daniel Westreich and Noah
Iliinsky, ‘Epidemiology Visualized: The Prosecutor's Fallacy’ (2014)
American Journal of Epidemiology
1125, 1125.
[2002] NSWCCA 30
See also National Research Council (US) Committee
on DNA Forensic Science (n 101) ch 5.
[1996] EWCA Crim 728
1 Cr App R 369
, 372-373 per Phillips LJ.
National Research Council
(US) Committee on DNA Forensic Science (n 101) ch 5.
Gill (n 68) 15.
Norman Fenton and Martin
Neil, ‘The “Jury Observation Fallacy” and the use of Bayesian
Networks to present Probabilistic
Legal Arguments’ (2000) 36(6)
Mathematics Today
Carmen de Macedo,
‘Guilt by Statistical Association: Revisiting the Prosecutor’s
Fallacy and the Interrogator’s
(2008) 105(6)
The Journal
of Philosophy
, 327. See generally Ian Stewart, ‘The
Interrogator’s Fallacy’ (1996) 275(3)
Scientific American
Robert S Wyer and Rashmi
Adaval, ‘Pictures, Words and Media Influence: The Interactive Effects of
Verbal and Nonverbal Information
on Memory and Judgments’ in L J Shrum
The Psychology of Entertainment Media: Blurring the Lines Between
Entertainment and Persuasion
(Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004) 137, 138.
Allison Klein, ‘Art
trips up life: TV crime shows influence jurors’,
The Baltimore Sun
(Maryland, 25 July 2004).
Shelton (n 91) 5.
Aaron Doyle,
Images: Crime and Policing in Front of the Television Camera
(University of
Toronto Press, 2003) 13-31; L J Shrum,
The psychology of entertainment media:
Blurring the lines between entertainment and persuasion
(Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers, 2004) 137-160.
Tom Tyler, ‘Viewing
CSI and the Threshold of Guilt: Managing Truth and Justice in Reality and
[2006] YaleLawJl 80
Yale Law Journal
, 1062-1063.
Rhona Wheate, ‘The
importance of DNA evidence to juries in criminal trials’
International Journal of Evidence & Proof
Ibid 141-142.
Note, this expectation
differs depending on the nature of the crime, with 46% of respondents expecting
to see DNA evidence in crimes
involving murder or attempted murder, and 73%
expecting to see DNA evidence in crimes involving rape. See Shelton (n 91) 3.
N J Schweitzer and
Michael J Saks, ‘The
Effect: Popular Fiction about Forensic
Science Affects the Public’s Expectations about Real Forensic
Jurimetrics
Tyler (n 124) 1063.
Schweitzer and Saks (n
‘Exonerations by
The National Registry of Exonerations
(Web Page, 13 April
http://www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/Pages/Exonerations-in-the-United-States-Map.aspx
(Web Page, August 2021)
<https://ccrc.gov.uk/facts-figures/>.
Statistics’,
Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission (SCCRC)
Page, 1 April 2021) <https://www.sccrc.co.uk/case-statistics>.
‘Exonerations’,
Innocence Canada
(Web Page, 2021)
<https://www.innocencecanada.com/exonerations/>.
Rachel Dioso-Villa,
‘A Repository of Wrongful Convictions in Australia: First Steps Toward
Estimating Prevalence and Causal
Contributing Factors’ (2015) 17(2)
Flinders Law Journal
163, 195-202.
Data as of 30 June 2021,
see: ‘Prisons data’,
UK Government
(Web Page, 14 September
2021) <https://data.justice.gov.uk/prisons>.
Statistics based on the
June 2021 quarter, see: ‘Corrective Services, Australia’,
Australian Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 16 September 2021)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/corrective-services-australia/latest-release>.
Court of Melbourne, 21 July 2008).
Vincent (n 1) 20.
It should be noted that
Jama was not charged in relation to this incident.
Rachel Dioso-Villa (n
Vincent (n 1) 11.
Ibid 16-17.
(Victorian Court of Appeal, Warren CJ, Redlich and Bongiorno JJA, 7 December
Katherine Rayment,
‘Faith in DNA: The Vincent Report’ (2010) 20(1)
Journal of Law,
Information and Science
Vincent (n 1) 11.
Ibid 10-11.
See, eg, Ibid 10-12, 17,
Kirby (n 12) 17.
This may have resulted in
a secondary transfer of a microscopic amount of genomic material from the
initial examination to a swab
and slide which was analysed as part of M’s
examination, see: Vincent (n 1) 22-24. See also Laura Precup-Pop,
DNA: Scientific evidence and the adjudgment of guilt or
innocence [2013]
Sydney University Law Society Social Justice Journal
For the response, see
Vincent (n 1) 25.
Kirby (n 12) 12.
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 1117.
Kirby (n 12) 12.
Deborah L Kellie,
‘Justice in the Age of Technology: DNA and the Criminal Trial’
[2000] AltLawJl 64
(2001) 25(4)
Alternative Law Journal
Kirby (n 12) 16-21.
Crime and Misconduct
Commission,
Forensics Under the Microscope: Challenges in Providing Forensic
Science Services in Queensland
(Report, October 2002) 5.
Kirsten Edwards,
‘Ten things about DNA contamination that lawyers should know’
Criminal Law Journal
, 73. See also Australian Law Reform Commission
(n 10) 1109.
Regardless, failure to
impartially conduct DNA testing would not in itself constitute grounds for an
appeal, see: Gregor Urbas, ‘DNA
Evidence in Criminal Appeals and
Post-Conviction Inquiries: Are New Forms of Review Required?’
[2002] MqLawJl 6
Macquarie Law Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 1099.
NSCCCQ 413 and
[2001] NSWCCA 504.
Jeremy Gans and Gregor
Urbas, ‘DNA Identification in the Criminal Justice System’
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 1099.
, [39]. See also
[2001] NSWCCA 504
, [89-97] in which
it was stated that, although a direction about the prosecutor’s fallacy is
not necessary in all cases involving
DNA, a warning would have been desirable.
Aytugrul v The
[2010] NSWCCA 272
[2012] HCA 15.
Mitochondrial DNA testing
produces higher frequencies of expected occurrences of particular DNA profiles
in the community, in contrast
to nuclear DNA testing. As such, nuclear DNA is
the preferred method for investigatory analysis.
Aytugrul v R
[2010] NSWCCA 272
Aytugrul v R
(2010) 205 A Crim RJ 157, 158.
Aytugrul v The Queen
[2012] HCA 15
(2012) 247 CLR 170
Evidence Act 1995
Aytugrul v The Queen
[2012] HCA 15
Gregor Urbas, ‘The
High Court and the Admissibility of DNA Evidence:
Aytugrul v the Queen
[2012] HCA 15
(18 April 2012)’
(2012) 11(1)
Canberra Law Review
An event that has a
non-zero probability must be possible (ie it cannot be impossible), see:
Fitzgerald v The
[2014] HCA 28.
Jeremy Gans, ‘The
DNA, the Handshake and the Didgeridoo: Fitzgerald v The Queen’,
Opinions on High
(Blog Post, 18 August 2014)
<https://blogs.unimelb.edu.au/opinionsonhigh/2014/08/18/gans-fitzgerald/>.
Lynne Weathered, Kirsty
Wright and Janet Chaseling, 'Dealing with DNA Evidence in the Courtroom: A Plain
English Review of Current
Issues with Identification, Mixture and Activity Level
Evidence' (2020) 1(1)
Wrongful Conviction Law Review
59, 68; Marcus Smith
and Monique Mann, ‘Recent developments in DNA evidence’
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
Fitzgerald v The Queen
[2014] HCA 28
R v Sumner, R v
[2013] 117 SASR 271
Fitzgerald v The Queen
[2014] HCA 28
Gans (n 194).
Weathered, Wright and
Chaseling (n 196) 68.
See generally Roland van
Oorshot et al, ‘Need for dedicated training, competency assessment,
authorisations and ongoing proficiency
testing for those addressing DNA transfer
issues’ (2017) 6
Forensic Science International: Genetics Supplement
Forbes v The Queen
(2009) 167 ACTR 1
[2010] HCATrans 45
[2010] HCATrans 120.
Urbas (n 190) 93.
That is, there was a
random match probability of one in 20 billion. See Andrew Ligertwood, ‘Can
DNA Evidence Alone Convict
an Accused?’
[2011] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
Ibid 492-493.
Forbes v The Queen
[2009] ACTCA 10
(2009) 167 ACTR 1.
Forbes v The Queen
[2010] HCATrans 120.
Ibid [2690].
It is the jury themselves
who set the standard of what is reasonable in the circumstances:
Green v the
[1971] HCA 55
(1971) 126 CLR 28
, 32-33. Refusing to define this expression provides
the jury with the flexibility to exercise discretion when determining guilt.
the origins of this expression, see generally BR Martin, ‘Beyond
reasonable doubt’
The Judicial Review
Forbes v The Queen
[2009] ACTCA 10
(2009) 232 FLR 229
Forbes v The Queen
[2010] HCATrans 120
, [2740]-[2755].
Ligertwood (n 210)
Urbas (n 190) 94.
Porter (n 14) 8-9.
Lynne Weathered and Robyn
Blewer, ‘Righting Wrongful Convictions with DNA Innocence Testing:
Proposals for Legislative Reform
in Australia’
[2009] FlinJlLawRfm 2
Journal of Law Reform
Kirby (n 12) 22.
These recommendations are
summarised in Appendix 4.
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 973-1130.
‘Law Reform
Australian Law Reform Commission
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/about/law-reform-process/>.
Kirby (n 12) 22.
Crimes Act 1914
was inserted into this Act by the
Crimes Amendment
(Forensic Procedures) Act 1998
(Cth), and later amended by the
Amendment (Forensic Procedures) Act 2001
Crimes (Forensic
Procedures) Act 2000
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Act 2007
Forensic Procedures Act 2000
Powers and Responsibilities 2000
(Qld) Ch 17;
Criminal Investigation
(Identifying People) Act 2002
Police Administration Act 1978
These laws conform to
varying degrees to the Model Forensic Procedures Bill 2000 (Cth). See also
Australian Law Reform Commission
(n 10) 977, 982.
Crimes Act 1914
matters that may be considered by the court for the purpose of determining
whether admission is justified on the balance
of probabilities, see
For uniform Evidence Acts
in each jurisdiction, see
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2008
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2011
Evidence (National Uniform Legislation) Act 2011
(NT). For relevant, but
non-uniform statute, see
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1995
Crimes (Appeal and
Review) Act 2001
The convicted
person is liable for the cost of any DNA testing: ibid
Weathered and Blewer (n
Urbas (n 168) 164.
Weathered and Blewer (n
224) 44-45.
Lynne Weathered,
‘Reviewing the New South Wales DNA Review Panel: Considerations for
(2013) 24(3)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
Weathered and Blewer (n
224) 46. See also Weathered (n 79) 1392; Stephanie Roberts and Lynne Weathered,
‘Assisting the Factually
Innocent: The Contradictions and Compatibility of
Innocence Projects & the Criminal Cases Review Commission’
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
Weathered and Blewer (n
The Innocence Panel was
established in 2000 and suspended in 2003. Recommendations arising from the
failure of the Innocence Panel
were adopted and the body was succeeded by the
DNA Review Panel in 2007 following the enactment of the
Crimes (Appeal and
Review) Amendment (DNA Review Panel) Act 2006
(NSW). The provisions
establishing and regulating the DNA Review Panel have since been repealed and in
2013, this body was also abolished.
Attorney General &
Justice, NSW Government,
The DNA Review Panel: Review of Division 6 of
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
(Report, 2013) 6. For the general
referral powers of the DNA Review Panel, see
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act
(NSW) s 94(1), as repealed by
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Amendment
(DNA Review Panel) Act 2013
(NSW) sch 1 item 3.
This comment was made by
the President of the NSW Bar Association, see: Tim Dick, ‘Think again on
double jeopardy, Iemma warned’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
23 September 2006)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/think-again-on-double-jeopardy-iemma-warned-20060923-gdogag.html>.
Mervyn Finlay,
of the NSW Innocence Panel
(Report, 2003) 17-19.
Applications for review
to the DNA Review Panel could not be made if a person was convicted after 19
September 2006, see:
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
(NSW) s 89(3),
as repealed by
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Amendment (DNA Review Panel) Act
(NSW) sch 1 item 3. The intention of this was to limit the panel to
reassessing ‘past cases in which DNA technology may not
have been fully
utilised’, see: New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative
Assembly, 19 September 2006 (Morris Iemma).
Weathered and Blewer (n
Criminal Appeal Act
‘About us’,
Criminal Cases Review Commission
<https://ccrc.gov.uk/what-we-do/>.
Post-Conviction DNA Testing’,
Innocence Project
<https://innocenceproject.org/causes/access-post-conviction-dna-testing/>.
Justice for All Act of
, Pub L No 108-405, tit IV, 116 Stat 1789, 2261. See also Michael E
Kleinert, ‘Improving the Quality of Justice: The Innocence
Protection Act
of 2004 ensures post-conviction DNA testing, better legal representation, and
increased compensation for the wrongfully
imprisoned’
Brandeis Law Journal
Weathered and Blewer (n
224) 56-57. For the New York legislative framework, see: NY Criminal Procedure
Law § 440.10 (2021).
Post-Conviction DNA Testing’,
Innocence Project
<https://innocenceproject.org/causes/access-post-conviction-dna-testing/>.
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 1120.
Ill Comp Stat §
116-4 (2013).
Todd D Minton, Lauren G
Beatty and Zhen Zeng, ‘Correctional Populations in the United States, 2019
– Statistical Tables’,
US Department of Justice, Bureau of
Justice Statistics
(Web Page, July 2021) 11-12
<https://bjs.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh236/files/media/document/cpus19st.pdf?fbclid=IwAR1kBrZz0X86Jxn52MoWBtHAED3RzJqJ3R0m2iC7fcBsaQvX_qAcWlr6oIQ#page=11>;
‘Statistics’,
Federal Bureau of Prisons
<https://www.bop.gov/about/statistics/population_statistics.jsp?fbclid=IwAR0B9o_Yn_l2WOnPiGuwySH-wFCRHj0gY0wdmj-6NeJhENB2nx8PJ1cJfck>.
‘Corrective
Services Australia’,
Australian Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 16
September 2021)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/corrective-services-australia/latest-release>.
Weathered and Blewer (n
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 1120-1122.
Ibid 1123-1124.
Weathered and Blewer (n
Justice for All Act of
, Pub L No 108-405, § 413, 116 Stat 1789, 2285.
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 1099-1108; see also Australian Law Reform Commission and
Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Protection of Human Genetic
Information
(Discussion Paper No 66, 2002) 892.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Protection of Human Genetic Information
(Issues Paper 26, 16
November 2001) 408-409.
In determining these
recommendations, the ALRC consulted many experts in the field to ensure that
scientific education programs for
legal professionals are the most appropriate
course of action. These experts include Jeremy Gans, Barbara Hocking, Wendy
Ron Trent, Ian Freckleton, and James Robertson, see: Australian Law
Reform Commission (n 10) 1099-1108.
Vincent specifically
recommended the Judicial College of Victoria, the Law Institute of Victoria and
the Victorian Bar Council. See
Vincent (n 1) 56.
Such as the National
Judicial College of Australia, the Law Council of Australia, the National
Institute of Forensic Science, and
the Australian and New Zealand Forensic
Science Society, as well as corresponding state and territory associations.
Law Reform Committee,
Victorian Parliament (n 11) 404.
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 10) 1106.
Jane Goodman-Delahunty
and Lindsay Hewson, ‘Improving Jury Understanding and Use of DNA Expert
Evidence (Report, July 2009)
Ibid 41-42.
Vincent (n 1) 55.
Sarah Wüllenweber
and Stephanie Giles, ‘The effectiveness of forensic evidence in the
investigation of volume crime scenes’
(2021) 61(5)
National Research Council
of the National Academies (n 104) 22-23.
Tom Sherman,
Independent Review of
Crimes Act 1914
(Report, March 2003) [5.110].
Law Reform Committee,
Victorian Parliament (n 11) 381-382.
Vincent (n 1) 54.
Howes et al (n 90)
Forensic Science
Mark G Baron, Timothy
Rohrig and Jose Gonzalez-Rodriguez, ‘Forensic Science in the UK. Part III:
Regulation of Forensic Science
in England and Wales – The Role of the
Forensic Science Regulator’ (2020) 32(1)
Forensic Science Review
Explanatory Notes,
Forensic Science Regulator Bill (UK) 6.
‘HM Government
Public Appointments: Forensic Science Regulator’,
Cabinet Office
(Web Page, 17 May 2021)
<https://publicappointments.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/appointment/forensic-science-regulator/>.
‘Forensic Science Regulator Act 2021’ (2021) 36
Forensic Science
Regulator Newsletter
‘Uniform Language
for Testimony and Reports’,
United States Department of Justice
(Web Page, 11 January 2021)
<https://www.justice.gov/olp/uniform-language-testimony-and-reports>. The
ULTR documents were developed
in response to the NAS Report, see: National
Research Council of the National Academies (n 104) 189.
For the Uniform Language
for Testimony and Reports documents relating to DNA evidence, see, eg,
Department of Justice,
Uniform Language for Testimony and Reports for
Forensic Autosomal DNA Examinations Using Probabilistic Genotyping Systems
(ULTR Report, 18 March 2019); Department of Justice,
Uniform Language for
Testimony and Reports for Forensic Mitochondrial DNA Examinations
Report, 18 March 2019); Department of Justice,
Uniform Language for Forensic
Y-STR DNA Examinations
(ULTR Report, 18 March 2019).
Simon A Cole, 'A
Discouraging Omen: A Critical Evaluation of the Approved Uniform Language for
Testimony and Reports for the Forensic
Latent Print Discipline'
(2018) 34(4)
Georgia State University Law Review
, 1107-1108.
Law Reform Committee,
Victorian Parliament (n 11) 397.
See generally David J
Balding and Christopher D Steele,
Weight-of-Evidence for Forensic DNA
(John Wiley and Sons, 2015) 200-204.
C Neumann, I W Evett and
J Skerrett, ‘Quantifying the weight of evidence from a forensic
fingerprint comparison: a new paradigm’
(2012) 175(2)
Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society
Weathered and Blewer
suggest that a DNA test would cost roughly $300 in comparison to the $60,000 it
costs the state to keep a person
imprisoned for one year, see: Weathered and
Blewer (n 224) 70.
An example for
eligibility testing is provided in Law Reform Committee, Victorian Parliament (n
Amanda Dingle,
R v Frank Alan Button
Exposing a Wrongful
Conviction Through DNA Testing’
[2001] SCULawRw 13
Southern Cross University Law
‘Frequently Asked
Questions on CODIS and NDIS’,
Federal Bureau of Investigation
<https://www.fbi.gov/services/laboratory/biometric-analysis/codis/codis-and-ndis-fact-sheet>.
Celia Henry Arnaud,
‘Thirty years of DNA forensics: How DNA has revolutionized criminal
investigations’,
Chemical & Engineering News
(Web Page, 18
September 2017) <
https://cen.acs.org/analytical-chemistry/Thirty-years-DNA-forensics-DNA/95/i37
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (6.74 MB)
PDF format (1.07 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter