URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2004/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Averill, Morris --- "The Spider's Stratagem on the Web: Hunting and Collecting Web Users" [2004] DigTechLawJl 1; (2004) 5(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 1
The Spider’s Stratagem on the
Web: Hunting and Collecting Web
Visiting Lecturer University of Western
Sydney This article discusses: the traps for consumers browsing the
World Wide Web or engaging
in electronic commerce (ecommerce),
including the privacy implications on being on the Web; the possible
responses available
to Web users or government regulators are
considered; as well as Web site operators who consider that some Web
techniques are damaging
Introduction
The so-called ‘tech-wreck’ of April 2000, (the
‘correction’ in share values of technology
companies listed
on the NASDAQ, and other stock
exchanges), can be attributed to investors realising that profitable
would be more difficult
that many had imagined. Several commentators
suggested that e-commerce business models based on the premise
Web site and users will come’ were
little more than a
modern day cargo cult mentality.
The difficulty of attracting visitors to Web sites, has resulted in
World Wide Web technology
evolving sophisticated techniques of
attracting, even capturing, Web
development of sophisticated Web site design techniques may have
been pioneered by the developers of adult content and gambling
however mainstream e-commerce sites are adopting the techniques. At the
benign end of the spectrum (but still irritating for
some Web users) is
use of ‘pop-up ads’ - at the more aggressive end of
spectrum, is the use of ‘spawning’
and ‘mouse-trapping’ being used to capture Web
at a Web site.
Some techniques are criminally motivated scams to extract money from
unsuspecting Web users by causing the Web user to incur an
astronomically high telephone bill by re-routing their connection to an
Internet Service Provider (
via an international call rather than a local call or to send computer
programs to the user’s computer in order to search
other banking information.
The legal implications of the exchange of
data between the computers of the Web users and Web sites are
considered in this article.
In particular, the consumer privacy
implications of the
exchange of data between a Web user and a Web site.
difference between ‘data’ and ‘personal
information’
should be acknowledged when considering the exchange
between the
computer of a
Web user and a Web site.
“Data” is defined
as “information output by a sensing device or organ that
both useful and irrelevant
or redundant information and must be
processed to be meaningful.”
In the context of an exchange between the computer of a Web user and a
Web site, there is an
exchange of digital data which is processed
by the computer programs
operating each computer resulting in the presentation of Web pages and
interactive changes to screen display
on the Web user’s
computer as the user navigates through the Web site.
information”, as defined in the
is information or
opinion that can identify a person. The exchange of data between the
computer of the Web users and a Web site may
not, of itself, identify
an individual. However the Web
technology has created the ability of Web sites to track users and
their browsing behaviour.
‘Spawning’ and
‘mouse trapping’
‘Spawning’ is the use of HTML code to control what
presented to a Web user. ‘Mouse trapping’ is
use of HTML code to
trap a user at a particular Web site.
‘Page jacking’,
‘redirecting’
and ‘spoof pages’
Copying pages of Web sites (so that ‘key
words’ a picked up in
a search) in order for the fake or ‘spoof pages’
appears with the
same description as the ‘real site’ in search
engines results and
thereby divert Web traffic to the
‘spoof pages’ at
which the user
may become trapped – as in (1).
Misleading links
Mislabelled links lead the user to some place they do not
want to be and
the user may become trapped – as in (1).
‘Home-jacking’ - Changing
‘home pages’
or ‘favourites’
Software can automatically change the ‘home
page’ selected by
the user of a computer or alter the ‘favourites’
list in the Web
Spyware - Unauthorised or unknown software downloads
The automated downloading of computer programs to the Web
computer, done without seeking consent of the Web user; as
programs that are supplied free to the Web user, but which may have
‘add on’ or ‘plug-in’
to a primary
software program, which the Web user is not aware of at the time of
downloading.
‘Pop-Up Ads’ or
Using HTML code to provide advertising messages.
‘Cookies’ and ‘Web
The use of computer programs to track Web users.
‘Identity theft’ and
‘phishing’ for
information
The unauthorised access to computers or the interception of
communications
or searching databases accessible in the Internet for the
discovering
information about a person for the purpose of fraudulently acquiring
and incurring debt in that assumed
‘Internet dumping’
‘Internet dumping’ occurs when the
telephone link from the
user’s computer is switched, without their knowledge,
(or without their full
knowledge of the
consequences of clicking on a button), into
calling a more costly Internet access connection than
provided through the
user’s usual ISP.
The automated delivery of bulk e-mail.
In the study by Cyveillance, Inc
dated December 2001, many of the techniques listed about are described
in their list of 10 objectionable Web techniques.
Spawning & Mouse
‘Spawning’ is a way of programming a Web site so
that the new browser windows are automatically launched,
faster than
the user can close them, when a user attempts to exit a
Poor Web design and coding can result in a re-directed page entering
the browser history
in the user being unable to retrace their recent browsing history.
However, ‘mouse trapping’ is a deliberate
programmer. ‘Mouse trapping’ is a way of
programming a Web site so
that the ‘Go To’ command
shows only the URL of that
every click on the ‘Back’ button and
‘Close’ command,
still leaves the
Web user at the same site.
The consequence of which the Web
user is trapped at the Web site. The usual buttons to escape from a Web
site do not function so
that the Web user is
prevented from leaving – except by shutting down the
connection to the Internet.
‘Spawning’ and ‘mouse trapping’
can be combined with the launch of advertisements
that do not have visible
controls so that the only way to exit, apart
from shutting down the computer, is to click on the advertisement.
are often associated with ‘page jacking’
product of the online pornography industry.
In 2001 the
US Federal Trade Commission (
obtained injunctions against John
in respect of his practice of ‘domain name
mimicry’ (obtaining domain name registrations for
misspellings of well
names) and setting up Web sites using those domain names which
‘mouse trapping’ to force viewers to see endless
pages. The basis of the injunction being the practices of John
Zuccarini amounting to
unfair competition and unfair business practices
Commission Act
2. Page-Jacking, Redirecting &
‘Page-jacking’ results in users of World Wide Web
sites being re-directed to other sites chosen by the
page-jacker.
The reason ‘page-jacking’ is carried
out is to increase the number of Web users
‘hitting’ the site to
the Web users are re-directed. This will have the effect of
artificially
inflating the number of ‘hits’ on the site with
advertising being
sold at a higher rate based on the false perception that the Web site
high number of voluntary users.
Web site owners may pay the page-jacker
for re-directing Web users to a Web site.
The page–jacker
copies pages from a popular site and posts the copied pages on their
own computer server. The copied pages
are re-programmed to re- direct
to specific sites. The copied pages continue to be indexed on search
same key words as used in the original site. A Web user
user ‘clicks’ to that site they are re-directed to
the site chosen
by the page-jacker.
The consequence of ‘page-jacking’ is
that the owner of the legitimate site loses the potential customers and
reputation suffers as the kidnapped Web user assumes the content at the
re-directed site is that of the owner of the legitimate
‘Page jacking’ is a technique primarily used to
increase traffic to the Web site to which the Web users are redirected.
more sophisticated Web design techniques have been developed with the
use of ‘spoof pages’ which are
marks (‘metatagging’) for the purpose of maximising
likelihood that the ‘spoof page’ will
appear high
on a search engine’s list of results
. The ‘spoof
page’ being combined with the use of
‘doorway’ or ‘re-
direct’ techniques to take
the user to some other site, often
pornographic site.
16. The FTC, together
with the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission (
action against persons involved in ‘page
jacking’ in
Periera d/b/a/ atariz.com
Final settlement with one
defendant, and default judgments against two others, were obtained on
February 2000.
17. Techniques related to
‘page-jacking’ can be
used to make a political statement; an example being the report by
Mr. Racine, the defendant, admitted to tricking VeriSign subsidiary
Network Solutions into giving him ownership of the aljazeera.net
domain. Racine then redirected visitors from that Internet address to
another site. Technically known as a ‘redirect’,
the Web users that wanted to go to www.aljazeera.net - as well as the
English- language site, english.aljazeera.net - to be redirected
NetWorld's servers where the US flag was displayed.
18. Mislabelling links is the false
labelling of hyper links
that send the Web user to an unintended destination.
misleading link may be the result of poor Web design and coding.
However if the
mislabelling is intentional, liability may arise
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) for ‘misleading or
conduct or under fair trading legislation.
Changing Home Pages or Favourites List
‘Home-jacking’
is the result of Web design techniques which allow the unauthorised
substitution of the ‘home
page’ so that when the
launches their browser, instead of the user’s selected home
page coming up
the selected Web site appears.
A digital file can also
be inserted into the user’s computer so that the selected Web
page appears
in the ‘favourites’
list in the Web browser
The unauthorised inserting of data may be a
criminal offence under sections 477 (1) or (2) of the
section 308D
Crimes Act 1900
That is, provided there
is no consent of the Web user so that the insertion of the data which
changes the ‘home page’
‘favourites’ is
clearly unauthorised, with the necessary intention or recklessness as
impairment of the functioning
of the Web user’s computer
software. Some Web sites overtly ask the Web user if they wish to
change their home page,
if this option is selected the user is clearly
consenting to the change. However with a covert change it can be argued
the unauthorised
inserting of a digital file into the Web
user’s computer
is a criminal
21. However the
level of ‘impairment’ of functioning of the
computer may be disputed, with a
that changes to the ‘home page’ or
‘favourites’ falls below what could be considered
to be damage
to the functioning of the
need of the Web user to replace the ‘home
page’ setting or remove files inserted into the
‘favourites’
file can be argued to be ‘damage’ to the computer.
Causing damage when computer programs are removed from a computer
interfered with has been considered in
Cox v Riley
R v Whitley
R v Whitley
involves the prosecution of a
‘hacker’ under the
Criminal Damage Act
(UK). The prosecution had to establish that
the defendant had caused damage
to tangible property contained on the computer disc. Counsel
argued that there was no damage to tangible property. However, in
considering that argument, Lord Lane CJ stated
that it contained a
fallacy: “What the Act requires to be proved is that tangible
property has been damaged, not necessarily
that the damage itself
‘should be tangible’… The fact that the
alternation [to the metallic particles on the disk]
could only be
perceived by operating
the computer did not make the alternations any the less real, for the
if the alternation
amounted to damage, any the less within the ambit of
5. Spyware -
unauthorised, or unknown, software
The development of ‘parasite’ business
results in software programs being supplied as an
‘add on’ or ‘plug-in’ to a
primary software
The developer of the primary software program (usually
made available to the user without cost) has a business model of
money from parasite software or generating income from advertising
from ‘pop-up ads’. The users of such a business
model would
naturally choose other descriptive phrases to describe their technology
be aggrieved at the use of pejorative
terms to describe their
technology. The
Gator Corporation, a developer of ‘pop-up’ widow
technology,
has alleged trade libel, false advertising and tortuous
interference claims, against others using the term "spyware" to
the Gator technology.
The Gator Corporation prefer to
describe their technology as providing “contextually relevant
advertisement[s]”.
Legislatures are beginning to respond to public concern about intrusive
Web techniques, with commentators suggesting that the
legislatures are
also responding to the conflicting results of litigation in US federal
courts over whether Web techniques, such
ad’ software infringes intellectual property rights or unfair
trade practice legislation.
The State of Utah enacted the
Spyware Control
(2004) which, as stated in the general description of
Prohibits spyware from
delivering advertisements to a
computer under certain circumstances;
Requires spyware to provide
removal procedures;
Allows a website,
trademark, or copyright
owner to bring an action to enforce the requirements.
Spyware Control Act
defines ‘spyware’ in a
Subsection 4 beginning the extensive definition describing the ambit of
the software techniques
that are being regulated: monitoring
that reports back to a remote computer or delivers
obtrusive ‘pop-up ads’ (without making appropriate
disclosure to
“Except as provided in Subsection (5),
"spyware" means software residing on a computer that: (a) monitors the
computer's usage;
(b) (i) sends information about the computer's usage
a remote computer or server; or (ii) displays or causes to be displayed
advertisement in response to the computer's usage if the
advertisement: (A) does not clearly identify the full legal name of the
entity responsible for delivering the advertisement; (B) uses a
registered trademark as a trigger for the display of the
advertisement
person other than: (I) the trademark owner; (II) an authorized
agent or licensee of the trademark owner; or (III)
recognized Internet search engine; (C) uses a triggering mechanism to
display the advertisement according to the Internet websites
or (D) uses a context based triggering mechanism to display the
advertisement that partially or wholly covers
or obscures paid
advertising or
other content on an Internet website in a way that interferes with a
ability to view the
definition of spyware going on to describe the triggering mechanism for
the spyware and describes categories of software which
do not fall
within this definition of spyware. The Act also has the definition:
"Context based triggering mechanism" means a software
based trigger or
program residing on a consumer's computer that displays an
advertisement
according to: (a) the current Internet
website accessed by a user;
or (b) the contents or characteristics of the current Internet website
accessed by a user.”
The key provision of the
Spyware Control Act
(2004) is § 13-39-201,
which states the
prohibited conduct as being that. “(1) A person may
not: (a) install spyware on
another person's computer; (b) cause
spyware to be installed on another person's computer; or (c) use a
context based triggering
mechanism to display an advertisement that
partially or
wholly covers or obscures paid advertising or other content on an
website in a way that interferes with a user's ability to view the
website. (2) It is not a defense to a violation of this
section that a
user may remove or hide an advertisement.”
In response to the
Spyware Control Act
(2004), WhenU,
a supplier of
‘pop-up ad’ technology, is claiming that that the
unconstitutional attempt to regulate Internet
advertising on various
including that it is in violation of the First Amendment of the US
Constitution
– which describes the right of free
On 22 June 2004 Judge Joseph C Fratto Jr. of the
Third Judicial District Court in Salt Lake City granted WhenU a
preliminary
that will prevent the Act coming into effect until such time
argument on the issues is heard.
31. First Amendment
arguments have been successful in protecting other Web technology and
techniques from legal action, such as the
litigation over changes to
the algorithms of Google’s search engine considered in
Inc v Google Technology, Inc
2003, federal judge, Vicki Miles-
LaGrange granted Google's motion to dismiss the preliminary
injunction, accepting that the allocation of ranking to a Web site is
‘protected free speech’, so that the First Amendment of the
Constitution
protected Google from tort liability for the way it
allocated a ranking to the Search King’s Web site.
State of California is also actively
pursuing legislation.
Federal legislation is also being
considered.
33. The California
Assembly Bill 2787, amended June 23, 2004, would enact the Protection
Against Computer
purpose of which is described as:
would enact the Protection Against Computer
Spyware Act
. The act would
a person or entity conducting business in this state from knowingly
computer program to be copied
onto the computer of a California
consumer, as
defined, and using the program to perform certain acts relating to
control of, or damaging, the computer or the consumer's Internet
access or use. Bill 2787 in § 22581.2. prohibits specific
techniques and actions, including: (a) Take control, through
intentionally deceptive means, of the consumer's computer; (b) Modify,
through intentionally deceptive means, any of the settings related to
computer's access to, or use of, the Internet; (c) Collect,
intentionally deceptive means, personally identifiable information
through the
use of a keystroke logging function that records
all key strokes made
authorized user who uses the computer and transferring that information
computer to another person;
(d) Prevent, through intentionally
means, an authorized user's reasonable efforts to block the
installation of, or
to disable,
software; (e) Intentionally misrepresent that software will be
uninstalled or disabled by an authorized user's action, with knowledge
the software will not be so uninstalled or disabled; (f) Induce,
through deceptive means, an authorized user to install a
component onto the computer, including, but not limited to,
deceptively
misrepresenting that installing software is necessary for
security or
reasons or in order to open, view, or play a particular type of
content; (g) Deceptively install and execute
on the computer one or
additional computer software components with the intent of causing an
user to use the components
in a way that violates any other provision
section; (h) Through intentionally deceptive means, remove, disable, or
inoperative a security, antispyware, or antivirus technology
installed on
the computer.”
The question can be asked as to whether the Web
user is in a position to give an informed consent as to what
software programs are downloaded with
the primary software program and what changes those programs will make
Spyware Control Act
(2004) of Utah
is clearly designed to force disclosure from the supplier of the
software to
give a level of informed consent by the
Web user downloading the
and to force the supplier of the software to provide for mechanisms to
enable the Web user to disable
or remove the software at any time after
downloading.
Act continues the definition of
‘spyware’ by referring the software having the
functions, (discussed
in 5.1 above),
where the software:
“(4) (c) does
not: (i) obtain the consent of the user, at the time of, or after
installation of the software but before the
software does any of the
described in Subsection (4)(b): (A) to a license
agreement: (I) presented in full; and (II) written
language; (B) to a notice of the collection of each specific type of
information to be transmitted as a result of the software
installation; (C) to a clear and representative full-size example of
of the frequency with which each type of advertisement may be
and (E) for each type of advertisement delivered
by the software, a
description of a method by which a user may distinguish the
advertisement by its
appearance from an advertisement
generated by other software services;
and (ii) provide
a method: (A) by which a user may quickly and easily disable and remove
software from the user's computer; (B) that does not have other
effects on the non-affiliated parts of the user's computer; and (C)
uses obvious, standard, usual, and ordinary methods for removal of
The WhenU litigation against the State of Utah raises the general
policy question of whether legislation is the appropriate response
the various technologies that are described as
spyware given that Web users, wishing to avoid having spyware on their
can adopt one of the existing software solutions, such as selection
preferences
on Web browsers so that the browser blocks pop-up
ads from appearing or
warnings that the Web site wants to deliver a
‘cookie’ to the
user’s computer.
Control Act
(2004) of Utah goes on to specifically
exclude benign software such as operating systems and diagnostic
software, however the exclusion
of ‘cookies’ in
subsection (5)
(b) (ii) potentially creates a flaw in this legislation. “(5)
Notwithstanding Subsection
(4), "spyware" does not include: (a)
designed and installed solely to diagnose or resolve technical
difficulties; (b) software
or data that solely report to an Internet
website information previously stored by the Internet website on the
computer, including:
(i) cookies; (ii) HTML code;
or (iii) Java Scripts; or (c) an operating
may have a benign
function of managing the browser (by retaining information related to
the user’s previous visits to the site)
or for a more
intrusive purpose with the downloading of the cookie being triggered
moving the cursor over a link or by
the user clicking on mislabeled
‘Cookies’ can be programmed with more
sophisticated tracking functions that can track the users web surfing
information being returned to the server so that the
‘pop-up’ advertisements and banner advertisements
user are focused on what the computer server, to which the
transmitted data from the Web user’s computer, has analysed
be advertisements relevant to the Web user’s choice of terms
used in the search engine.
While subsection (5) (b) (ii) does start with the qualifying
description of “
software or data that
to an Internet website information
previously stored by the Internet website on the user's
however this may be insufficient to
distinguish, in this statutory definition, between benign
sophisticated
tracking ‘cookies’, and malignant
Spyware Control Act
Utah can be criticised for:
Failing to provide a function definition of what is
‘spy-ware’, by not adequately defining malignant
as spyware, (which may have personal
discussed later in Section 7);
to be a practical solution
as the user of the computer who consents to the downloading of the
‘spyware’ may be
a child using a parent’s
computer. So that no
real informed consent is given;
While the title of
the Act refers to ‘spyware’ control, the Act would
focus on ‘pop-up ad’ software,
which is arguably an
irritation, to
some, but does not address the types of malignant software the
Californian statute addresses.
The ad-serving software, or ‘adware’, is
downloaded with Peer-to-Peer (
file trading software or other free
software, such a screen savers. The software examines keywords, URLs
terms in use
on the user's browser and then selects which
advertisements to present the Web user.
Pop-up advertisements may be an
irritating advertising tactic, which if taken to extremes, can be
described as ‘spawning’.
The FTC obtained an
injunction in November 2003 against D Squared Solutions over software
exploit a feature of the Windows
Messenger Service.
The software creates pop-up windows that appear every ten minutes,
advertising a D Squared Solutions product that stops the pop-up
windows. However the interim injunction was not continued in December
hearing to determine whether a permanent should be
issued in set down
for hearing in March 2003.
Beales, Director of the FTC’s Bureau of Consumer Protection,
scheme, “nothing more than a high-tech
version of a classic
scam. The defendants created the problem that they proposed to solve
Their pop-up spam
computer users’ time and caused them needless
frustration.”
Litigation has occurred in
the US courts over whether the operator of a Web site can control the
information that appears of a
Web user’s screen when the user
is accessing a Web site. The user of ‘pop-up ad’
technology raise a number of legal
issues, including:
(1) Copyright
infringement & contributory copyright infringement. In the US
this is argued on the basis that the presentation
‘pop-up ads’ incorporates the plaintiffs’
Web site into a new “derivative work” (as defined
in 17 USC §101). In Australia the claim would be that an
“adaptation” of the Web site has been
(2) Trade mark infringement & trade mark
dilution argued to be created by simultaneous appearance of the
‘pop-up ad’
and the plaintiff’s trade
marks; (3) The use of the pop-up ads suggested a (non-existent)
relationship between the advertiser
promoted on the ‘pop-up
the commercial entity operating the Web site (that Web site
operator’s own
are being obscured by the ‘pop-up ad’)
‘misrepresentation’ potentially actionable under
‘passing off’ or actionable, in Australia, under
Practices Act 1974
(Cth). In the US this issue being claimed
as being in
breach of the Lanham Act; and (4) The economic effect of pop-up ads is
a dilution of the commercial value of the advertising. In the
US this issue being claimed as unfair competition and unfair business
practices under the Lanham Act.
However, despite the pleading of these multiple causes of action,
litigants attempting to stop the use of
‘pop-up ads’
have been unsuccessful in the US
courts, with the developers of ‘pop-up ad’ software
successfully arguing that
operating in the public interest in bringing advertisements to
the attention of Web users.
Corporation
Gator Corporation, a developer of pop-up ad software
has been the defendant in legal actions from the Washington
United Parcel Service
has now become a plaintiff in an action against Extended Stay America,
Corp argued, in its action against Extended Stay America, that the
company could not block the ‘pop-up ads’ as
users had agreed to accept them in return for the
use of Gator’s free software.
Gator Corporation
settled the legal action commenced by the Washington Post and other
in February 2002, however the
legal action commenced by United Parcel
Plaintiffs, like United Parcel Service, can put unfair competition
arguments when ads for their competitors appear when users
accessing the United Parcel Service Web site.
However, these arguments have been unsuccessful in
International
Wells Fargo & Co. & Quicken
Loans, Inc v WhenU.com, Inc
response of the
defendant companies creating the pop-up advertisements is that the ads
legitimate form of comparative
advertising. This defence has been
successful in
striking out the plaintiff’s claim in
WhenU.com v
International
and to deny a preliminary injunction in
Wells Fargo &
Co. & Quicken Loans, Inc v WhenU.com,
not accepted in
1-800 CONTACTS v WhenU.com and
Vision Direct
when a preliminary injunction was
6.2 WhenU.com v U-haul
International
U-haul International objected to the pop-up ads, created by WhenU.com
on its Web site as they directed its visitors
to the sites of competing
hire businesses.
52. The causes of
action asserted by U-haul International were copyright infringement and
contributory
mark infringement and trade mark
misappropriation, unfair competition and interference with prospective
unjust enrichment and a violation of the
Conspiracy Act
of Virginia.
WhenU argued that their ads appear in clearly
differentiated windows and that Internet users have the choice to
control the
September 2003, Judge Lee, in the Eastern District Court of Virginia,
granted WhenU's motion to dismiss the trade mark and
arguments and the unfair competition claim. Lee J held that even if the
simultaneous appearance of the pop-up advertisement
plaintiff’s trade marks was a ‘use’ under
the Lanham Act it was still immune from liability as a legitimate
of comparative
advertising.
6.3 Wells Fargo & Co. &
Loans, Inc v WhenU.com, Inc
Wells Fargo & Co. & Quicken Loans, Inc v
WhenU.com, Inc.,
Edmunds denied the plaintiffs’ application for an preliminary
to stop the defendant creating pop-up windows
plaintiffs’ Web sites.
WhenU designed their pop-up
advertisements to include a ‘disclaimer’ to reduce
the possibility that Web users’
would be confused about any
connection between the pop-up advertisements and the Web page being
viewed by the Web
user. The defendant’s
pop-up windows stated,
is not sponsored or displayed by the Web
site you are
57. Judge Edmunds
opined that the plaintiffs had not demonstrated a strong likelihood of
success on their trade mark infringement
and had not
demonstrated a strong likelihood of success on their copyright claim,
finding that:
The defendant did not ‘use’ the
plaintiffs’ trade marks ‘in
The defendant does not hinder
access by Web users to the plaintiffs’ Web sites by causing
annoyance to
users that other courts
have accepted can amount to a
‘use’ under
the Lanham Act;
The fact that WhenU pop-up
advertisements appear on a Web user’s screen at the same time
the plaintiffs’ Web page appears
on another window does not
constitute of ‘use’ of the plaintiff’s
trade marks
as there is no ‘framing’ that other courts have
accepted can amount to a ‘use’ under the Lanham
The simultaneous appearance of
the WhenU’s pop-up
advertisement and
the plaintiff’s trade marks is a legitimate form
comparative
advertising;
The inclusion of URLs that included a
portion of the plaintiffs’ trade marks in a scrambled
is not a ‘use’ in
The plaintiffs’ have not shown a ‘likelihood of
confusion’ of Web users believing that the pop-up windows
from the Web site of the plaintiffs.
In reaching these
conclusions, Judge Edmunds concluded that:
The defendant’s
pop-up windows did not ‘use’ any of the
plaintiffs’ trade
That due to the way Internet technology
works to present images appearing on Web user’s computer
screen; pop-up windows do
not: appear ‘on’ the
plaintiffs’ Web
‘modify’ the plaintiffs’ Web
‘frame’ the plaintiffs’ Web
There was no evidence of a ‘likelihood of
confusion’ of Web users believing that the pop-up windows
emanated from the
Web site of the plaintiffs.
1-800 CONTACTS v WhenU.com & Vision
On 22 December 2003, Judge Batts of the Southern District Court of New
granted 1-800 Contacts a preliminary injunction, prohibiting WhenU from
sending pop-ups windows, and requiring that trade marked
removed from its search terms
‘free’ software downloads
with other programs such
as P2P file trading software. Where a Web user has the SaveNow software
installed on
their computer, entering
a URL into the search engine will trigger the
software to deliver to the Web user a pop-up advertisement in the same
of goods or services as a key word search term. The SaveNow
software included an extensive directory of URLs including the address
of the plaintiff’s Web site
<www.1800contacts.com>.
Batts found the defendants had ‘used’ the
plaintiff’s mark in
commerce under the Lanham Act
and that the necessary requirement
of “a likelihood of confusion”
“Defendants here use Plaintiff’s mark in two ways.
First, in causing pop-up advertisements of Defendant
Vision Direct
to appear when SaveNow users
have specifically attempted to access Plaintiff’s Website
– on which the Plaintiff’s
trade mark appears
– Defendants are displaying Plaintiff’s mark
“in the … advertising of” Defendant
Vision Direct’s services. …. Second, Defendant
WhenU includes Plaintiff’s URL,
<www.1800contacts.com>, in
the proprietary WhenU
directory of terms that triggers pop-up advertisements on SaveNow users
computers. In so doing Defendant When
Plaintiff’s mark by
including a version of Plaintiffs 1-800 CONTACTS mark, to advertise and
companies that are in direct competition with
Plaintiff. Accordingly the Court finds that the Defendants have
Plaintiff’s mark in
61. Consequently the
Judge found that there
was trade mark confusion: “The fact that Defendants' pop-up
advertisement for competing
internet contact lenses retailers appears
after a consumer types into the browser bar Plaintiff's trademarked
and accesses
Plaintiff's homepage increases the likelihood that a
might assume Defendants' pop-up advertisements are endorsed or licensed
Plaintiff.”
62. Judge Batts stated
conclusion: “On the Internet, online shoppers have a myriad
competing retailers literally at their
finger tips, are easily able to
research preferences, and with very little time and effort are able to
enact their preferences with
purchases. In this context, the good will
and reputation that Plaintiff and other online retailers have
established is of extreme
importance. Plaintiff has spent considerable
sums to establish and maintain its marks' notoriety with online
and is entitled
to protect this investment from conduct that infringes
marks. An online shopper who has knowledge of Plaintiff's marks and
interest sufficient to choose to visit or find Plaintiff's Website is a
potential buyer that Plaintiff is entitled to protect
confusion.”
63. Judge Batts
dismissed a further claim
that the ads infringed on 1-800 Contacts’ copyright by
blocking access to
but granted an injunction against Vision Direct in
respect of a likely breach
Anticybersquatting Consumer
Protection Act 1999
(15.USC.) by registering:
www.www1800Contacts.com>.
The SaveNow program did, at the time the litigation commenced, have a
statement on the pop-up ad
: “A WhenU offer - click ?
with the “?” button
opening a new window containing a notice explaining the software is
provided by WhenU and the statement
offers shown to you by SaveNow are not affiliated with the
site you are visiting.”
However, the
Judge held that this disclaimer was not sufficient to alleviate the
likelihood of consumer confusion.
65. Judge Batts
disagreed with the decisions of
Wells Fargo v WhenU
U-Haul International, Inc v When U
and declined to follow
those decisions, as they were not
Comparative advertising
argument that pop-up ads are a legitimate form of comparative
advertising was successful in striking out the plaintiff’s
WhenU.com v U-haul International
and to deny a
preliminary injunction in
Wells Fargo & Co. &
Quicken Loans, Inc v
WhenU.com, Inc,
but not accepted in
v WhenU.com and Vision Direct
The different
decisions reached in these cases are explained by differences in the
However the application
of the ‘comparative advertising’ argument
may need to be resolved by appellate courts.
In other common law jurisdictions, the competing supplier, whose goods
or services are
being compared unfavourably have resorted
to litigation under a number
of causes of action depending on the content of the comparative
advertisements. Comparative advertising
of products and services
have been variously claimed as the tort of malicious falsehood
misleading or deceptive conduct or misrepresentations (or both),
infringement of
trade marks,
and copyright
infringement.
68. Comparative
advertising in Australia is
not to be considered a disrespectable form of commercial conduct
factual assertions
are not untrue or misleading half-truths. An
can lawfully compare a particular aspect of its product or services
the same aspect of a competitor’s product or
Provided the pop-up advertisements clearly
‘disclaim’ any
association with the Web site, it would appear that Australian
litigants are unlikely to be successful under any of the causes of
listed in the previous paragraph. The technical evidence
operation of pop-up window technology accepted by Judge Edmunds in the
Wells Fargo
case would make
difficult for an Australian litigant to sustain trade mark or copyright
causes of action.
7. Cookies and Web
The ‘Cookies’ are the electronic files that many
Web sites use to manage information about visitors to the site.
a benign level, the cookie may record and store information so that
subsequent visits to the Web site the stored information is
visitor in gaining speedy access to the site. However, the technology
be programmed with different levels
of invasiveness to collect
personal information such as name and e-mail address and to secretly
Web users’ on-line
travels to other Web sites.
‘Web Bug’ is often used with Cookies on the
Internet. Web Bugs are
tools designed to monitor who is reading a Web
They are often used for online profiling, advertising, marketing and to
measure Website statistics.
For many users of the Web the main practical difference between a
Cookie and a Web Bug is that Web Bugs are much more difficult to
neutralise.
extreme level of invasion executable bugs can be
inserted on the user’s computer that can:
capture a Web
site visitor’s Internet Protocol address; or
install files
to change settings in the computer of the Web site visitor; insert a
bug which results in copies of e-mails being sent
by a person, being
copied to the person inserting the bug; take the visitor’s
entire e- mail
address book; or take any other
document from a computer; and
used to control a person’s computer from a remote computer.
users and a Web site have become of concern to
areas: (1) That the serial number, (Processor Serial Number (
embedded in Intel's Pentium III processor, and subsequent Intel
processors, could be misused to identify and collect data on Web
and (2) The operation of online profiling
of Web users through the use of
technology which tracks and monitors of individuals' online
7.1 Processor Serial Number
Intel designed the PSN as an additional security feature
allowing each computer to have a unique identifier.
the PSN was not universally accepted as appropriate technology for Web
users. The Centre for Democracy and Technology (CDT)
have stated:
“The PSN is a unique identifier. Due to Intel's market
the PSN has the potential to become
identifier for nearly everyone on the Internet -- fundamentally
changing the Web experience from one where consumers can browse
seek out information
anonymously, to one where an individual's every move is
74. In 1999 the CDT
and other privacy
organisations, filed a complaint and request for relief
FTC, seeking immediate action to prevent harm to consumer privacy as
a result of deployment of the Intel Pentium III PSN.
CDT requested that
enjoin the shipment of
Intel Pentium III Processors equipped with a unique PSN; and
commence an investigation into the privacy issues posed by the Intel
Pentium III PSN.
Intel responded by releasing software that
allowed owners of computers with Intel chips to have the choice of
or enable the ability of other computers to read the PSN, with
default setting of the Intel chip set being that the PSN is
76. However the online
tracking and profiling of Web users does not operate through use of the
PSN, instead Cookies, Web Bugs and
other software
can be activated to collect and return information about the habits of
7.2 Online profiling of Web users
77. What information a
Web site can learn about visitors can be understood by
visiting links from the Web site of the CDT:
growing frequency, information about how you use the Web -- the sites
online purchases, "click
through" responses to advertisements -- is being captured by
advertising networks
or "profiling companies."
With the permission of the Web site, but not
permission, these companies place a tag on your computer. This tag --
-- is then used to track your movements as you surf the Web.
In addition to long lists of collected information, a profile may
"inferential" or "psychographic" data -- information that the company
infers about you based on your surfing habits. From this amassed
elaborate inferences may be drawn, including your interests, habits,
associations, and other traits.”
78. The FTC
has maintained self-regulatory approach to online
However on 23 May 2000, the FTC issued a report
to Congress requesting to
regulate online privacy. While the report noted
that an increasing number of Web sites now post privacy
policies, it
also noted that only 20% meet the FTC's fair information practices. The
issued a two-part report in June
2000 on online profiling and industry self-regulation. The July report
asked Congress to enact baseline legislation to protect
Litigation has occurred in the US in relation to the
scope of privacy protection afforded Internet users under the
Communications Privacy Act 1986
re Pharmatrak, Inc Privacy Litigation
a class action, raised
questions related to the privacy protection provided by EPCA.
Pharmatrak provided a Web service to the pharmaceutical
companies that
allowed them to access information about Internet users accessing the
sites of the pharmaceutical companies. The
pharmaceutical companies had
sought, and received, assurances from Pharmatrak that personal and
identifying information about their
Web users would not be collected.
Notwithstanding these assurances,
Pharmatrak did collect personal and identifying information about
Web users of the Web sites of the pharmaceutical companies. The
First Circuit accepted that Pharmatrak
‘intercepted’
information (as described in the EPCA 18 U.S.C. §2511 (1) (a))
returned the matter to the lower court to consider whether
interception
was ‘intentional’ with the meaning of
Pharmatrak, Inc
also discusses cases regarding
‘consent’ to intercept under §2511 (2)(d)
states, “where one of the
parties to the communication has
prior consent to such interception unless such communications is
intercepted for the purpose
of committing any criminal or tortuous
act…”. The court rejected the argument that the
DoubleClick
established
a rule that consent to interception can be inferred from the mere
purchase of a
service, regardless of circumstances.
The court considered that neither
pharmaceutical companies nor the Web users had given the requisite
described in
Griggs-Ryan
While the court accepted that consent may be explicit or implied,
however it must be actual consent rather than
constructive consent,
relying upon the
Berry v Funk
case, which held that “[w]ithout actual notice,
consent can only be
implied when the surrounding circumstances convincingly
show that the
party knew about and consented to the interception”
relying upon Watkins v L.M. Berry & Co, which held that
“[k]nowledge
of the capacity of monitoring alone cannot be
considered implied
81. The same issues
‘interception of a communication’ can arise under
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
of the Act creating civil remedies in respect of unlawful interception
or communication information passing over a telecommunication
In respect the collection of ‘personal information’
the Federal Privacy
Commissioner has issued
Information Sheet 18 - Taking
Reasonable Steps to
Make Individuals Aware That Personal Information About Them is Being
(June 2003)
to address the implications under the
(Cth) in relation to the
collection of
‘personal information’ about Web
European Union
has been pro-active in regulating online activities. In December 2001
the EU decided to move to regulate Cookies
because their use
is perceived to be an infringement on personal
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
The Directive on the Privacy and Electronic Communications
) restricts the use of cookies and similar
tracking devices
on Web sites.
of the DEPC requires that, when personal information stored on the
terminal is accessed, or when personal information
stored on a
network (other than purely for technical reasons), the user must be
clearly and
fully informed about the
purposes of such access or storage of his or
personal information, and then be allowed to opt out of accepting the
85. The DEPC
is a controversial move as many Web sites,
especially those offering e-commerce, only function if the user accepts
and Electronic Communications (EU Directive) Regulations 2003
(UK) implemented the DEPC which include a
requirement to inform Web users that Cookies exist on a Web site and
the opportunity
to reject the Cookies.
The UK Information
Commissioner has issued guidance on these
regulations.
87. Software solutions
are available to Web
users as Web browsers usually provide for settings to regulate whether
browser will
down load Cookies (or warn the user so that the user can
whether or not to download the Cookie). Software is available to
user to gain knowledge of and manage programs, which may be downloaded
through use of Web searching.
8. Identity
‘Phishing’ for Information
Computer and Internet
technology allows the access to information that is in publicly
accessible databases. This ease of access
that allows signification
information about
a person to be obtained by using search engines.
This can lead to
‘identity theft’
where information trawled from
Internet allows
a person to
assume the identity of another to obtain credit cards and proceed
to incur debt under that stolen identity.
The Australian Crime Commission (
established to
address the threats posed by nationally significant crime.
estimates that identity theft costs Australia $2
million each year.
90. The Internet scams
that have been
practiced in Australia include the setting up of fake Web sites to
appear to be the site of
a legitimate Internet banking operation, and
the scam known as 'phishing', where e-mails that appear to come from a
legitimate business
in an effort to obtain recipients' information,
such as bank
account, password and credit card details.
91. The imperative to generate
income from the Internet leads some Web businesses to engage in
‘Internet dumping’.
This is an issue related to the
regulation of the telecommunications
system, as an Internet user accesses the ISP via the telephone
by the telephone company at which the user has an account.
‘Internet dumping’ occurs when the user’s
computer is
without their knowledge
into calling
a more costly Internet access connection
than the user’s
usual ISP. The 'switch' occurs when Web users download
dialler’ software unwittingly,
by clicking on an icon or
button on their
November 2002 the Department of Communications, Information
Technology and Arts (
announced draft legislation to
address the problem of ‘Internet dumping’. The
draft proposals have not been accepted
by interested parties, either
the ‘190’ service providers or the telephone
as providing a workable answer to the
problem. In March 2003 DCITA directed the Australian Communications
Authority (
) to implement safeguards for
consumers against unexpected
high telephone bills and Internet dumping.
The automated transmission of e-mails to multiple recipients, usually
containing commercial advertisements or inducements is usually
as ‘spamming’.
Some US States have legislated in
relation to the transmission of unsolicited e-mails.
Federal Privacy Commissioner has expressed an opinion that spammers may
breach the National Privacy Principles (
(Cth) and raised the possibility
of a test case
in relation to the practice of anonymously harvesting e-mail addresses
from the Web
or newsgroups, which is suggested to be a breach of
NPP 1.3 and 1.5.
Australia has moved to regulate the
practice, with the
Spam Act 2003
regulating the sending of ‘spam’
and the collection and use of e-mail addresses by Australian based
However as a majority of ‘spam’ originates from
international sources, delivery of commercial advertisements or
inducements
and other unwanted spam is unlikely to be significantly
94. Both the
US and the UK have moved to regulate
spamming. However the CAN-
SPAM Act 2003
(US) has be criticised by
anti-spamming as being a licence for spammers to operate, as provided
an ‘opt-out’ option is
provided, the transmission
of spam e-mails is lawful.
Communications (EU Directive) Regulations 2003
(UK) requires
the sender of
the spam to have the explicit consent of the individual recipient
except where
there is an existing customer
relationship.
However the
legislation has been criticised for differentiating between 'private'
'business' spam and thereby creating loopholes
as spammers can assert
they believed they were sending the e-mail to a
95. Sending bulk
unsolicited e-mails may be a
criminal offence if it interferes with the operation of computers or if
matter of the e-mail is contrary to law. In
Steven G. Hourmouzis.
The defendant posted information in 'chat rooms'
and the charges filed against the defendant were:
interference with, interruption of or obstruction of the lawful
use of file server computers under section 76E of the
(Cth), by sending over 3 million spam messages to
named e-mail
servers by means of a telephone facility operated by Telstra;
an offence under the
Corporations
"making a statement or disseminating information that was false or
misleading and likely to induce the purchase of securities
way of transmission of electronic mail messages containing information
relating to Rentech when he knew or ought to
have known that the
information was
misleading" by posting information in ‘chat rooms’
on the Internet
touting the stock
of Rentech Inc., a U.S. company. The defendant
guilty and was sentenced to two years imprisonment.
The FTC has been
active against spammers:
FTC v 30 Minute Mortgages, Inc,
Roth & Stolz
respect of violation of US banking and consumer- protection and privacy
importance of compliance with the NPPs is exemplified in
(Operations) Limited v Media Entertainment
and Arts Alliance (MEAA) & Connect
[2004] FCA 637
which MEAA were found, in the context of conducting an industrial
relations campaign, to have infringed copyright
in Seven’s internal
telephone directory and were held to have breached the
(Cth). Connect, a telephone call centre, contacted
Seven employee's in
order to learn information about what those employees thought
held that MEAA ‘collected’ personal
information
and that MEAA was in breach of Principle 1.1 in
relation to the information received as a result of the telephone
Connect were held to have breached NPP 1.3 in respect of
the script for the telephone survey.
The ancient
tort of trespass to a computer server
Commentators have argued that the sending of spam to a computer server
constitutes the tort of
trespass to a chattel,
with the chattel being the
computer server.
Jeremy Malcolm suggests that the common law, as
applied in Australia, does not support the proposition that trespass to
be committed by a non-physical interference with the goods,
referring to
Penfolds Wines v Elliot
Latham CJ (citing Halsbury's
Laws of England): “Trespass to
goods is any direct infringement of the possession by another of
corporeal personal chattels by means of an asportation or other
However, the understanding of what is understood by
‘corporeal personal
chattel’, ‘direct infringement of the
possession’ and
‘physical invasion’ must be considered. It is
arguable that the
‘corporeal personal chattel’
is the computer server
that there is
‘direct infringement' by the deliberate transmission of data
(the unsolicited e-mail)
to the computer server with the consequence
aspects of the ‘possession’ of the computer server
are interfered with
by a ‘physical
poses the question of what is sufficient to amount to an
‘infringement
of the possession’ and ‘physical
invasion’. Is it
sufficient to prove that computer memory was used by the unwanted
e-mail or to
provide evidence of the lost
time and unproductive effect needed to
the unwanted e-mail? Or
must ‘physical damage’ be established and whether
spam, which creates
unauthorised additions or changes to electronic information in a
computer is
a ‘physical invasion’?
Certainly in the
criminal law context of damage to goods, Lord Lane in
rejected the argument that for there to be
‘physical damage’ there must be ‘tangible
damage’: “The
that the alternation [to the metallic particles on the disk] could
perceived by operating the computer did not make the alternations
real, for the damage, if the alternation amounted to damage, any the
less within
the ambit of the Act.”
103. In the context of
the common law tort of trespass to chattels, Lord Lane's statements are
consistent with the view of Australia
courts. Latham CJ, in
Penfolds Wines v Elliot,
concluded that the reference to
‘physical’ includes
‘intangible’ as well as
‘tangible’. That
is, the deliberate transmission of
data (the unsolicited e-mail) to the computer server is a
‘physical invasion’ and
that proof of damage to the
chattel (the
computer server) is not a requirement for the common law tort of
trespass to chattels.
Penfolds Wines v Elliot
related to the use, by the
defendant, of the plaintiff’s wine
The claim being there was a trespass by the defendant
to the plaintiff's goods when he filled the plaintiff's bottles with
than Penfold's. However there was no assertion of physical
to the bottles. Latham CJ was of the opinion that the unauthorised
defendant of the plaintiff’s bottles was a trespass. On
majority of the High Court (Starke, Dixon
McTiernan and Williams JJ)
answered the question "what wrong to
possession or property on the part of the respondent do these facts
The important fact being that the defendant was in lawful possession of
bottles as a bailee".
105. The tort of
trespass is not a single tort, as it as this form of
action includes
trespass de bonis asportatis
wrongful taking of chattels – at issue in
trespass vi et armis
of the form of action in trespass of
relevance to
spamming litigation).
Russell Ashby Pargiter v Vincent Harley Alexander
Zeeman J in
the Supreme Court
of Tasmania, compared the tort of trespass to chattels to the tort of
relation of a dispute
over a yacht, stating: “Trespass to
is a wrong to possession (Penfolds Wines Pty Ltd v Elliott
[1946] HCA 46
at 224) committed by an act of the defendant and as a direct
consequence thereof (Hutchins v Maughan
[1947] VicLawRp 18
(1947) VLR 131).
The essence
of the tort of detinue is the wrongful detention of a chattel to which
plaintiff has the right to immediate possession
which requires that
demand and a wrongful refusal to comply with that demand. On one set of
both torts may be established
although there may be a trespass
without detinue or detinue without a trespass. The different elements
of the two torts assist in
defining the nature of the damage which may
flow from each. Damages in trespass are by way of compensation for the
injury done to
the chattel by reason of the wilful interference with
although nominal damages may be awarded where no actual
damage occurs
(Kirk v Gregory (1876) 1 Ex D 55).”
Courts have not
reached a fixed view as to whether damage to the chattel is a
requirement of the tort of trespass to a chattel.
Cyberpromotions
the Federal Court issued a injunction against the transmitter of spam
on the basis that the applicant (as the owner of the computer
was able to show damage
both in terms of loss of customer goodwill and lost time and effort in
spam. However, the
Californian Supreme Court, in
Intel Corp v
Kourosh Kenneth Hamidi
required proof of more than just
distraction or loss of productivity due to employees reading
messages to establish trespass
to chattels (in the form of sending
bulk e-mails to Intel’s internal mail system, criticising
Intel’s employment
policies). The Californian Supreme Court
Californian
Trespass Act
it is necessary to prove
damage to computers or their usefulness before an injunction will be
issued to prohibit the sending of
the e-mail.
Compuserve v
Cyberpromotions
Compuserve v Cyberpromotions
the trespass-to-chattels
argument was
used by Compuserve to obtain an injunction to block spammers.
presented evidence
of the number of complaints from customers upset by
spam. Compuserve was able to show damage both in terms of loss of
goodwill and lost time and effort in blocking spam.
Intel Corp v Kourosh Kenneth Hamidi
Intel Corp v Kourosh Kenneth Hamidi
majority decision of the Court of Appeal affirmed the lower court
decision, where an injunction was issued against the defendant
prevent him from emailing up to 35,000 Intel employees at a time. Mr
Hamidi’s employment with Intel had been terminated
result of a dispute over work related injuries. He responded by urging
Intel employees, in bulk e-mails, to join in class actions
overtime and
for injuries suffered. Intel sued under two courses of action: trespass
chattels (the Intel e-mail system)
and nuisance.
The majority of the appellate court held that sending bulk e-mails via
the Internet to
Intel’s computer network amounted
to trespassing on
Intel’s private
computer network. The court reviewed the history of trespass to
chattels and
Hamidi’s conduct was trespassory, as an
electronic signal is sufficiently tangible to support a trespass cause
the tangibility of the
the harm caused as the e-mails caused disruption to Intel’s
were drawn away from their jobs to deal with the messages.
dissenting opinion considered that the mere receipt of an e-mail
only damage from which consists of the time
consumed to read it,
assuming the recipient chooses to do so – did not establish
the requisite
injury for trespass to chattel.
The dissenting opinion considered that
appellate decisions that have applied trespass to chattel to computer
transmittal of the unsolicited bulk e-mail burdened the
computer equipment, thereby interfering with its operation and
diminishing the
chattel’s value
the unauthorised search, and retrieval of information from,
another party’s database reduced the computer
capacity, slowing response times and reducing system
performance.
112. The decision was reviewed
by the Californian Supreme Court with the
Electronic Frontiers Foundation filing an
in the case
arguing that the lower court decision threatened ‘freedom of
speech’ interests.
113. The California
a 4 –3 majority decided that Hamidi did not
trespass on Intel's computers when he sent e-mail messages to thousands
employees worldwide. The majority held that Intel could only rely upon
Californian trespass law if the e-mail caused actual damage
equipment or property. The court reasoning that the legal claim of
trespass to chattels requires damage to Intel's computers or
usefulness, not just
distraction or loss of productivity due to employees reading messages
criticised Intel.
114. The bare majority
in the California
Supreme Court and the conflicting decision in
Compuserve v
Cyberpromotions
in the US federal jurisdiction leaves room for
further argument as to whether the tort of trespass to chattels, in the
form of transmission
of spam directed at a computer server managing
e-mail, requires actual damage to equipment or property or whether
terms of loss of customer goodwill and lost time and effort in
spam or removing from e-mail accounts is sufficient.
appear that there is a difference between the law of the United States,
Australia in relation to the action for
trespass to chattels,
respect of a direct and intentional interference with a chattel in the
possession of another. In Australia the tort is actionable
without proof of actual damage or dispossession.
the U.S. the tort is not actionable
plaintiff has to establish damage or dispossession.
116. Computer and
Internet technology has
created consumer privacy issues. These privacy issues are reflected in
willingness to engage in e-commerce.
Australia has moved to regulate many aspects of online activities,
updating criminal statutes and statutes regulating
to use of the
telecommunications facilities on which the Internet and the World Wide
Web operate. However the global nature of the
Internet means that
Australian initiatives
to secure the protection of Australian Web users can be undermined by
unregulated activities
in other jurisdictions. International
initiatives by Australian regulators can result in a reduction of
harmful online practices.
However, ultimately it is for the Web user to
be on their
guard against 'data miners' seeking to use Web user's personal
information,
for purposes of committing a fraud, or for those who wish
to avoid being profiled, to avoid unintentionally providing information
Web sites through automated profiling software.
Information about
the browsing habits of Web users is a commodity in itself, to be stored
and analysed,
and applied directly by the collector;
or sold to other e-commerce operations. In the struggle to make
e-commerce profitable Web
site operators may employ techniques ranging
from the frustrating to the fraudulent.
Because the World Wide Web is evolving into an important medium for
commerce and communication it is generating legislative responses
litigation in other jurisdictions that can be of assistance in
determining the
appropriate Australian response to harmful or
merely irritating Web
techniques.
The possible responses being new legislation regulating Web techniques;
litigation based
on existing common law or statutory causes of action
asserting that they are harmed by the Web techniques; or software
Web users can adopt to counter harmful or irritating Web
techniques.
* LLB (Victoria University, NZ) LLM (UNSW). Legal Practitioner (New
South Wales). Visiting lecturer in Intellectual
Property Law,
Electronic Financial Transactions Law & Computer
University of Western Sydney.
Cargo cults: Ask
not for whom the
Internet bubble bursts, it burst for thee, Robert Cringely 27/4/01
http://www.pbs.org/cringely/pulpit/pulpit20010426.html.
Robert Cringely
the link between the cargo cults that developed in the Pacific in the
twentieth century and the rapid,
sometimes irrational, investment into
development during the 1990’s. John Fitzgerald in 1996 linked
the cult of the computer in the US and other advanced
societies: “Cargo cults supposedly originated in Melanesia
ago, but the type of thinking which is the foundation of cargo
has long been characteristic of what we like to consider the
sophisticated
society on the face of the earth. In fact, North America is currently
cargo cults. The cargo cult is
founded on a familiar, and popular, bit
fallacious reasoning: post hoc ergo propter hoc. The residents of
Yaliwan, Vanuatu
and other places noticed that when the colonial
built wharves and airstrips, the wharves and airstrips were soon
ships and airplanes which delivered cargos of goods. They concluded
ships and airplanes arrived as a consequence of the
building of the
and airstrips, so they built their own wharves and airstrips in the
expectation
of receiving their own cargoes.
This reasoning seems naive to us, since
already know that the correct chain of reasoning is the reverse: the
wharves and
were built because ships and airplanes were going to be
However, in dealing with that which is new to us, just as wharves
airstrips were new to Melanesians, we draw exactly the same conclusions
it”:http://www.coolth.com/cargo.htm.
Cyveillance, Inc
dated December 2001 “Entangled on the Web –
Aggressive Technology
Tactics Go Mainstream”
www.cyveillance.com lists their
assessment of the
top 10 objectionable Web techniques as: Spawning; Mouse-trapping;
Unauthorised software downloads; Spoof pages; Typo-piracy
& cyber-squatting; Changing home pages or favourites; Visible
Misleading links; and Framing. This article discusses further
techniques that
annoy Web users or lead to fear and loathing of the
technology. Those
techniques being: ‘Pop-Up Ads’,
‘Spamming’,
‘Identity theft’, ‘Cookies’
Discussed in
section (8).
Merriam-Webster
http://www.m-w.com/home.htm
Amendment (Private Sector) Act
(Cth) sets out 10 National Privacy Principles (NPPs), which
regulate the
way in which private sector organisations collect, store
information. See the Guidelines to the National Privacy Principles,
available at www.privacy.gov.au
See note 3. See
'Competition on
the Internet and the World Wide Web - The Schoolmasters’ of
case in the 21st Century',
Morris Averill
(2004) 11 (3) Competition and
Consumer Law Journal 300
for a discussion of the competition law
aspects of:
‘deep linking’; ‘framing’;
‘domain name
& ‘typo piracy’ or
‘domain name
mimicry’; & search engine
‘optimisation’
& ‘metatags’
or ‘invisible
‘visible seeding’.
Spawning - the
automatic launch of new
browser windows on entry to or exit from a site, including the launch
"stealth" windows
which appear behind the browser.
http://ebizlogic.net/notes.php
Usually found in
the ‘Go To’
command on the ‘View” menu of the Web browser.
trapping - manipulation of the browser "Back" button to prevent exit
site. http://ebizlogic.net/notes.php
“The porning of the
internet, - Sex sites’ slimeball tactics ease into
mainstream”, by
Marty Beard,
www.mediaifemagazine.com/news2001/dec01/dec01/1_mon/news4monday.html
and “Beware, sneaky sites can trap your mouse; some Web pages
technological dirty tricks to grab, keep users”,
by Danialle
Florida Today,
http://www.floridatoday.com/news/tech/stories/1999b/tt102799p.htm
Federal Trade
Commissioner v John Zuccarini (Civil Action 01 CV 4845) in the US
District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania)
Restraining Order entered 26th September 2001.
Under Section 5
FTC Act (15 U.S.C.), which prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or
in or affecting commerce. The Commission
will find deception if there
representation, omission, or practice that is likely to mislead the
acting reasonably
in the circumstances, to the consumer's detriment.
See FTC Policy Statement on Deception, appended to Cliffdale
Associates, Inc.,
103 F.T.C. 110
, 174 (1984). Note the similarity of s.
Act (US) to s. 52
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) 1974.
Spoof pages -
including ‘doorway’ or
‘redirect’ pages optimised
specifically for search engines, ‘cloaking’
actual site
content by presenting to search engines an optimised page which is not
which a visitor will see, and the ‘page-jacking’
content from
another site. http://ebizlogic.net/notes.php
‘Seeding’ and
‘mettatagging’ are discussed in
“Competition on the Internet
and the World Wide Web -
The Schoolmasters’ of Gloucester
case in the 21st
Century”, Morris Averill
(2004) 11 (3) Competition and
Consumer Law
Journal 300.
“How the ‘Page Jacking’ and
‘Mouse Trapping’ Web Scam
Works” http://www.techlawjournal.com/internet/19990924b.htm
obtained and executed search warrants in Australian. See “FTC
Obtains Injunction of Page Jacking and Mouse Trapping
http://www.techlawjournal.com/internet/19990924a.htm
99-1367-A, Eastern District of Virginia) – Complaint filed on
14 September
1999. Preliminary Injunction issued on 21 September
www.ftc.gov See also:
http://www.techlawjournal.com/alert/2001/02/13.asp
admits guilt, awaits sentence, 13/6/03 at www.silicon.com
Mislabelling
links - sending shopper to a destination other than indicated by the
on which she or he clicks. http://ebizlogic.net/notes.php
Page Guard Program from www.pjwalczak.com is a form of protection
against this
Changing home page or favourites -
unauthorised alteration
of the browser's homepage or unauthorised addition of a site to browser
Favourites or Bookmarks. http://ebizlogic.net/notes.php
Which inserted
new sections 477 & 478 inserted into the
Crimes Act 1914
Computer Crime offences
s.308, 308 A – 308 I - replacing the
offences in ss. 309 & 310 of the
Crimes Act 1900
(1986) Cr App R
[1993] FSR 168.
parasite economy,
Damien Cave 2 August 2001 www.salon.com ‘Spyware’
piggybacks on
Napster rivals, John Boland
14 May 2001http://news.cnet.com Centre for
Democracy & Technology (CDT) Report: "Ghosts in Our Machines:
Background and
Proposals on the "Spyware" Problem" November 2003
http://www.cdt.org/
“Spyware, adware, malware, thief: what's
in a name?”, by Jerry Stern (2004), www.filetiger.com - also
published by
Masons Lawyers, 24/06/2004 at
http://www.out-
law.com/php/page.php?page_id=spywareadwaremal1088077115&area=news
See Section 6.
See you later,
anti-Gators? Paul Festa, 22 October 2003,
http://news.com.com/2100-1032- 5095051.html?tag=nl. Gator foe bitten,
still not shy, Paul Fest, 1 December 2003,
http://news.com.com/2100-1024-5112435.html
Spyware law
by pop-up ads firm, Masons Lawyers,
http://www.out-law.com/php/page.php?page_id=spywarelawblocked1088077251&area=news
http://www.le.state.ut.us/~2004/bills/hbillenr/hb0323.htm
That is not
‘diagnostic software’ – s (5) (a) of the
definition.
York-based company’s software exists
on approximately 25 million computers, generated via WhenU’s
software having been bundled with Kazaa’s P2P file
A fuller description of the claims
appears on the Web site of
the Lawyers for WhenU: On April 12, 2004, Kronish Lieb Weiner &
LLP filed a complaint on behalf of its client WhenU.com, Inc., a New
based online contextual marketing company, seeking
to enjoin the
operation and
effect of Utah’s recently enacted Spyware Control Act. The
names as defendants the State
of Utah and its Governor and Attorney
General, and
asserts that the Act violates the Dormant Commerce Clause and the First
Amendments of the United States
Constitution
, the equal
and freedom of expression provisions of the Utah
Constitution
preempted by the federal Copyright Act. The complaint seeks to enjoin
as an unconstitutional effort to regulate Internet
advertising;
alternatively, it seeks damages from Utah on the ground that the Act
constitutes
an unconstitutional taking of property
under the Utah
Constitution
http://www.kronishlieb.com/news.cfm?news_ID=111
Spyware law
pop-up ads firm, Masons Lawyers,
http://www.out-law.com/php/page.php?page_id=spywarelawblocked1088077251&area=news
District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma. See
Competition on
Internet and the World Wide Web - The Schoolmasters’ of
Gloucester case in
the 21st Century, Morris Averill
(2004) 11 (3) Competition and Consumer
Journal 300
for a discussion of the Google case.
http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/bill/asm/ab_2751-
2800/ab_2787_bill_20040623_amended_sen.html
In June 2004, the U.S. House Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade and
Protection approved a spyware bill called the Securely
Protect Yourself
Trespass Act
(SPY ACT) that authorizes fines up to $3 million for
companies that are found guilty of collecting personal information,
Web browsers and delivering some pop-up advertisements to computer
users without
their consent. Senate Bill S.2145, Software Principles
Yielding Better
Consumer Knowledge (SPYBLOCK) Act, introduced in March2004, is "a bill
regulate the unauthorized installation
of computer software, to require
disclosure to computer users of certain computer software features that
pose a threat
to user privacy, and for other purposes." It is
cosponsored by
senators Conrad Burns (R-Montana), Barbara Boxer (D-California),
Clinton (D- New York) and Ron Wyden (D-Oregon).
Spyware: The
Spam? Jack M. Germain, TechNewsWorld , 06/26/04,
http://www.technewsworld.com/story/34775.html
Web users can
also look to software solutions such as: The BHO Demon program (Browser
Objects) from www.definitesolution.com
to monitor programs in the BHO
which may be benign or be ‘ad-ware’ or
‘spy-ware’; The
http://www.spybot.info/; The
Ad-Aware program from www.lavasoft.nu
further in Section
Which would appear to be the
intention of Subsection 5 (b) (i) of
the Spyware Control Act of Utah.
Unauthorized
software downloads -
unauthorized downloads of plug-ins, applets, embedded functions,
advertising,
etc., sometimes triggered
simply by moving the cursor over a link.
http://ebizlogic.net/notes.php
Spyware: The
Next Spam? Jack M.
Germain, TechNewsWorld, 06/26/04,
http://www.technewsworld.com/story/34775.html
Gator-style
'parasite on
the Web' wins pop-up ad ruling, 03/07/03 Masons Lawyers,
www.out- law.com
FTC Obtains
Order Barring Pop-up Spam Scam, Urges
Consumers to Take Steps to Protect Themselves. Ads Tout Software to
Pop-Ups – Like The Ones They’re Sending;
Allegedly Exploited Microsoft Windows Messenger Service to Contact
http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2003/11/dsquared.htm
design of the Web site can be argued to be a compilation of literary
artistic works. An Austrian court considered that the
layout of a Web
the result of creative work similar to the work of a graphic artist and
the Web site design. Re: The layout of a Web
Site [2003]
ECC 3, p13, The Austrian Federal Supreme Court held that there was
an infringement
of copyright in the Web site design where the
defendant’s Web designer created a Web site, which in all
was the same as the plaintiffs. The court stated that
protection is conditional on the work being individual and original.
must stand out from the everyday. The creator of the work must show
characteristics, particularly through the visual
composition and
working out
of ideas and that graphics are copyright protected only if they are
individual and original in that sense
– That this applies to
the layout of
a Web site. Copyright protection depends on it being an individual
is more likely to be available the more complex the
construction of
the Web site – at [15-18] & [22].
publishers settle
pop-up ads lawsuit 10 February 2003 and Gator-style 'parasite on the
wins pop-up ad ruling, 03/07/03
Masons Lawyers,
www.out-law.com
United Parcel
Service, the world's biggest
delivery company filed an action in September 2002 in Georgia, operates
site that does
not have third-party advertising. A particular objection
pop-up ads was that ads for competitors were showing up on the UPS
through the operation of the Gator software.
Pop-up ads to
court - Company files suit to prevent possible ban, Susan Decker
and Katherine Reynolds Lewis 9/11/02 www.sanmateocountrytimes.com
software allows Web users to store information and passwords to assist
in the logging onto Web sites.
publishers settle pop-up ads
lawsuit 10/02/03 & Gator-style 'parasite on the Web' wins
pop-up ad ruling,
03/07/03 Masons
Lawyers, www.out-law.com
279 F Supp. 2d
November 19, 2003 (03-cv-71906)
United States District Court
- Eastern District of Michigan.
Civ. 8048 (DAB) (2003).
The complaint
is posted at:
http://www.whenusucks.com/documents/uhaul_complaint.pdf
Supp. 2d 723
, 728 (E.D. Va., 2003).
November 19,
2003 (03-cv-71906)
United States District Court - Eastern District of Michigan.
defendant describes as ‘contextual marketing’ to
consumers who have
demonstrated some interest in a particular
product or service by
visiting a Web
site. See [13] – [16].
& Conclusion of Law II – at page 39.
That WhenU has
incorporated the plaintiffs’ Web site into a new
“derivative
work” (as defined in 17 U.S.C. §101).
See Conclusion
– A – at page 59.
See Conclusion
of Law II – A
– at page 40.
See Conclusion
of Law II – A – 1
– at page 41.
See Conclusion
of Law II – A – 2 a
– at page 43 - 46.
See Conclusion
of Law II – A – 2 b
– at page 46 – 47.
identify the category of
goods or services the Web user is interested in so that an appropriate
“contextually relevant
advertisement” can be sent
user’s computer.
See Conclusion
of Law II – A – 2 c
– at page 47.
– [120] & See Conclusion of Law
II – B- at page 51 – 59.
(SDNY 02 Civ.
At page 41. The Lanham Act
prohibiting the use in commerce,
without consent, of any “registered mark in connection with
offering for sale, distribution or advertising of any goods,”
that is likely to cause confusion - 15 USC §
1114 (1) (1). The
prohibits the infringement of any unregistered common law trademark -
§ 1125 (a) (1)
At pages 44,
51, 52 & 59.
pages 40 and 41.
At page 73.
At pages 85 and
pages 34 – 35 and 38.
At page 79.
See Note 22,
of Judgment. Note 23 describes a subsequent change of the wording of
ad to state, “This is
a WhenU offer and is not sponsored or
displayed by
the Web site you are visiting”.
At page 75.
(E.D. Mich.
279 F Supp. 2d 723
, 728 (E.D. Va.
Note 43, at page 44.
279 F Supp. 2d
, 728 (E.D. Va., 2003).
November 19,
2003 (03-cv-71906) United States District Court - Eastern District
of Michigan.
(S.D.N.Y. 02
Civ. 8048 (DAB) (2003).
Abrasive Products Ltd v International General Electric Co
[1975] 1 WLR
Compaq Computer Corp v Dell Computer Corp
[1992] FSR 93
; Juniper Unit
Managers Ltd v Johnson Fry Asset Managers plc (19/4/00) QBD
(Unreported); DSG
Retail v Comet Group plc
[2002] FSR 58
, 899 (HC Ch).
Australia P/L v Gillette P/L (No 4) (2000) ATPR 41-751. (FCA) and on
Gillette v Energiser Au P/L
[2002] FCAFC 223
(2002) 56 IPR 1.
v Dyson Appliances Ltd (1999) Times LR, Feb 8. Trade libel and trade
infringement - Dispute between rival vacuum cleaner
manufacturers.
Mitre 10 (NZ)
Ltd v Benchmark Building Supplies Ltd (HC Auckland) 17/3/03,
Rodney Hansen J: Trade Mark & copyright infringement
breaches of the
Fair Trading Act (NZ).
Energiser Au P/L
[2002] FCAFC 223
(2002) 56 IPR 1
– [22] Heerey J.
protect spyware, Chris Wheham, 26/4/01, www.salon.com. The parasite
Damien Cave, 2/8/01, www.salon.com. Spyware
vs.anti-spyware, Damien
26/4/02, www.salon.com.
traffic through a Web site in order
to detect which pages gets the most visitors.
‘spammers’ to know whether an email has been opened
confirming the address is valid in order
to send future spam to that
See “NAI Releases
“Web Bug: Guidelines”,
Brian Morrisey, November 26, 2000, www.internetnews.com The National
Advertising
Initiative (NAI) a coalition of US online as network
operators and
ad servers has issued voluntary guidelines for how Web sites and
should use ‘Web bugs’ (or “Web
beacons’ as described
Trials set for Intel's embedded
security, By Michael Kanellos
& Tim Clark. 22/1/99,
http://news.com.com/2100-1017-220536.html?legacy=cnet
principal business of online profiling companies is "delivering
advertising that can be tailored to consumers' declared
or predicted
characteristics or preferences." CDT’s Guide to online
Getting Started: Online Tracking FAQ
http://www.cdt.org/privacy/guide/start/track.html
US Cases in
dealing with Cookies & Web Bugs are summarised at
http://profs.1p.findlaw.com/privacy/1f.html. See also Collier
Scott, http://www.colshan.com/
Serial Number Questions
Answers: http://www.intel.com/support/processors/pentiumiii/psqa.htm
Complaint to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) In the matter of Intel
III Processor Serial Number, February 26, 1999
http://www.cdt.org/privacy/issues/pentium3/990226intelcomplaint.shtml,
Supplemental Material, April 8, 1999,
http://www.cdt.org/privacy/issues/pentium3/990408intelcomplaintsupp.shtml
Complaint to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) In the matter of Intel
III Processor Serial Number, February 26, 1999
http://www.cdt.org/privacy/issues/pentium3/990226intelcomplaint.shtml,
Supplemental Material, April 8, 1999,
http://www.cdt.org/privacy/issues/pentium3/990408intelcomplaintsupp.shtml
The FTC subsequent held a public workshop considering online privacy in
See http://www.cdt.org/privacy/FTC/profiling/
Intel® processor serial number control utility is a
Windows® program
that enables or disables the reading of the
Pentium III processor
serial number
by software. This allows users to control which software programs or
have permission
to read the processor's serial number and ensures that
preference for the processor serial number setting is enforced. The
default setting of the utility is to disable the reading of the
processor serial
http://www.intel.com/support/processors/pentiumiii/psover.htm
http://www.cdt.org/resourcelibrary/Privacy/Tools/Browser_Test/ Snoop
test: http://snoop.cdt.org/ Privacy.Net test: http://www.privacy.net/
CDT’s Guide to online privacy – Getting Started:
Online Tracking
FAQ http://www.cdt.org/privacy/guide/start/track.html
fair information practices www.ftc.gov. The practices of online
companies were also the subject of a public
workshop sponsored by the
November 8, 1999 http://www.cdt.org/privacy/FTC/profiling/
http://www.ftc.gov/reports/privacy2000/privacy2000.pdf
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2000/06/onlineprofilingreportjune2000.pdf
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2000/07/onlineprofiling.htm
Noah Blumofe
Pharmatrak, Inc; Global Communications, Inc; Pfizer, Inc (and other
pharmaceutical companies)
9, 18 (1st Cir. 2003) - on appeal
F. Supp 2d 4
, 12 (D. Mass. 2002).
DirectTV, Inc v
Tim Spokish, (Case No 6:03-cv-680-Orl-22DAB) US DC, Middle District of
Florida, Orlando Division (19 February
2004), which cites Pharmatrak
analysis of
the elements of 18 U.S.C. §2511 (1) (a) related to the
interception of
pay satellite
television signals.
DoubleClick, Inc Privacy
154 F. Supp. 2d 479
9S.D.N.Y. 2001. See also the Agreement
the Attorneys General of the States of Arizona, California,
Connecticut,
Massachusetts,
Michigan, New Jersey, New Mexico, New Your, Vermont
Washington and Doubleclick, Inc (2002) www.findlaw.com
165 F. Supp. 2d.
1153 (W.D. Wash 2001).
Griggs-Ryan
[1990] USCA1 265
(1st Cir. 1990).
Berry v Funk
[1998] USCADC 161
146 F. 3d 1003 (D.C.
1998) - Internal quotations omitted.
case at page
Berry v Funk
[1998] USCADC 161
146 F. 3d 1003
1011 (D.C. Cir. 1998).
L.M. Berry & Co
[1983] USCA11 510
704 F. 2d 577
, 581 (11th Cir. 1983).
‘Communication’ being defined in s. 6 to include
“conversation
and a message, and any part of a conversation or
message, whether: (a)
form of: … (ii) data …”
107A – 107D
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
(Cth), with
Telecommunications Act 1997
(Cth) also dealing with the use and
disclosure of information intercepted while passing over a network or
telecommunications facility
regulated by that Act.
http://www.privacy.gov.au/publications/is18_03_print.html
http://europa.eu
(2002/58/EC).
Web bugs, hidden
identifiers" and "other similar devices" that can enter the user's
without the user's knowledge
to access information, store hidden
information or
trace the user's activities (Recital 24).
cookies law in
force today in UK 11/12/03 Masons Lawyers http://www.out-
law.com/php/page.php?page_id=spamandcookieslaw1071144231&area=news
www.dataprotection.gov.uk
sites, which allow
‘hacking’ or ‘cracking’
security measures, are an
additional way in which credit
card information and personal
information can be
obtained be obtained by people with the skill and the motivation to
theft’ and subsequent fraudulent activity
identity of other people.
See the FTC
information “ID Theft:
When Bad Things Happen To Your Good Name”-
http://www.consumer.gov/idtheft/ Identify
Theft, Federal Reserve Bank
Boston http://www.bos.frb.org/consumer/identity/idtheft.htm Department
Justice – Identify
Theft and Fraud information -
http://www.privacyrights.org/identity.htm Privacy Rights Clearing House
http://www.privacyrights.org/identity.htm
Identity Theft Resource
http://www.idtheftcenter.org/
http://www.crimecommission.gov.au/
See also the
Joint Statutory
Committee on the Australian Crime Commission (formerly the Joint
Committee on
the National Crime Authority)
http://www.aph.gov.au/Senate/committee/acc_ctte/,
which in 2003 reviewed recent trends and practices in Cybercrime.
http://www.aph.gov.au/Senate/committee/acc_ctte/cybercrime/index.htm
submission No. 23 to the Joint Statutory Committee on the Australian
Crime Commission.
http://www.aph.gov.au/Senate/committee/acc_ctte/cybercrime/submissions/sublist.htm
Phishing protection for banks, Mark Sunner, Chief Technology Officer of
MessageLabs, 15/04/2004, http://www.out-
law.com/php/page.php?page_id=phishingprotection1082046132&area=news
IDD dumping causing havoc for dial-up Internet users, Telephone
Ombudsman 17/12/03
http://www.tio.com.au/media_statements/RELEASES/2003/release_10.htm
rebukes Australian Internet dumping prevention plan”
& “Internet
dumping burning unsuspected consumers”
November 26, 2002
www.zdnet.com.au
charge a fee per minute for Internet
access, otherwise the costs of the user’s access, the cost of
the call to
ISP (which may be an un-timed local call) and the cost ISP charges
to user for access to the Internet.
program, called an
“auto-dialler” may be downloaded, without the
knowledge, onto the user’s
“auto-dialler” program may provide cause of
window to appear asking if the user wants to continue
However the
users may remain ignorant as to the effect of clicking the
‘yes’ button on the pop-up window.
'190' number.
Australian Communications Authority (ACA) is the
regulator of the Australian telecommunications system under the
Telecommunications Act 1997
telephone companies
– the “Carriers” (such as Telstra and
Optus) and other
telephone service providers licensed
Telecommunications Act
DCITA Media Release 13/3/03
– Government Directs ACA on
Internet Dumping www.dca.gov.au The new measures have been developed
to consumer concern about the practice of Internet dumping and
unexpected high
bills for premium rate services. Premium
rate services are content
provided on the 190 number range or through 0011 (international)
numbers. 'Internet dumping' occurs
when, without the user's knowledge
or consent,
Internet dialler software transfers users from their current Internet
(ISP) - which they have usually accessed using an untimed
local call -
to a premium rate telephone number. Most content services
of this kind
accessed in Australia through the 190 premium rate number range. The
will require telecommunications
carriers to bar access to premium rate
provided through 190 numbers where the total premium rate bill exceeds
per month. Consumers will be able to opt out of this scheme, but
the first instance the call cap will apply to all residential
Australia. The level of this cap will set by the ACA, subject to
consultation. The ACA will also ensure telephone
companies inform their
customers about the risks associated with premium rate services, and
pre-emptive action they can take
to protect themselves from unexpected
bills. The Government has also directed the ACA to investigate, as a
other measures to address consumer concerns about unexpected
bills and access to Internet diallers, including whether the premium
service providers' self regulatory code of practice should be
registered under
Telecommunications Act 1997
. Registration would allow the ACA to
enforce the
code through remedial directions. Premium rate service providers in
already subject to a self- regulatory code of practice that deals
supply and advertising of premium rate, telephone sex
and Internet
services using 190 numbers, as well as complaints handling
procedures.”
adopted from the Monty Python’s Flying
Circus song (John Cleese, Michael Palin, et al), which is little more
repartition of the word “Spam”, itself the brand
name for canned
meat owned by Hormel Foods of Austin, Minnesota. Extracts
lyrics of the
Monty Python song can be found at - Spam is luncheon meat, not e-mail,
www.out- law.com
And Professions Code, Section 17538.4 As amended by Assembly Bill 1676
(approved by Governor September
26, 1998) 17538.4. (a) No person or
conducting business in this state shall facsimile (fax) or cause to be
electronically
mail (e-mail) or cause to be e-mailed, documents
consisting of
unsolicited advertising material for the lease, sale, rental, gift
other disposition of any realty, goods, services, or extension of
credit unless
pursue spam case, 31/3/03
www.zdnet.com.au
http://scaleplus.law.gov.au/html/bills/0/2003/0/2003091906.htm
Coalition Against Unsolicited Bulk Email, Australia
http://www.caube.org.au/australia.htm
States set to
legalise spanning on 1 January
2004 http://www.spamhaus.org/news.lasso?article=150
cookies law in force today in UK 11/12/03 Masons Lawyers
http://www.out-
law.com/php/page.php?page_id=spamandcookieslaw1071144231&area=news
Britain bungles anti-spam law
http://www.spamhaus.org/news.lasso?article=11
County Court,
30 October 2000, Judge Schott (unreported). Discussed by Amin El-
“Australian Spam Legislation”,
University of
Western Sydney 2003
(unpublished).
Mortgage Scam Halted
http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2003/12/30mm2.htm In January 2003, the FTC filed
complaint in U.S. District
court charging that 30 Minute Mortgage Inc.
and maintained Web sites where it advertised “3.95% 30 Year
and described itself as a “national
lender.” The FTC charged that the company urged potential
customers to
detailed online loan applications that included such
information as
social security numbers, income, and assets. The company assured
consumers that
their sensitive information would be protected because it would be
transmitted using Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) technology.
alleged that
30 Minute Mortgage was not a “national mortgage
lender” and did
not offer 3.95% 30-year loans. Instead,
the company allegedly sold or
offered to sell thousands of completed applications to non-affiliated
parties without consumers’
consent. The FTC also alleged that
consumers’ sensitive personal and financial information was
not protected
in transmission
because the Web sites at times did not use SSL or other
encryption technology."
FTC Settles
with Two Florida Spammers,
Reuters, 9/12/03
http://story.news.yahoo.com/news?tmpl=story&cid=582&e=2&u=/nm/20031209/wr_nm/tech_spa
At [29] – [31]
applying Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v
Telstra Corporation Ltd (2002) 119 FCR 491.
referring to
Principle 1 of the NPPs.
The Ancient Doctrine of Trespass
to Web Sites, Trotter Hardy,
1996 Online L. article 7.
www.wm.edu/law/publications/jol/95_96/hardy.html
through trespass to goods, Rollo T
(2001) 8 PLPR 77.
Developments
in Australian Spam Law, Jeremy Malcolm http://www.isoc-
au.org.au/Spam/SpamLaw.html
[1946] HCA 46
[1993] FSR 168.
[1946] HCA 46
[1946] HCA 46
(1946) 74 CLR 204.
The bottles
had the words upon them, in raised
letters moulded upon the glass: "This bottle is the property of
Penfolds Wines
or "This bottle always remains the property of Penfolds Wines
Dixon J stating: “In
English law what amounts to an
infringement upon the possessory and proprietary rights of the owner of
chattel personal is a question still governed by categories of specific
wrong. Trespass was the wrong upon which reliance appeared
to be placed
in support of the appeal when it was opened, but, in the end, it seemed
conceded that this cause of action was
untenable. I think that it is
quite clear
that trespass would not lie for anything which the foregoing facts
Trespass is
a wrong to possession. But, on the part of the respondent,
was never any invasion of possession. At the time he filled the
bottles his
brother left with him, he himself was in possession of them. If the
bottles had
been out of his own possession and
in the possession of some other
person, then
to lift the bottles up against the will of that person and to fill them
have amounted to trespasses. The reason is that the movement
bottles and the use of them as receptacles are invasions of the
possession of
the second person. But they are things which the man possessed of the
may do without committing trespass. The
respondent came into possession
bottles without trespass. For his brother delivered possession to him
bottles specifically
in question. In the same way, if any other
customer ever
left bottles of the appellant with him for wine to be poured into them,
customers must have similarly delivered possession of the bottles to
the respondent. His possession of the appellants' bottles
never trespassory”.
The tort of
‘passing off’ was
not a cause of action at issue in the appeal.
recover damages from a person who has taken goods or property from its
owner http://www.thefreedictionary.com/trespass
“It is pointed out in Salmond on Torts, 10th ed. (1945), pp.
279, 280, by
W. T. S. Stallybrass, that there
are three distinct methods in which
may deprive another of his property. 1, by wrongly taking it; 2, by
it; and 3, by wrongly disposing of it; and that corresponding
three modes of wrongful deprivation there were three distinct
provided by the law: —1, trespass de bonis asportatis, for
taking; 2, detinue, for wrongful detention;
and 3, trover, for wrongful
conversion (that is to say disposal).”
with force and
arms resulting in injury to another’s person or
property http://www.hyperdictionary.com/dictionary/trespass+viet+armis
No. 1390/1987 Judgment No. A34/1995
[1995] TASSC 62
(1995) Aust Torts Reports 81-349
(S.D. Ohio 1997) 962 F.
Corporation v Ken Hamidi S103781 Superior Court No.
1997) 962 F. Supp.1015.
Super. Ct No
98S05067 CofA State of California, 3rd Appellate District –
Sacramento - 10 December 2001. Appeal heard in the
Supreme Court of
California on 2nd March 2003.
1998) 24 F. Supp.
, 550-551; AOL v LCGM (ED. Va
1998) 46 F. Supp. 444
, 449; Compuserve
–v- Cyberpromotions (S.D. Ohio 1997) 962 F. Supp.1015.
Bidder’s Edge (N. D. Cal.
2000) 100 F. Supp. 2d 1058):
Register.com
v Verio (SDNY
2000) 126 F. Supp. 2d 1058
, 1066, 1071 The grant of an
preliminary injunction was up-held on appeal to the 2nd U.S. Circuit
Appeals: 2nd Circuit Upholds
Injunction on Web Hosting Firm, Mark
January 27, 2004, New York Law Journal
http://biz.yahoo.com/law/040127/37279d61f112d3b96d1be8ef3b993aa5_1.html
Arising under the First Amendment of the US
Constitution
See information
at www.eff.org
Corporation v Ken Hamidi S103781 Superior Court
No. 98AS05067.
Intel cannot
use trespass law to block e-mail,
01/07/2003 Masons Lawyers, www.out-law.com
1997) 962 F.
Derived from
the writ of trespass vi et armis.
Lathan CJ in
Penfolds Wines v Elliott
[1946] HCA 46
(1946) 74 CLR 204
stating, “[a] mere
taking or asportation of a chattel may be a trespass without the
of any material damage.”
Zeeman J expressing the same opinion
Russell Ashby Pargiter v Vincent Harley Alexander No. 1390/1987
Judgment No.
[1995] TASSC 62
(1995) Aust Torts Reports 81-349
(1995) 5 Tas R 158
The terms ‘data
warehousing’ and ‘data
mining’ have emerged to describe the storage and analysis of
in order to deduce valuable
‘information’ from
the database.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter