URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/FedJSchol/2023/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:57:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Logan, Justice John --- "Judicial accountability - new developments and threats" (FCA) [2023] FedJSchol 7
[E]very Commonwealth member must continuously pose itself the question: how well does it observe the separation of powers? Do our
Executives respect the freedom of the Legislature and the Judiciary to discharge their responsibilities?
Theirs, of course is the greatest temptation to jettison these Principles aEUR" and there was a time, perhaps a generation ago, when
many Legislatures and Judiciaries wilfully complied with over-reaching Executives. In other words, they didnaEURtmt properly believe
in their own independence and power, as a key element of the sharing of power.
of us, from time immemorial, power has been difficult to separate, and thereby to control. All are complicit, and in being so make
ourselves dangerously vulnerable to poor governance, corruption and instability.
[Emphasis in original]
Secretary-General SharmaaEURtms understanding highlights an enduring hazard presented by undivided sovereign power. His observations
are hardly idiosyncratic or even unique to the Commonwealth. What is of profound importance about Secretary-General SharmaaEURtms
observations is his affirmation that the hazard mentioned, and means of addressing it via adherence to the Latimer House principles,
is not confined in relevance to the developed world.
One of the founders of an independent United States of America, was the 18
century statesman, Alexander Hamilton. He had experience of what he perceived as despotic, as opposed to representative, government
in the pre-revolution, fiscal administration of Great BritainaEURtms American colonies. In his Federation Paper, aEURoeThe Judiciary
DepartmentaEUR, Hamilton wrote with respect to that department of government, aEURoeIn a monarchy it is an excellent barrier to the
despotism of the prince; in a republic it is a no less excellent barrier to the encroachments and oppressions of the representative
body. And it is the best expedient which can be devised in any government, to secure a steady, upright, and impartial administration
of the laws.aEUR
The sense of grievance that informed Hamilton and his fellow revolutionaries was their understanding that, as British subjects resident
in the then American colonies, they were being denied rights enjoyed by those resident in Great Britain which had by then come about
there as a sequel to the constitutional and political compact, often termed a Westminster system of government, that had followed
cataclysmic events in the British Isles in the 17
It is that compact which has been taken up in the separation of powers found in the national constitutions of Australia, Papua New
Guinea and other members of the Commonwealth. Each national constitution is based on an acceptance that that system is a proven,
effective check on abuse of sovereign power.
Therefore, no discussion of judicial accountability or of related threats to judicial independence is complete without understanding
how that compact came about. I shall explore this topic in detail shortly. First it is desirable to reflect about the nature of power.
Separation of Powers: Westminster origins
Famously and in relation to the possession and exercise of power generally, the British politician and historian, John Dalberg-Acton,
1st Baron Acton opined in his 19
century correspondence with Bishop Creighton about the moral dilemmas presented by writing a history of the Inquisition conducted
by the Roman Catholic Church, aEURoePower tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely.aEUR
It may be that Lord ActonaEURtms view as to the tendency of power to corrupt is too absolute. Modern psychological studies of human
behavioural characteristics suggest that the conferral of power on an individual is not universally conducive to moral corruption
and worse, but instead heightens pre-existing ethical tendencies. So it may be that the rationale for an independent exercise of
judicial power is to address a tendency rather than a certainty of abuse of absolute sovereign power. It is elementary history that
not all dictators are, or at least remain, benign.
What then were cataclysmic events in 17
century Great Britain and the constitutional and political compact which followed? As will be seen, in those events are exemplified
enduring human behavioural tendencies in the exercise of power which make it impossible reasonably to dismiss the resultant compact
as a neo-colonial irrelevancy.
I shall do that which shall be fit for a judge to do
A sequel to the Norman invasion of England in 1066 was the concentration of sovereign power in a monarch, King William I, known as
William the Conqueror, and his successors. By the 17
century, the practical and also political impossibility of all aspects of such power being exercised personally by the monarch, or
even the monarch assisted by his or her appointed councillors, had seen aspects of that power at least in part devolved, the legislative
to a parliament and the judicial to persons learned in the law appointed to courts established by the monarch. Nonetheless, the view
persisted under the early Stuart kings, King James I (in Scotland, King James VI) and his son, King Charles I that the holding of
kingship was a Divine Right, which necessarily conferred monarchical supremacy such that a monarch could, if so disposed, dispense
at will with either parliament or judges and govern alone.
I highlighted particular events concerning relations between these early Stuart kings and the judiciary in relation to the exercise
of judicial power, and accountability for its exercise in a paper which I delivered in 2016 at a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
Seminar. The following account of those events is taken from that paper.
In 1607, King James purported himself to adjudicate and pronounce upon a controversy between parties. That controversy and the KingaEURtms
ability himself to resolve it came before Coke in the Court of Common Pleas in what is known as the
Case of Prohibitions
. Coke overturned the KingaEURtms judgement, holding, aEURoeThe King in his own person cannot adjudge any case, either criminal or
betwixt party and party; but it ought to be determined and adjudged in some Court of Justice, according to the law and custom of
England.aEUR
In 1610, Chief Justice Coke was summoned to appear before the KingaEURtms Privy Council. There he was requested to furnish a legal
opinion on the subject of whether the King might, by proclamation, as opposed to Act of Parliament, prohibit new buildings in London,
or the making of starch or wheat. This subject had been referred to the King by the House of Commons as a grievance and as supposedly
against law. Coke requested and was granted time to consult his fellow judges, such was the importance of the question.
CokeaEURtms answer, which represented the collective view of the judges, has come to be known as the
Case of Proclamations
. That answer included the following pronouncements:
aEURoethe King by his proclamation of other ways cannot change any part of the common law, or statute law, or the customs of the realmaEUR;
aEURoethe King cannot create any offence by his prohibition or proclamation, which was not an offence before, for that was to change
the law, and to make an offence which was notaEUR.
These and other pronouncements as to the role and independence of the judiciary did not endear Coke to King James. At that time, judges
did not enjoy security of tenure. They served at the pleasure of the King. Initially, Coke was transferred from the Court of Common
Pleas to be the Chief Justice of the Court of KingaEURtms Bench. That was probably because the jurisdiction of the latter court was
concerned with individual rights whereas that of the former was with the rights of the Crown. The transfer, so it was thought, gave
Coke less opportunity to vex the King by his assertions of judicial independence.
In 1616, came the
Case of Commendams
. The name of that case is taken from the use by the King of an
in commendam writ
as a means of transferring income producing ecclesiastical property belonging to a bishophric to a Bishop while at the same time
relieving the holder of that office from having in person to perform the duties of that office and allowing another to perform them
in place of the bishop. The writ was a convenient means of rewarding those who deferred to the King. King James used such a writ
to allow one Richard Neile to hold office as the Bishop of Coventry and enjoy the income from two properties associated with that
bishophric without performing personally the duties of that office. The grant of the property to Bishop Neile by the King was contested
before the Court of KingaEURtms Bench by two individuals who claimed that the property in question belonged to them. The case touched
on the KingaEURtms prerogative to issue
in commendam writs
Coke and his fellow KingaEURtms Bench judges were about to hear the case when, on behalf of King James, his Attorney-General, Francis
Bacon, appeared to assert the prerogative of
Rege inconsulto
[that the King has the power to advise judges before they rule] and ordered them to stay the proceedings until His Majesty advised
them. Instead, the judges proceeded to hear and determine the case, holding that the
in commendam writ
procedure was illegal. The judges thereafter sent a letter to King James in which they stated aEURoein case any letters come unto
us contrary to law, we do nothing by such letters, but certify your Majesty thereof, and go forth to do the law notwithstanding the
sameaEUR. The judges were then summoned before the King who ripped up their letter in front of them, stating that aEURoeI well know
the true and ancient common law to be the most favourable to Kings of any law in the world, to which law I do advise you my Judges
to apply your studiesaEUR. While all the other judges were repentant, Coke maintained the position stated in the letter, informing
the King aEURoeWhen the case happens I shall do that which shall be fit for a judge to doaEUR. For this defiance of Royal authority,
Coke was dismissed from his office as Chief Justice of the Court of KingaEURtms Bench.
King JamesaEURtm assertion, and exercise, of a purported power to summon judges before him to explain their judicial determinations,
and a related power to dismiss them if he deemed that explanation or the determination to be unacceptable to him offers a paradigm
example of an assertion that the judiciary is accountable to the executive.
King James successor, his son King Charles I, persisted in his fatheraEURtms beliefs that both the judiciary and parliament were accountable
to him for the exercise of judicial and legislative powers respectively, and that he could dispense with either or each and govern
alone at will. History instructs that, after his defeat in a vicious civil war between his forces and those of parliament, King Charles
I paid for such beliefs with his life. Yet history also instructs that regicide and the republican ideal soon evolved in mid-17
century Great Britain into the military dictatorship of Lord Protector Cromwell, backed by the New Model Army.
As I also recalled in that Commonwealth Parliamentary Association paper, on CromwellaEURtms death, peace was preserved by a restoration
of the monarchy but on terms that, over the course of the reign of King Charles II and his successors, led to an acknowledgement
of the supremacy of parliament within the field of its legislative competence and to the affirmation of the separate role of an independent
judiciary by express provision for the continued tenure in office of judges, subject to capacity and good behaviour. The instruments
by which these features of what has proved to be an enduringly successful system of government were enshrined were:
The Declaration of Breda of 4 April 1660, by which King Charles II undertook, if restored to power, to issue a general pardon for
crimes committed during the Civil War and the period of the Protectorate for all those who acknowledged him as the lawful monarch;
to uphold the right of those who purchased property during that period to retain that property; religious toleration; to pay arrears
owing to members of the army, and that the army would be reconstituted under the service of the Crown. It was on this basis that
the English Parliament resolved on 2 May 1660 that aEURoegovernment ought to be by King, Lords and CommonsaEUR, which is the essence
of a constitutional monarchy. In this lie the origins of the Westminster system of government in which Ministers appointed by the
Crown or other Head of State hold office only while they enjoy the confidence of parliament.
The Declaration of Rights of 1688, which recited the infractions of King James II of the laws of England during his reign and formed
the basis upon which his successors King William III and Queen Mary II were invited and agreed to accept the Throne in succession
from him. This declaration was later recited and the rights it specified enacted by the English Parliament in the
Bill of Rights 1689
(Eng). Article 9 of the Bill of Rights is the foundation of the freedom of speech in parliament:
Freedom of Speech.
That the Freedom of Speech and Debates or Proceedings in Parliament ought not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place
out of Parliament.aEUR
(as rendered in modern English form)
In conformity with this freedom, courts do not permit the tendering in court of statements made in parliament for the purpose of drawing
an adverse inference against a member of parliament and a member of parliament may not be sued for defamation for statements made
in parliament.
Act of Settlement 1701
(Eng), which provided for the succession to the Throne and for the terms of that succession after the failure of King William and
Queen Mary and their successor, Queen Anne to produce a surviving heir. Clause 7 of Article III of that Act provided:
aEURoeThat after the said Limitation shall take Effect as aforesaid Judges Commissions be made
Quam diu se bene Gesserint
and their Salaries ascertained and established but upon the Address of both Houses of Parliament it may be lawful to remove them.aEUR
Judicial tenure
Quam diu se bene Gesserint
is tenure during good behaviour. It affords the judiciary a tenure not enjoyed by Chief Justice Coke and facilitates the discharge
of the judicial function he defended.
There is nothing uniquely historical or English about officers of the executive asserting a right to hold the judiciary accountable.
Australia and Papua New Guinea: comparative approaches
Papua New Guinea
The troubles
On 12 December 2011, the Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea gave judgment in
Re Reference to
Constitution
section 19(1) by East Sepik Provincial Executive
. At the heart of that case was whether the great architect of Papua New GuineaaEURtms independence and then Prime Minister, Grand
Chief the Rt Hon Sir Michael Somare had, by an absence from three meetings of parliament, forfeited his seat in parliament and thus
also his office as Prime Minister. By majority, the court held that he had not. The corollary of this was a conclusion that the Hon
Peter OaEURtmNeill, who was then at least purporting then to serve as Prime Minister in a government in coalition with the Hon Belden
Namah as Deputy Prime Minister had not been duly elected as Prime Minister.
The members of the majority included the then Chief Justice, Sir Salamo Injia and Justice Nicholas Kirriwom.
A period of high political tension in Papua New Guinea, even turmoil, attended this court case and its aftermath. I gave an account
of the events of this period in a paper which I delivered last year concerning the rule of law in Papua New Guinea. The following
is taken from that account.
In between November 2011 and May 2012, Injia CJ was twice purportedly suspended from office and twice arrested. There was no substance
in any of these purported suspensions and arrest charges. Justice Kirriwom was also arrested, again without any substance in the
According to evidence tendered in a later Leadership Tribunal proceeding,
the circumstances attending the second occasion on which Injia CJ was arrested were particularly dramatic. While the Chief Justice
was engaged in May 2012 in hearing a contempt proceeding at the Law Courts at Waigani, the Hon Belden Namah, accompanied by some
other MPs and some members of the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary and the Defence Force stormed into the courtroom with Mr Namah
aEURoeChief Justice, I want your immediate resignation now. Resign now Chief Justice, your immediate resignation. You are not a credible
person. You are bringing country down. You have got to respect the people of Papua New Guinea. You are only one man, you are bringing
this country down. Arrest him, follow him. Arrest him, arrest him, arrest him. Enough is enough. Enough is enough. Take him straight
to the car.
[ie seize him]. Arrest him. He asked for it, he will get it.aEUR
According to that evidence, the Chief Justice exited the court room. His Associate attempted to close the door behind him but was
injured in this endeavour and the door was forced open by some of the accompanying police officers and soldiers, who then rushed
through searching for the Chief Justice.
Proceedings on the charge against the Chief Justice were in short order stayed and it was later dismissed.
Although this Leadership Tribunal concluded that Mr Namah engaged in misconduct to which the evidence mentioned attested, and made
a recommendation to the Governor-General that Mr Namah be dismissed from office, Papua New GuineaaEURtms National Court later held,
on an application for judicial review of the TribunalaEURtms decision by Mr Namah, that this recommendation had been made without
affording him an opportunity to be heard as to penalty. Further, taking into account delay in the institution of proceedings before
a Leadership Tribunal, that this was the second occasion in which such a proceeding had been brought before such a tribunal, that
the TribunalaEURtms reasons had conflated in a way not able to be disentangled findings as to the occurrence of charged conduct and
penalty, that contempt proceedings against Mr Namah in respect of the same alleged conduct had been discontinued in 2013 and that
Mr Namah had, since the alleged misconduct, twice been re-elected to parliament, the court decided to quash this tribunalaEURtms
decision and recommendation and to permanently stay Leadership Tribunal proceedings in respect of the alleged incident. An appeal
against these orders was subsequently dismissed as an abuse of process.
The position which therefore obtains is that there is no subsisting finding of a court or tribunal on the evidence mentioned that
the Hon Belden Namah was guilty of misconduct.
Also in the period November 2011 to May 2012, Papua New GuineaaEURtms parliament enacted the
Judicial Conduct Act
2012. This provided for a mechanism for the suspension and removal of judges which was not readily reconcilable with the provisions
Constitution
on these subjects. I visited Papua New Guinea for two Supreme Court sittings over this period, in February and in April 2012. How
well I recall the air of tension that pervaded the judicial branch during this period, especially in April 2012. For resident judges,
their very livelihood and lifeaEURtms vocation in the Law was in jeopardy via the Judicial Conduct Act. And how enduring is my admiration
for the way in which the PNG judiciary continued independently to do justice according to law. Business as usual, in those unusual
The aftermath
Since 2012, Papua New Guinea has again held national elections in 2017 and 2022. Over this period, government has changed, based on
an ability to command a majority in parliament. Moreover, in the immediate aftermath of the death in 2021 of Sir Michael Somare,
the Hon Belden Namah made a fulsome and public apology for his behaviour in that period of tension in 2011 to 2012 in and in relation
to Sir Michael Somare, Sir Salamo Injia and the judiciary generally. So, too, did the Hon Peter OaEURtmNeill tender a public apology
for his part in the political impasse which occurred as a sequel to the Supreme CourtaEURtms decision. In 2013, the PNG Parliament
also repealed the Judicial Conduct Act.
Other examples but to no different effect of such overt and dramatic assertions of judicial accountability to the executive might
be drawn from the shared experience of the Commonwealth in modern times.
In the Commonwealth, any assertion that the judiciary is responsible to the executive for its decisions is met, as I have mentioned,
by constitutional provision to the contrary.
In Australia, judicial accountability is solely via a procedure for removal from office by the Governor-General in Council but only
aEURoeon an address from both Houses of the Parliament in the same session, praying for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour
or incapacityaEUR. That accountability mechanism is a direct legacy of the security of judicial tenure for which the Act of Settlement
Papua New GuineaaEURtms constitution also provides for removal of the senior judiciary from office on the ground of misbehaviour or
incapacity. However, taking up an assessment by Papua New GuineaaEURtms Founding Fathers about the stage of national development
as at Independence in 1975, the constitutional accountability mechanism which commended itself to the people of Papua New Guinea
in respect of judicial behaviour was to consign the making of a value judgement as to whether there are aEURoegood grounds for removingaEUR
the judge concerned to a tribunal consisting of three presently serving or former judges of the Supreme Court or the National Court
or aEURoeof a court of unlimited jurisdiction of a country with a legal system similar to that of Papua New Guinea, or of a court
to which an appeal from such a court liesaEUR.
Papua New Guinea has had occasion to constitute such a tribunal to investigate and report upon alleged judicial misconduct (alleged
gross delay in delivery of reserved judgements). However, the judge concerned resigned before the tribunal had completed its investigation
thereby removing occasion for any furtherance of that investigation by that tribunal. It proved unnecessary, in light of its expeditious
repeal, for the validity of a separate accountability mechanism in Papua New GuineaaEURtms Judicial Conduct Act ever to be judicially
determined.
Federal and constitutional dilemma
That same irreconcilability objection has not yet been voiced, and perhaps never will be, in relation to a current proposal by the
Australian Government to establish a judicial accountability mechanism beyond that enshrined in the Australian
Constitution
. The Australian government has signified in principle support for a federal judicial commission of some sort. It has released a discussion
paper as a sequel to an Australian Law Reform Commission Report (ALRC) which recommended the establishment of a federal judicial
commission. The ALRC did not recommend any particular model for that commission.
In the governmentaEURtms discussion paper, it is stated:
Proponents of an independent complaints body have argued that it would promote judicial accountability by providing a more accessible,
structured and transparent procedure for complaints to be raised and dealt with.
In its submission to the 2021 ALRC inquiry, the Australian Bar Association expressed the view that, aEUR~[a]bsent a federal judicial
commission, there is no readily available, independent of the court recourse for improper behaviour on the part of the federal judiciaryaEURtm.
[Footnote references omitted]
Insofar as the quoted view of the Australian Bar Association (ABA) might be thought to suggest that there is
existing mechanism for addressing federal judicial misbehaviour, that view is incorrect, for reasons already given. Ever since the
several Australian colonies federated and gained independence from the United Kingdom on 1 January 1901 there has been the constitutionally
ordained mechanism mentioned namely, a parliamentary value judgement that misbehaviour by a particular judge has been proved and
a consequential address by each House to the Governor-General praying for the removal from office of that judge. But the emphasis
in the ABA submission is, I think, on aEURoereadily availableaEUR.
Seemingly implicitly, the view has been taken by the ABA, and highlighted by the Australian government in the discussion paper, that
correspondence to a member of the national parliament, or the presentation by members of the public of a petition to parliament promoting
a case for a judgeaEURtms removal via the constitutionally ordained mechanism is not aEURoereadily availableaEUR to any Australian.
Some, with respect, might see such a view of the accessibility of members of the national parliament to Australians as odd. But it
is hardly a unique view in Australia. Notwithstanding that their processes for removal of judges are also ultimately parliamentary,
judicial commissions of one sort or another, charged with the initial handling of complaints in respect of conduct by State judicial
officers, have been established in most Australian States.
Perhaps it is that the contemporary attraction in the Australian political class and the ALRC for judicial commissions stems from
a recognition of a deficiency in civic education and understanding about the ability of parliament to remove a judge and the related
accessibility of a member of parliament. Perhaps it lies in an acceptance that, however this may be, there is no general public confidence
that the political class would, without more, react to such a complaint. Or there may be other reasons, for example, an acknowledgement
that the other demands on the time of the political class are such that it would just not be practical for them to investigate and
report on a complaint of judicial misbehaviour. Whatever the reasons, there is no denying that judicial commissions have been seen
by many legislatures as conducive to maintaining public confidence in the judiciary by the general public by providing a mechanism
for supporting parliaments to hold judges to account for misbehaviour (or incapacity).
While the model for a federal judicial commission, and perhaps whether there will be one, has yet to be settled, there is no suggestion
either in the ALRC report, or the governmentaEURtms discussion paper, that any commission established would be other than deferential
to the constitution. In other words, the determination of whether there existed proved misbehaviour (or incapacity) would remain
with the parliament.
Under existing Australian law, there is already statutory provision for the appointment, by parliamentary resolution, of a commission
to investigate and report to the parliament upon a specified allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity of a specified Commonwealth
judicial officer. A aEURoeCommonwealth judicial officeraEUR is defined so as to apply to judges of AustraliaaEURtms ultimate appellate
court, the High Court of Australia, and judges of all other courts established under the Australian constitution. Membership of any
such commission must include at least one former judge in a commission of three persons.
There is, and, given the absence of express prescription in that regard in the Australian constitution, probably could not be, any
obligation on the part of parliament to avail itself of a reference to such a commission in dealing with an allegation of misbehaviour
(or incapacity) warranting the removal of a federal judge.
Reasonable minds might perhaps reasonably differ as to whether the present, non-binding Australian provision for the investigation
of alleged judicial misbehaviour, by a commission not even a majority of which need be former judges, or even a former superior court
judge, is or is not better than Papua New GuineaaEURtms constitutionally entrenched, adjudicative tribunal model. Such a tribunal
can be comprised only of currently serving or former superior court judges. In theory, although unlikely in practice, under present
Australian law a commission investigating alleged misbehaviour on the part of a judge of the High Court of Australia might lawfully
comprise one inferior court judge and two adults who finished their formal education without completing secondary school, with questions
being decided by majority.
What constitutes misbehaviour? The Murphy Commission
The current, Australian statutory provision at least has the advantage of being a standing model for the investigation of alleged
judicial misbehaviour (or incapacity). That is in contrast to the
provision for a parliamentary commission of inquiry, adopted by the parliament in respect of the only occasion in respect of which
the subject of alleged misbehaviour by a federal judge warranting removal has arisen for consideration by the Australian parliament.
That concerned alleged misbehaviour by the Honourable Lionel Keith Murphy, then a justice of the High Court of Australia. In contrast
to the current Australian statutory provision, the members of that commission (the Murphy Commission) could only be current or former
Australian superior court judges. Thus, this
model had greater membership affinity with the composition of a Papua New Guinea tribunal than the current Australian standing provision.
As it happened, although the Murphy Commission embarked upon its investigation, Murphy J died in office prior to the completion of
that investigation, thus removing any occasion for any report to parliament by it.
What constitutes misbehaviour for the purposes of the removal of a federal judge under the Australian constitution has never been
the subject of definitive judicial authority. It was, however, addressed in detail in an opinion furnished by the then Australian
Solicitor General to the Australian Senate Select Committee on the Conduct of a Judge, the report of which to the Senate in August
1984 preceded the establishment of the Murphy Commission. The conclusion reached by the Solicitor General was as follows:
Misbehaviour is limited in meaning in
Constitution
to matters pertaining to -
(1) judicial office, including non-attendance, neglect of or refusal to perform duties; and
(2) the commission of an offence against the general law of such a quality as to indicate that the incumbent is unfit to exercise
the office.
Misbehaviour is defined as breach of condition to hold office during good behaviour. It is not limited to conviction in a court of
law. A matter pertaining to office or a breach of the general law of the requisite seriousness in a matter not pertaining to office
may be found by proof, in appropriate manner, to the Parliament in proceedings where the offender has been given proper notice and
opportunity to defend himself.
The Solicitor General accepted, and it must follow from the language employed in the Australian constitution, that parliament retained
a discretion not to resolve to pass an address seeking the removal of a judge, notwithstanding it was satisfied that there misbehaviour
had been proved.
The meaning of aEURoemisbehaviouraEUR proved controversial before the Murphy Commission. Counsel for Murphy J submitted that, as used
in the Australian constitution, it meant:
(a) misconduct in office, and
(b) conviction for an infamous offence.
Each retired judge constituting the Murphy Commission ruled upon this submission and offered related detailed reasons. None accepted
it to be correct. Each was of the opinion that misconduct need not be misconduct in office in order to constitute aEURoemisbehaviouraEUR.
The view of the Murphy CommissionaEURtms presiding member, the Honourable Sir George Lush was, aEURoethe word aEUR~misbehaviouraEURtm
is used in its ordinary meaning, and not in the restricted sense of aEUR~misconduct in officeaEURtm. It is not confined, either,
to conduct of a criminal nature.aEUR He added in respect of judicial conduct, aEURoeIf their conduct, even in matters remote from
their work, is such that it would be judged by the standards of the time to throw doubt on their own suitability to continue in office,
or to undermine their authority as judges or the standing of their courts, it may be appropriate to remove them.aEUR
A like expansive view of what may constitute aEURoemisbehaviouraEUR is evident in the ruling of Sir Richard Blackburn, aEURoeThe material
available for solving this problem of construction suggests that aEUR~proved misbehaviouraEURtm means such misconduct, whether criminal
or not, and whether or not displayed in the actual exercise of judicial functions, as,
being morally wrong
, demonstrates the unfitness for office of the judge in question.aEUR (Emphasis added).
The remaining member of the Murphy Commission, the Honourable Andrew Wells, offered a reflective rationale for his similarly expansive
view of aEURoemisbehaviouraEUR, which is desirably quoted at some length:
The office of judge differs markedly from that of many other public officials. The performance of his duty calls on him to display,
of a high order, the qualities of stability of temperament, moral and intellectual courage and integrity, and respect for the law.
Those and other like qualities of character and fitness for office, if displayed by a judge in the exercise of his judicial function,
are unlikely to be found wanting in his conduct when not acting in office. If they are said to be genuinely possessed and not feigned,
they would stand uneasily with conduct in private affairs that testifies to their absence.
There are, however, other qualities that do not carry the same guarantee of stability, integrity, and respect for the law in private
life. For example, a man may possess profound learning, intellectual adroitness, and an accurate memory, and, by using them, adequately
discharge the duties of many public offices; but, without more, he could not discharge the duties of judicial office.
In short, a manaEURtms moral worth, in general, pervades his life both in and out of office.
It is not surprising to find, therefore, that if, in the general affairs of life beyond his judicial functions, a judge displays aberrations
of conduct so marked as to give grounds for the view that he lacks the qualities fitting him for the discharge of his office, the
question is likely to arise whether he should continue in it. Such a question cannot be resolved without establishing standards of
conduct by reference to which the consequences of proven misconduct may be assessed.
In determining the standard of conduct called for by
, it is both logical and inevitable that regard should be had to the legislative and constitutional framework, referred to above,
At this point, one must be cautious. The
Constitution
was meant to apply to mankind, and it would be unreasonable to require of a judge a standard of extra judicial conduct so stringent
that only a featureless saint could conform to it. It is only to be expected that High Court judges, like everyone else, will vary
in character, temperament and personal philosophy. But there is, I have no doubt, a clear distinction between, say, mere eccentricity
of conduct, or the fervent proclamation of personal views upon sane matter of public concern, on the one hand, and plain impropriety,
on the other.
There may be degrees of departure from wholly acceptable conduct outside the judicial function that fall short of misbehaviour in
the foregoing sense. Without attempting to fix an exhaustive range of categories, it is possible to predicate conduct that is unwise,
or that amounts to a marked, but transient, aberration or a momentary frenzy, or that would be seriously deprecated by other judges
or by the community, but yet would not be so wrong as to attract the condemnation of
Indeed, one may go further, and affirm that there may be conduct of such a kind that, if displayed habitually or on several occasions,
could amount to misbehaviour, within the meaning of
, that nevertheless, if displayed only once or twice, or perhaps on a handful of occasions or in special circumstances, would not.
The issue raised by
would thus appear to pose questions of fact and degree. Somewhere in the gamut of judicial misconduct or impropriety, a High Court
judge's conduct, outside the exercise of his judicial function, that displays unfitness to discharge the duties of his high office
can no longer be condoned, and becomes misbehaviour so clear and serious that the judge guilty of it can no longer be trusted to
do his duty. What he has done then will have destroyed public confidence in his judicial character, and hence in the guarantee that
that character should give that he will do the duty expected of him by the
Constitution
. At that point,
Mr Justice Murphy did institute a proceeding in the High Court concerning the meaning of misbehaviour in s 72 of the Australian
Constitution
but this proceeding was withdrawn by him before it was heard, because by then the imminence of his death, and the related futility
of any report by the Murphy Commission, had become obvious.
Aside from the present standing provision for the establishment by parliament by resolution of a commission to investigate and report
upon alleged misbehaviour warranting removal, the legislation under which federal courts are established presently provides for the
handling by a head of jurisdiction of complaints in respect of aEURoea complaint about the performance by another Judge of his or
her judicial or official dutiesaEUR. In dealing with any such complaint, the head of jurisdiction may be assisted by a aEURoecomplaint
handleraEUR, who need not be a judge.
Quite how this current Australian federal, head of jurisdiction complaint handling mechanism interplays with the constitutional provision
for the removal of judges on grounds confined to proved misbehaviour or incapacity has never been explored in authority. One might
hope that no occasion for any such exploration would ever arise.
Existing checks and balances
The Australian constitution does not envisage any response short of removal for proved misbehaviour on the part of a federal judge.
To trivialise what constitutes judicial misbehaviour is to trivialise the whole rationale for judicial independence as a check on
the exercise of arbitrary or otherwise unlawful power by the executive or the enactment of statutes beyond constitutional legislative
competence by the parliament. Presumably, were a head of jurisdiction to form a view, as a sequel to his or her handling of a complaint,
that another judge of his or her court may have engaged in conduct constituting misbehaviour, that head of jurisdiction would so
inform the Attorney-General, who, if similarly satisfied, would then promote the passing of the requisite resolutions to establish
a commission under the standing statutory provision to investigate and report upon specific allegation of judicial misbehaviour.
The role of the Chief Justice
In respect of complaints and generally in the management of a court, the contemporary Australian federal approach has been to codify
judicial administrative powers which, in my view, are implicit in the office of Chief Justice as
primus inter pares
, first among equals. Thus, in respect of the Federal Court of Australia, there is now express provision for the Chief Justice to
aEURoetake any measures that the Chief Justice believes are reasonably necessary to maintain public confidence in the Court, including,
but not limited to, temporarily restricting another Judge to non-sitting dutiesaEUR. The extent to which there is virtue in stating
what some might see as obvious doubtless depends on the virtue one sees in codification. In no sense, however, is a Chief Justice
a supervisor of subordinates. To some extent, the current provision in respect of complaint handling might encourage a misconception
But it may just encourage a misconception that such a commission has a supervisory role in relation to federal judges.
Constitutionally, in Australia, this can never be. As already noted, each federal judge is responsible solely to parliament and then
only in respect of what parliament adjudges to be proved misbehaviour (or incapacity). At most, all that a federal judicial commission
can do is to draw to parliamentaEURtms attention, in a non-binding way, judicial conduct which that commission considers might amount
to misbehaviour in the constitutional sense.
Accountable to reasons: the appellant jurisdiction
Constitutional accountability and related supporting investigatory mechanisms aside, judges in both Australia and Papua New Guinea
other than at ultimate appellate level are accountable in respect of their judgements via avenues of appeal ordained in law. Further,
in both Australia and in Papua New Guinea, the national ultimate appellate court has a separate, constitutionally entrenched jurisdiction
judicially to review by orders in the nature of prerogative writs the judicial acts of, respectively, other Australian federal courts
or, as the case may be, other Papua New Guinea courts.
At all levels of the judiciaries of both Australia or Papua New Guinea, and be it in the exercise of original or appellate jurisdiction,
in respect of all but the most formal of procedural orders, a judge is obliged to give reasons for the making of an order, either
at a pre-hearing or final stage of a proceeding. Such reasons may be given orally (and permissibly later revised in respect of matters
of grammar or style but not so as to change the substance of the oral reasons) or in writing. Moreover, such reasons for judgement
must be published, usually by via their delivery in open court.
Judges are thus accountable to the law. They explain themselves via their reasons for judgement. Although never as a substitute for
such reasons, so as to increase understanding of those reasons, some well-resourced courts which do not have high caseloads also
choose to publish related short summaries of facts, issues and reasons either in respect of each case or in respect of those assessed
as having an interest wider than that of the parties.
Subject to the issuing of any such explanatory statement, judges speak only via their reasons for judgement as to why particular cases
which they determined were decided in a particular way.
Fixed tenure
In neither Australia nor Papua New Guinea are judges elected. In each instance, this is a deliberate constitutional choice, reflecting
a preference for a tenured rather than elected judiciary. In Australia at the federal level, that tenure is until attaining 70 years
of age. In Papua New Guinea, judicial tenure is measured by a term of years, fixed at the time of appointment, with reappointment
possible and overwhelmingly usual, subject to an overall age limitation aEUR" the attainment of 70 years of age (subject to a limited
discretion to extend an appointment to 75 years of age).
Ever since the Act of Settlement in the early 18
century, the experience in England and in those countries such as Australia and Papua New Guinea which have chosen to adopt a like
judicial system has been that a tenured, rather than elected judiciary, is conducive to judicial independence. In turn, that assurance
of independence has been regarded as essential to public confidence that legal controversies, civil or criminal, great or small will
be resolved according to law and without fear, favour, affection or ill-will be that related to a party or otherwise. In this sense,
no judge in either country is responsible to an electorate for continuance in office.
Contemporary issues
Judicial accountability in the digital age
The observations by the members of the Murphy Commission concerning misbehaviour were made in 1986, before the onset of the internet
and digital age. The ability of any individual to disseminate information near-instantaneously, enduringly and to the world at large
has added a dimension to judicial conduct other than as a judge beyond the contemplation of those who authored those observations.
The experience of now former Associate Chief Justice of the Court of QueenaEURtms Bench of Manitoba (Family Division), Lori Douglas
offers a case in point. That office is a Canadian federal judicial appointment. The basis for removal of a federal judge in Canada
is broadly similar to that which prevails in Australia, Papua New Guinea and elsewhere in the Commonwealth.
Douglas ACJ became the subject of an anonymous complaint to, and subsequent investigation by, the Canadian Judicial Council in respect
of whether alleged conduct might constitute grounds for her removal from office by parliament. The Canadian Judicial Council is an
example of the judicial commission model for dealing with complaints.
The alleged conduct had its origins in consensual sexual conduct in which the then Ms Douglas had engaged, prior to her appointment
to judicial office. The precise allegations made against her are set out in documents published on the CouncilaEURtms website. At
the risk of over-simplification and generalisation, prior to her appointment, photos of her engagement in the conduct concerned had
been posted to the internet by her husband without, Douglas ACJ maintained, her consent. Those photos became part of the background
to a controversy between Douglas ACJaEURtms husband and a third party. Prior to her appointment to judicial office, that controversy
had been compromised by her husband by payment of money to that third party with funds said to have been borrowed from the then Ms
Douglas. When she was under consideration for appointment to judicial office and as is common practice these days, she had completed
a personal circumstances form one question on which was, aEURoeIs there anything in your past or present which could reflect negatively
on yourself or the judiciary, and which should be disclosed?aEUR The then Ms Douglas answered aEURoeNoaEUR to this question. The
photos concerned continued to be available on the internet.
Three instances of alleged conduct which it was alleged might constitute grounds for removal from office came to be the subject of
the investigation:
an alleged failure to disclose in the application process;
an alleged incapacity as a result of the public availability of the photos;
an alleged failure to fully disclose facts to former independent counsel.
In the result, the CouncilaEURtms inquiry was discontinued, without any findings being made, when Douglas ACJ indicated that she would
In love and war: shifting attitudes
A recent Australian example of a Chief Justice dealing with an issue of judicial conduct is offered by a report concerning a State
Supreme Court judge said to have been seen kissing his female Associate in a nightclub following an Opening of the Law Year observance.
The judge concerned was counselled by the Chief Justice of the State concerned about this behaviour.
At least with respect to alleged sexual harassment, conduct during office which comes to light only after the judge concerned has
left office has nonetheless in Australia recently been regarded as apt for administrative inquiry by the court concerned, and publication
of the result of that inquiry by the head of jurisdiction on behalf of the court, as opposed to just being a subject for the seeking
by a complainant of such remedies as the general law confers in respect of the alleged conduct.
Self-evidently in the modern era, such a complaint about a former judge directed to a current head of jurisdiction is no longer regarded
as aptly met by a statement by the head of jurisdiction that the subject of the complaint is no longer a judge. That is not to say
that the reception of a complaint might not hitherto have provoked a review of the adequacy of internal reporting procedures. But
the need publicly to be seen to have done something more has proved a powerful one.
This type of accountability, even after leaving judicial office, is undoubtedly a new development. Even to question its appropriateness
is to risk being accused of being an apologist for the alleged behaviour concerned. But there must, with respect, surely be limits
to this. If the alleged past conduct were criminal and still amenable to prosecution, to publish a statement that complaints had
been born out and that apologies had been tendered would be fraught, at least while the subject of the complaint was living and amenable
to earthly justice. If that publication were made by an ultimate appellate court, it is difficult to see how then members of that
court could, absent a rule of necessity, sit on an appeal against conviction by the subject of the complaint, if a conviction were
ever forthcoming. To be clear, sexual harassment is to be deprecated but populism, preservation of civil liberties and due process
make for a volatile mix.
Not all inter-personal relationships end amicably. And aEURoerecollections may varyaEUR about conduct during such a relationship.
Contemporary ease of image taking may facilitate a form of fury after being scorned in ways not encountered by earlier generations.
Further, there is the possibility of later, enduring publication to the world at large via the internet of images of lawful, private,
pre-judicial office conduct, be it youthful indiscretion or otherwise.
In relation to judicial accountability, there is both benefit and burden in the digital age, ease of image taking or audio-recording
may offer corroboration for an allegation of sexual harassment or even just questionable conduct in ways that were impossible in
an earlier age. But, as the experience of Douglas ACJ shows, it also offers ways in which lawful, wholly private, sexual conduct
may be made known enduringly.
Of course, serious criminal conduct prior to assuming judicial office is one thing, and never acceptable. But as to other conduct
and for example, what to one is clumsy, late adolescent ineptitude in seeking, or during, a relationship may be sexual harassment
to another, even assuming there is any acceptable proof that such alleged conduct occurred. Decades later, allegations as to sexual
harassment, or worse, never earlier made public or even at all may be prompted by publicity associated with a proposed appointment
to judicial office. It is salutary to transpose the experience in 2018 of now United States Supreme Court Associate Justice Brett
M. Kavanaugh in the course of his Senate Judiciary Committee confirmation proceedings into the context of a complaint of alleged
judicial misbehaviour to a parliament of the Commonwealth, to a head of jurisdiction or, where one exists, to a judicial commission.
Inter-personal relationship issues aside, some who enter the legal profession and later judicial life have earlier callings outside
the law. In the 20
century, two generations entered the legal profession and, later, the judiciary after military service during a world war. Prior
military service of any kind is uncommon in the judiciary these days. The possibility of greater incidence of such experience might
seem remote until the very moment hostilities occurred. The invasion of Ukraine by Russia a year ago should remind us of that. Years
later, a judge who had served his or her country in armed conflict in their youth might be accused of having committed or covered
up a war crime. Heinous conduct in war ought always be condemned. Area bombing of civilian targets was common place during the Second
World War. But sometimes what was once acceptable is by the standards of a different age no longer. Some who served, for example,
in Air Crew Europe in the Allied Air Forces in the Second World War later became judges. As the war progressed, many German cities
were repeatedly bombed by Allied Air Forces (as the Germans did to Allied cities). By later standards, and perhaps even at the time
(although that is controversial), indiscriminate area bombing of cities might be regarded as a war crime. It is not hard to envisage
a campaign for judicial removal, given megaphone quality via internet publication, based on alleged or even acknowledged conduct
during prior military service.
Love and war aside, reflection on the subject yields the thought that there may be a range of human behaviours, lawful at the time
and conducted in private circumstances which, if later publicised and by the standards of a different age, may be considered questionable.
Moreover, in the age of Twitter, trolling and aEURoe#MetooaEUR, allegation may be equated with proof in terms of a public clamour
for removal and attractive to some in the political class and even some in the judiciary on the basis of aEURoereputational riskaEUR.
In short then, one development in relation to judicial accountability is the potential presented by the internet for preservation
and universal publication of conduct long ago and related commentary and allegations. For some at the Senior Bar, and quite apart
from a near inevitable reduction in income, this may operate as a disincentive for accepting public judicial office. In turn, that
may adversely affect the quality of the senior judiciary. The submission, rejected by the Murphy Commission members, that pre-appointment
behaviour not constituting criminal conduct at the time was not aEURoemisbehaviouraEUR for the purposes of the removal provision
at least had the advantage of precision of application. Yet so confining the meaning of that term has all of the disadvantages identified
in the reasons for ruling of the members of the Murphy Commission.
Executive criticism
I have dwelt on these personal behavioural aspects of judicial accountability, because it is all too easy when considering that subject
just to focus on the more obvious dimension of tensions between the executive and the judiciary arising from particular judicial
As to tensions between the executive and the judiciary arising from particular judicial decisions, such criticism is, in my experience
and to my observation, ever increasingly personal. That may not just be a form of intimidation but also a stratagem to divert attention
from the merits of judicial reasoning in a particular case.
Publication via the internet both magnifies and preserves this type of criticism. Moreover, no longer, as once in an age of publicity
confined to the print medium, is a report of todayaEURtms ministerial aEURoedoorstopaEUR or folksy banter with a chosen radio aEURoeshock
jockaEUR tomorrowaEURtms fish and chips wrapper. Ministerial commentary aside, the same phenomenon is evident in relation to media
reports of court outcomes generally. A conspiracy theorist whose views might in earlier times have been heard no further than a voice
could carry from a soapbox in a public park, and which would never have been published in a newspaper, may now publish to the world
at large via the internet.
In 2011, the High Court of Australia invalidated federal legislation directed to the end of the off-shore processing in Malaysia of
those seeking asylum in Australia. The then Australian Labor Party Prime Minister, the Honourable Julia Gillard MP, described the
High CourtaEURtms judgement as a aEURoemissed opportunityaEUR, as if the members of the High Court had responsibility for the conduct
of foreign affairs and migration policy.
In Australia, such criticisms are hardly confined to one side of politics or even as muted. In 2017, three Ministers in the then Liberal
National Party coalition government of Australia were found
prima facie
to have committed contempt of the Victorian Supreme Court by making statements, published prominently in The Australian newspaper,
that the judges of that court were soft on terror at a time when that StateaEURtms Court of Appeal was reserved on a Crown appeal
in respect of alleged leniency of sentences in respect of certain terrorism offences.
The statements mentioned of then Prime Minister Gillard and those three federal Ministers are all the more lamentable because each
of their authors had been admitted as a legal practitioner.
This type of behaviour is also evident at State level in Australia. Last month, QueenslandaEURtms Deputy Premier, the Hon Steven Miles
(who is not a lawyer) described a decision by a magistrate to release a number of youth defendants on bail as a aEURoemedia stuntaEUR
and that the magistrate had put aEURoethe community of Townsville in dangeraEUR. Yet QueenslandaEURtms
Youth Justice Act
contains an imperative statement requiring the release by a court of a youth defendant from custody in connection with a charge,
subject only to very narrow exceptions. The Deputy PremieraEURtms statement was preceded by a spate of publicity in the media about
youth offending. The Deputy PremieraEURtms statement was promptly condemned by the Queensland Bar Association But the experience
in 2017 of Federal ministerial officers did nothing to deter it and, unlike a newspaper report, the statement lingers to the world
at large on the internet.
This type of personalisation concerning judicial decisions is hardly confined to Australia. Notoriously in 2016, three judges of the
Court of Appeal for England and Wales, including the then Lord Chief Justice, were described by the Daily Mail as aEURoeEnemies of
the PeopleaEUR for holding that the United KingdomaEURtms withdrawal from the European Union required a prior referendum, not just
an enactment.
The capacity for incitement of disaffection by the executive with the independent exercise of judicial power via ill-considered statements
is enhanced by the internet and other means of universally available mass communication.
Of course none of this means, and never has meant, that the reasoning in judicial decisions is immune from criticism, either by the
executive or by other commentators. But to attribute or allude to base motives for such reasoning, contrary to the judicial oath
or affirmation, may reveal as much about the character or civic responsibility of the author as it does about the judicial officer
concerned. One of the greatest threats to a system of government according to law is the notion that judges must yield to some prevailing
populist whim, whether that whim is as perceived by a minister or a journalist or commentator or otherwise.
A less obvious but perhaps more pernicious thrust to ordained accountability mechanisms and grounds is an endeavour to subvert their
role in buttressing independence by appointing persons thought to have views sympathetic to those espoused by particular political
actors. In the United States of America, sharp political differences are evident in relation to appointments of judges to the Supreme
Court. The appointment of Kavanaugh J, already mentioned, offers but one recent example. Many others might be cited from that country.
In the United Kingdom and, save for the position of Chief Justice, in Papua New Guinea, appointments to the senior judiciary are
made not directly on the advice of a political officer but rather via an appointments commission of which political officers are
either not members or in a minority. Not so in Australia.
The Administrative Appeals Tribunal (the AAT) is a quasi-judicial merits review tribunal, the President (or acting President) of which
must be a judge of the Federal Court of Australia. The AAT is charged with the independent review of a large and diverse range of
decisions by ministers, their delegates or other officers of agencies of the executive. If one accepts the majority view of the Australian
SenateaEURtms Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, membership of the AAT had by 2022 and to a significant extent,
become a sinecure for those associated with the Liberal National side of politics.
The current Australian government (Australian Labor Party) has, by the Attorney-General, signified an intention to implement the recommendations
of the Senate Committee to legislate to abolish and replace the AAT (thereby removing all members from office) and to provide for
a transparent appointment process independent of the government of the day.
Lurking behind the position thought revealed by the majority of this Senate Committee may be an alternative method by which the executive
seeks to subvert independent decision-making. If members of courts or quasi-judicial tribunals rebuff calls by ministers to conform
to populist positions, as opposed to deciding cases according to law and without fear, favour, affection or ill-will, an attractive
alternative to some in the executive may be to appoint those in whom, by reason of association or affiliation, one apprehends a likelihood
of such conformity. Where the relevant law reposes in such decision-makers a zone of discretion it may be very difficult for a person
adversely affected by the decision of a judge or tribunal member appointed because of such an apprehension on judicial review even
to establish an apprehension of bias. Judicial commissions are not a panacea for this.
Indeed, in the very preference of parliaments in modern times for tribunals comprised of short term appointees, as opposed to tenured
judiciaries, for the resolution of a vast range of controversies great and small, to some of which the executive is one party, may
lie a perhaps unwitting wholesale subversion by avoidance of constitutional accountability mechanisms and related grounds for removal.
In the aftermath of the highly controversial appointment by his government in 2014 of the Honourable Tim Carmody as Chief Justice
of Queensland, the by then former Premier of Queensland, the Hon Campbell Newman called for the establishment of a judicial commission.
He envisaged a commission of ten members, three of whom would be judicial officers, the balance drawn from the wider community. He
stated, aEURoeIaEURtmm after a quiet revolution that will bring the courts under the control of the people of Queensland, in a responsible
way,aEUR At the same time, Mr Newman expressed particular concern about the cost of litigation and accessibility to the courts.
A recollection of history confirms that Mr NewmanaEURtms proposal was, with respect, undoubtedly revolutionary. Once again, the political
compact which was the sequel to 17
century revolutionary tumult is replicated in QueenslandaEURtms
Constitution
. This has always made State judges accountable, via the State parliament, to the people but only in respect of proved misbehaviour
(or incapacity). Further, providing it leaves the Queensland Supreme Court as a recognisably independent body in which to invest
judicial power, it has always been within the legislative remit of the Queensland parliament to enact measures designed to reduce
the cost of litigation and accessibility to the courts.
In Australia, a judicial commission the function of which was other than deferential to a manifestation of the constitutional compact
mentioned may well be unlawful. A judicial commission is not a means of aEURoecontrollingaEUR the judiciary, only a means of assisting
parliament to discharge its constitutionally limited role in relation to judicial misbehaviour or incapacity.
Chief Justice Carmody resigned his office as Chief Justice in July 2015 but remained a member of the Queensland Supreme Court until
2019, by which time he had become eligible for the judicial pension. The period in which he held the office of Chief Justice was
noteworthy for internal disharmony within the Supreme Court concerning his legal and judicial administrative abilities, the existence
of which was made clear in a retirement speech delivered by a judge at a valedictory sitting in late March 2015.
The period in office of Carmody CJ may perhaps highlight an aspect of judicial accountability rarely made public. The existence and
metes and bounds of the accountability of judges one to the other are uncertain. Superior courts are collegiate. All judges are expected
to co-operate in the exercise of a courtaEURtms jurisdiction according to law and as efficiently as possible given the resources
available. Judges expect each other to pull their weight. Yet the constitutionally ordained remedy in respect of a lawfully appointed
judge, perceived by his or her peers underperforming is not internal ostracising, but only parliamentary removal for proved incapacity
or misbehaviour.
Such is the importance of tenure as a bulwark of judicial independence these grounds leave no room for inexact proofs. Recognising
this, as well as a need to maintain public confidence in the judiciary and exercise a courtaEURtms jurisdiction, it is not unknown
for other judges to accept that they must do more or more difficult trial or appellate cases, because a lawfully appointed colleague
is unable or unwilling to do so.
Gageler J: on the separation of executive and judicial function
The subject of judicial accountability is indeed a large one. But understanding to whom judges are accountable and to whom they are
not and why is but one part of understanding the rationale for, and necessary features of, the separate exercise of judicial power
under a Westminster system of government, or even that adopted in the United States
Constitution
(where the executive does not sit in parliament).
These features been much rehearsed in the earlier writings of judges much more eminent than I. In this regard and recently is a paper,
aEURoeJudicial LegitimacyaEUR authored by Gageler J of the High Court of Australia. His HonouraEURtms paper was evidently prompted
to deliver his paper by the various recommendations in the ALRC report to which I have made reference above. Those recommendations
ranged beyond a recommendation that a federal judicial commission be established. Another was the establishment of an independent
judicial appointments commission akin to that in the United Kingdom.
As Gageler J highlights in his paper, four interweaving and necessary features underpin the successful achievement in practice of
addressing the vice of the exercise of arbitrary sovereign power by separating the judicial function from those of the executive
and the parliament. These features are:
(a) judicial independence (which he takes to mean aEURoethat measure of protection from external influence which needs to exist if
a competent and impartial judiciary is to do its job of deciding controversies according to law without fear or favouraEUR);
(b) aEURoejudicial legitimacyaEUR (which he takes to mean aEURoethat level of public confidence which needs to exist for a competent
and impartial judiciary to do its job of deciding controversies according to law without fear or favouraEUR);
(c) judicial competence; and
(d) judicial impartiality.
I respectfully commend his HonouraEURtms paper to those who would read further about these features of judicial power and threats
to the success in practice of the separation of judicial power from other types of sovereign power.
As I have endeavoured to highlight in this paper, an attempted subversion by the executive of the successful, good governance compact
entailing the separation of powers need not only come in the form of asserted accountability by physical intimidation by officers
of the executive (as in the Namah example) or in ill-informed ministerial public statements which suggest the judiciary must defer
to prevailing public sentiment or executive government policy, as opposed to the law. It may come in ministerial endeavours to aEURoestackaEUR
a bench, irrespective of competence, with those expected to conform to the prevailing executive governmentaEURtms view of the law.
Or it may come in measures which sidestep the judiciary as societyaEURtms forum for the resolution of a range of public and private
controversies.
Addressing misconceptions about judicial accountability is but one part of addressing a wider threat to the societal governance benefit
of separating the exercise of judicial power into a system of justice which has each of the four features mentioned by Gageler J.
I conclude this perhaps overlong paper by drawing attention to observations made now a quarter-century ago by another eminent Australian
jurist, the Honourable Sir Gerard Brennan when Chief Justice of Australia:
Over recent years, politicians and other interested parties, showing little interest in the Court's function of administering the
law but versed in the techniques of political struggle, public controversy and media relations, have criticized the Courts, not for
their reasons for decision but for the decisions they have made. Criticism which pays little or no attention to the reasons for decision
may be politically successful because, as surveys have shown, the public generally are not familiar with the
Constitution
and with the powers which are distributed under it. Even less is the public familiar with statute law and less again with the common
law. Nor is the public familiar with the step by step reasoning that leads a judge to a conclusion in accordance with his or her
understanding of the law. But the public is accustomed to the cut and thrust of political debate. Consequently, if no defence is
made to a political attack on a Court, some will regard the attack as unanswered or unanswerable. No effective answer can be given
by the Courts themselves. The Courts cannot be advocates to plead their own cause in justification of their judgments. If they were,
they would be induced to temper their judgments to protect their own interests. Impartiality would be gone, traded for protection
from attacks. To quote Sir Frank Kitto again:
aEURoeEvery Judge worthy of the name recognises that he must take each man's censure; he knows full well that as a Judge he is born
to censure as the sparks fly upwards; but neither in preparing a judgment nor in retrospect may it weigh with him that the harvest
he gleans is praise or blame, approval or scorn. He will reply to neither; he will defend himself not at all.aEUR
[Footnote omitted]
As Brennan CJ noted in this speech, in Australia it had hitherto been regarded as the role of the Attorney-General to denounce unfounded
attacks on the judiciary. In the modern era, the holders of this office in the Australian government have indicated that this is
no longer their role.
Wherever in the Commonwealth that is the case, that means that it is more important than ever for the legal profession and its peak
professional bodies such as the Commonwealth Lawyers Association to undertake not only the role of defending the judiciary from ill-founded
criticism but also of highlighting to whom judges are truly accountable, on what grounds and why this is so. A failure to do this
is to yield the field of justice according to law to those different in title but not in animus to the Stuart Kings. In this regard,
there are no new developments, only modern replications of that old vice.
The price of the civil liberty of justice according to law is eternal vigilance with respect to its subversion by the executive and
A(c)J A Logan 2022 Moral right of author asserted. Non-exclusive publication licence granted to the Commonwealth Lawyers Association.
A Judge of the Federal Court of Australia and of the Supreme and National Courts of Papua New Guinea; President, Australian Defence
Force Discipline Appeal Tribunal.
- The views expressed in this paper are personal and, as to any controversial issues of law, necessarily provisional. They are not
to be regarded as those of either the Australian or Papua New Guinea governments or of any court or tribunal of which the author
is a member. I gratefully acknowledge helpful critiques of an early draft of this paper respectively offered by my current Associate,
Mr Evan Donaldson and by my wife, Mrs Jan Logan, each of whom has been a solicitor in active practice. Such errors as remain are
mine alone.
Hostettler, p. 91.
Google scholar returns 375 results for articles with aEURoeJudicial AccountabilityaEUR in the title between the years 2000 and 2022,
compared with just 77 articles for the years 1950 to 1999.
This separation of powers is implicit in the Australian
Constitution
by separate chapters, Chapters I, II and III, respectively directed to The Parliament, The Executive Government and The Judicature
R v Kirby; Ex parte BoilermakersaEURtm Society of Australia (the BoilermakersaEURtm Case)
[1956] HCA 10
(1956) 94 CLR 254.
Papua New GuineaaEURtms
Constitution
makes separate provision within
for these three branches of government but goes further by explicitly providing in
that, aEURoe(3) In principle, the respective powers and functions of the three arms shall be kept separate from each otheraEUR.
Constitution
Judicial power and Courts.
The judicial power of the Commonwealth shall be vested in a Federal Supreme Court, to be called the High Court of Australia, and in
such other federal courts as the Parliament creates, and in such other courts as it invests with federal jurisdiction. The High Court
shall consist of a Chief Justice, and so many other Justices, not less than two, as the Parliament prescribes.
Papua New Guinea
Constitution
, ss. 157 and 158:
Independence of the National Judicial System.
Except to the extent that this
Constitution
specifically provides otherwise, neither the Minister responsible for the National Justice Administration nor any other person or
authority (other than the Parliament through legislation) outside the National Judicial System has any power to give directions to
any court, or to a member of any court, within that System in respect of the exercise of judicial powers or functions.
Exercise of the judicial power.
(1) Subject to this
Constitution
, the judicial authority of the People is vested in the National Judicial System.
(2) In interpreting the law the courts shall give paramount consideration to the dispensation of justice.
These came popularly to be called the aEURoeLatimer House PrinciplesaEUR because the initiative for their adoption may be traced
to a conference sponsored by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Commonwealth Legal Education Association, the Commonwealth
MagistratesaEURtm and JudgesaEURtm Association and the Commonwealth LawyersaEURtm Association, which was held in the United Kingdom
at Latimer House, Buckinghamshire, in June 1998. The product of that meeting was considered by a working group of Law Ministers drawn
from Commonwealth member countries, adopted by Commonwealth Law Ministers and then, at their meeting in Abuja, Nigeria, in December
2003, endorsed by Commonwealth Heads of Government. The text of the Latimer House Principles is readily accessible via the Commonwealth
SecretariataEURtms website http://thecommonwealth.org/sites/default/files/history-items/documents/Latimer
HousePrinciples.pdf. Accessed 22 December 2022.
Alexander Hamilton, The Federation Papers, No 78, aEURoeThe Judiciary DepartmentaEUR: McLeanaEURtms Edition, New York, as reproduced
in Yale Law School, Lillian Goldman Law Library, Avalon Project: https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/fed78.asp Accessed, 30
January 2023.
Reproduced in Online Library of Liberty: https://oll.libertyfund.org/quote/lord-acton-writes-to-bishop-creighton-that-the-same-moral-standards-should-be-applied-to-all-men-political-and-religious-leaders-included-especially-since-power-tends-to-corrupt-and-absolute-power-corrupts-absolutely-1887
Accessed, 30 January 2023.
Christopher Shea, Why Power Corrupts, Smithsonian Magazine, October 2012, referring to studies led by Professor Katherine A. DeCelles,
a professor of management at the University of Toronto, published in the Journal of Applied Psychology: https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/why-power-corrupts-37165345/
Accessed, 30 January 2023.
J A Logan, aEURoeThe relationship between parliament, the judiciary and the executive ("the Latimer House principles"), 27th Commonwealth
Parliamentary Seminar, Parliament House, Brisbane, 9 June 2016: https://www.fedcourt.gov.au/digital-law-library/judges-speeches/justice-logan/logan-j-20160609
Accessed, 30 January 2023.
(1607) 12 Co.Rep. 64;
[1607] EWHC KB J23
; British and Irish Legal Information Institute (BAILII) website: http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/KB/1607/J23.html (Accessed,
7 May 2016).
In the report of the Case of Prohibitions, Coke reported the following exchange which had occurred between The King and him:
A controversy of land between parties was heard by the King, and sentence given, which was repealed for this, that it did not belong
to the common law: then the King said, that he thought the law was founded upon reason, and that he and others had reason, as well
as the Judges: to which it was answered by me, that true it was, that God had endowed His Majesty with excellent science, and great
endowments of nature; but His Majesty was not learned in the laws of his realm of England, and causes which concern the life, or
inheritance, or goods, or fortunes of his subjects, are not to be decided by natural reason but by the artificial reason and judgment
of law, which law is an act which requires long study and experience, before that a man can attain to the cognizance of it: that
the law was the golden met-wand and measure to try the causes of the subjects; and which protected His Majesty in safety and peace:
with which the King was greatly offended, and said, that then he should be under the law, which was treason to affirm, as he said;
to which I said, that Bracton saith,
quod Rex non debed esse sub homine, sed sub Deo et lege
[That the King ought not to be under any man but under God and the law].
(1611) 12 Co. Rep 74;
[1610] EWHC KB J22:
BAILII website: http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/KB/1610/J22.html (Accessed, 7 May 2016).
Hostettler, John (1997). Sir Edward Coke: A Force for Freedom. Barry Rose Law Publishers (Hostettler), p. 90.
Hostettler, p. 91.
For the original text of the Bill of Rights 1689, see the Yale Law SchoolaEURtms Avalon Project website:
http://avalon.law.yale.edu/17th_century/england.asp. As presently in force in the United Kingdom, the text of the Act is to be found
at legislation.gov.uk: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/aep/WillandMarSess2/1/2/introduction. Each accessed, 12 May 2016.
Original text, British History Online website: http://www.british-history.ac.uk/statutes-realm/vol7/pp636-638 Accessed, 12 May 2016.
As the Act of Settlement as in force today in the United Kingdom, see legislation.gov.uk: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/aep/Will3/12-13/2/section/III
Accessed 12 May 2016.
[2011] PGSC 41
I detail the circumstances of these purported suspensions and arrests in my paper, A Year in the Life of an Australian Member of
the PNG Judiciary, paper delivered at the 18th Commonwealth Law Conference Stream C - Constitutionalism, Human Rights & the Rule
of Law aEUR" aEURoeLawyers on the FrontlineaEUR, Cape Town South Africa.
15 Apr 2013: https://www.fedcourt.gov.au/digital-law-library/judges-speeches/justice-logan/logan-j-20130415 accessed, 30 January 2023.
Namah, In re
[2018] PGLT 1
; N7194 (LT), at [30].
Namah v Higgins
[2020] PGNC 189
Independent State of Papua New Guinea v Namah SC2037
, 16 December 2020.
PART VIaEUR"Division 5, Subdivision H.aEUR"Removal from Office of Senior Judicial and Legal Office-holders., PNG
Constitution
Post Courier, 16 March 2021.
Judicial Conduct (Repeal) Act 2013
Constitution
Constitution
, ss 179, 180 and 181.
For proceedings concerning this tribunal and the occasion for it being established, see
Sakora v Judicial and Legal Services Commission
[2017] PGNC 291
; N6991 (19 September 2017) and
Application Pursuant to
Constitution
Section 18(1)
by Justice Sir Bernard Sakora
[2020] PGSC 76
; SC1980 (31 July 2020).
Australian Attorney-GeneralaEURtms department, Scoping the establishment of a federal judicial commission: https://consultations.ag.gov.au/legal-system/federal-judicial-commission/supporting_documents/discussionpaper.pdf
Australian Law Reform Commission, Without Fear or Favour: Judicial Impartiality and the Law on Bias (ALRC Report 138, December 2021)
310 [9.25]: https://www.alrc.gov.au/publication/ji-report-138/
Judicial Misbehaviour and Incapacity (Parliamentary Commissions) Act 2012
Judicial Misbehaviour and Incapacity (Parliamentary Commissions) Act 2012
Judicial Misbehaviour and Incapacity (Parliamentary Commissions) Act 2012
The definition of aEURoeCommonwealth judicial officeraEUR includes aEURoea judge or justice of a court created by the ParliamentaEUR
and thus would include a judge of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2), which is not a superior court of
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry Act 1986
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry Act 1986
definition of aEURoejudgeaEUR.
Brian Galligan, aEUR~Murphy, Lionel Keith (1922aEUR"1986)aEURtm, Australian Dictionary of Biography, National Centre of Biography,
Australian National University, https://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/murphy-lionel-keith-15823/text27022, published first in hardcopy
2012, accessed online 31 January 2023. The
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry Act
was repealed later in 1986 by the
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry (Repeal) Act 1986
The then Mr Gavan Griffith QC, now Mr Gavan Griffith AO KC.
Opinion of the Australian Solicitor General dated 24 February 1984, Appendix 6(ii), Senate Select Committee on the Conduct of a Judge,
Report to the Senate, August 1984: https://www.aph.gov.au/-/media/02_Parliamentary_Business/Parliamentary_Commission/Class_B_documents/In_the_matter_of_section_72_of_the_Constitution.pdf?la=en&hash=60A0C98B7FE2C54D1F7F53BD8927FB19F716BFCD
Accessed 5 February 2023.
Murphy Commission: Commission Hearings, Ruling on 5 August 1986 on the meaning of
Constitution
: https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Chamber_documents/
Tabled_Papers/Parliamentary_Commission/Class_B_Records Accessed 5 February 2023.
Annotation on High Court file concerning Sydney Registry proceeding No 87 of 1986, Records of the Commission of Inquiry, class B
records: https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Chamber_documents/Tabled_Papers/Parliamentary_Commission/Class_B_Recordsm
Accessed, 5 February 2023.
See, for example, in respect of the Federal Court of Australia,
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
s 15(1AA)(c).
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
s 15(1AAA).
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
s 15(1AA)(d).
Constitution
Constitution
, s 155(4).
Constitution
PNG Organic Law on the Terms and Conditions of Employment of Judges, s 2. The maximum appointment term for a judge who is a PNG citizen
is 10 years with that for a non-citizen being 3 years.
They are set out in the CouncilaEURtms ruling of 4 November 2014 in the course of its inquiry: Available: https://cjc-ccm.ca/en/what-we-do/review-procedures/inquiries-listings#380
Accessed 6 February 2023.
See the reasons for the Council adjourning its inquiry dated 24 November 2014. Those reasons give a full chronology of the inquiry:
Available: https://cjc-ccm.ca/en/what-we-do/review-procedures/inquiries-listings#380 Accessed 6 February 2023.
Tasmanian Supreme Court Justice Gregory Geason has been counselled by the Chief Justice: The Mercury, 20 February 2021: https://www.themercury.com.au/truecrimeaustralia/police-courts/tasmanian-supreme-court-justice-gregory-geason-has-been-counselled-by-the-chief-justice/news-story/e3a3f85b7b3d24af5fbae557d3451335
Accessed 6 February 2023.
See the statement by the Honourable Susan Kiefel AC, Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia concerning allegations of sexual
harassment made with respect to the Honourable Dyson Heydon AC, a former judge of that court: https://cdn.hcourt.gov.au/assets/news/Statement%20by%20Chief%20Justice%20Susan%20Kiefel%20AC.pdf
Accessed 8 February 2023. It must be emphasised that no court has made any finding adverse to the Honourable Dyson Heydon AC in respect
of any of the conduct alleged.
One Julie Swetnick alleged to the Judiciary Committee that, while at Gaithersburg High School, Judge Kavanaugh participated in conduct
which included targeting girls for gang rape. This was emphatically denied by the judge, denials supported by other statements made
to the committee. In the result, the United States Senate voted 50-48 to confirm his nomination an Associate Justice of the US Supreme
Court: See the Judiciary Committee file in relation to the nomination: https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/nominations/supreme/pn2259-115
Accessed 6 February 2023.
For example, Lord Geoffrey Lane AFC, later Lord chief Justice of England and Wales, served as a bomber pilot in the RAF in WW2: biographic
note, Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geoffrey_Lane,_Baron_Lane Accessed 6 February 2023. Judge Edmund Broad DFC was another
who served as a bomber pilot in the RAAF in WW2: Queensland Supreme Court Library Biographic Note: https://www.sclqld.org.au/judicial-papers/judicial-profiles/profiles/ebroad
Accessed 6 February 2023.
See the Practice in Relation to
, Area Bombardment, International committee of the Red Cross, International Humanitarian Law Databases: https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v2/rule13
Accessed: 6 February 2023.
Plaintiff M70/2011 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2011] HCA 32
(2011) 244 CLR 144.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard says High Court moving to outlaw Malaysian Solution is missed opportunity, Courier Mail, Brisbane, 1
September 2011: https://www.couriermail.com.au/news/national/navy-on-alert-for-boats/news-story/cd948a00432dc00a08b0b699cc6c851d
Accessed 6 February 2023.
Turnbull MPs narrowly avoid contempt charges, Australian Financial Review, 23 June 2017: https://www.afr.com/politics/victorian-court-of-appeal-increases-terror-sentences-20170623-gwwxhf
Accessed 6 February 2023.
aEURoeaEUR~Cracked the s**tsaEURtm: Outrage as magistrate releases 13 young offenders at same timeaEUR: Courier Mail, 11 February
2023: https://www.couriermail.com.au/truecrimeaustralia/police-courts-qld/cracked-the-sts-outrage-as-magistrate-releases-13-juvi-crims-at-same-time/news-story/f2a84f578db4426a9b6aa00485b2f3d8
Accessed, 1 March 2023.
Youth Justice Act 1992
48 Releasing children in custody in connection with a charge of an offence
(1) This section applies if a court or police officer is deciding whether to release a child in custody in connection with a charge
of an offence or keep the child in custody.
(2) The court or police officer must decide to release the child unless required under this Act or another Act to keep the child in
custody or exercising a discretion under this or another Act to keep the child in custody.
Queensland Bar Association Media Release, 13 February 2023: https://qldbar.asn.au/general-news/0/0/media Accessed, 1 March 2023.
Enemies of the people: Fury over 'out of touch' judges who have 'declared war on democracy' by defying 17.4m Brexit voters and who
could trigger constitutional crisis, Daily Mail, 4 November 2016: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3903436/Enemies-people-Fury-touch-judges-defied-17-4m-Brexit-voters-trigger-constitutional-crisis.html
Accessed 6 February 2016.
Miller & Anor, R (On the Application Of) v The Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union
[2016] EWHC 2768 (Admin).
This judgement was later upheld by an emphatic majority by the UK Supreme Court:
Miller & Anor, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union
[2017] UKSC 5.
In the United Kingdom, appointments are made by the Judicial Appointments Commission: see Courts and Tribunals Judiciary aEUR" Judicial
Appointments: https://www.judiciary.uk/about-the-judiciary/our-justice-system/jud-acc-ind/jud-appts/ Accessed, 6 February 2023.
In Papua New Guinea, the Chief Justice is appointed on the advice of the National Executive Council. Each other member of the senior
judiciary is appointed by the Judicial and Legal Service Commission on which politicians are in the minority: PNG
Constitution
, ss 169, 170 and 183.
Australian Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Report on Performance and integrity of AustraliaaEURtms
administrative review system: Interim Report, March 2022, adopted without further substantive report June 2022: https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Legal_and_Constitutional_Affairs/Adminreviewsystem/Interim_Report
Accessed 6 February 2022. The 4-2 majority was drawn from Australian Labor Party and Australian Greens members of the committee.
The minority comprised the Liberal National members of the committee.
Attorney-GeneralaEURtms Department, A new system of federal administrative review: https://www.ag.gov.au/legal-system/new-system-federal-administrative-review.
Accessed 6 February 2023.
For an account of circumstances relating to this appointment and its aftermath see Rebecca Ananian-Welsh; Gabrielle Appleby; Andrew
Lynch, The Tim Carmody affair: AustraliaaEURtms greatest judicial crisis, New South Books, Sydney, 2016 (aEURoeCarmody AffairaEUR).
In Queensland, controversy concerning an appointment to the office of Chief Justice, while hardly the norm, is also hardly confined
to one side of politics. The legal and political controversy concerning the appointment of the Honourable T W McCawley as Chief Justice
by the Australian Labor Party Government of Premier T J Ryan offers such an example. For those who would read further of this, I
commend reference to Nicholas Aroney, --- Politics, Law and the
Constitution
in McCawley's Case
[2006] MelbULawRw 21
(2006) 30(3) Melbourne University Law Review 605:
http://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2006/21.html#fn20 Accessed 8 February 2023.
Premier auditioned and rejected arrogant judges for top job, Courier Mail, 16 September 2018: https://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/crime-and-justice/premier-auditioned-and-rejected-arrogant-judges-for-top-job/news-story/566d27731c8ecbd2a6d12a67e9b2aed8
Accessed 6 February 2018.
Constitution
of Queensland Act 2001
(Qld), s 61.
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales
[2010] HCA 1
; (2010) 239 CLR 531.
See The Carmody Affair, Chapters 4 and 5 and Justice Alan Wilson, 'Notes' [for speech delivered at the valedictory ceremony to mark
his retirement, Banco Court, Brisbane, 26 March 2015: https://www.sclqld.org.au/judicial-papers/judicial-profiles/profiles/awilson/papers
Accessed, 6 February 2015. It should be recorded that, in the 2002 Australian QueenaEURtms Birthday Honours List, The Hon Tim Carmody
was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia, aEURoeFor significant service to the law, and to the judiciaryaEUR: Governor General
of Australia, The Queen's Birthday 2022 Honours List: https://www.gg.gov.au/queens-birthday-2022-honours-list Accessed 6 February
The Hon S Gageler AC, Judicial Legitimacy,
(2023) 97 (1) Australian Law Journal 28:
also available High Court of Australia JudgesaEURtm speeches and papers: https://www.hcourt.gov.au/publications/speeches/current/speeches-by-Justice
Gageler. Accessed 7 February 2023.
Brennan CJ, The State of the Judicature - Opening of the 30
Australian Legal Convention, Melbourne, 19 September 1997: High Court of Australia Former JudgesaEURtm Papers and Speeches: https://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/speeches/former-justices/brennanj/brennanj_judicat.htm
Accessed 6 February 2023.
Related Links
Was this page useful?
What did you like about it?
How can we make it better?
* This online submission is protected by captcha
Can't read the security key?
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter