URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Grenfell, Laura; Carter, Anne; Olijnyk, Anna --- "Scrutinising the Scrutiny Process in the Courts" [2024] SydLawRw 14; (2024) 46(3) Sydney Law Review 267
I Introduction
II Disorganized Developments, the High Court and Legislative Scrutiny
III ‘Effective Parliamentary Supervision and Oversight’?
A The LRC’s Workload and Functions
B The LRC’s Scrutiny Principles
1 Adequate Consultation
2 Rights and Liberties
C Provision of Explanatory Material to the LRC
D The LRC and the Power to Disallow
E Evaluations of the LRC’s Effectiveness
IV Courts and Facts: Assumptions about Legislative Scrutiny
V Conclusion
Scrutinising the Scrutiny Process in the
Anne Carter
and Anna Olijnyk
In every Australian jurisdiction, a dedicated parliamentary committee
scrutinises delegated legislation. When interpreting delegated
legislation,
courts may make assumptions about the nature and quality of the scrutiny
performed by these committees. We argue courts
should be cautious about reaching
these conclusions. The article uses the High Court of Australia’s decision
Disorganized Developments Pty Ltd v South Australia
as a case study.
We show that, while a scrutiny committee might hold the promise of providing
effective parliamentary oversight of
delegated lawmaking, the reality may fall
short of the ideal. With limited time and resources to scrutinise a large volume
of instruments
as well as to perform other functions, and with no guarantee of
engagement from the Parliament or executive, scrutiny committees
may not be able
to scrutinise delegated legislation in a thorough or timely manner. Building on
these insights, we consider the circumstances,
and manner, in which a court
might be justified in making findings about the process of scrutiny of delegated
legislation.
Introduction
Over the last few decades there has been a dramatic rise in delegated
lawmaking across
Cheryl Saunders has dubbed this ‘executive law-making
but it may be that ‘torrent’ is a more apt description.
Increasingly, the bulk of new laws are made by the executive
pursuant to
delegated legislative
In New South Wales and South Australia, for instance, it has been reported that
70–90% of new laws are made by
delegation.
The volume of delegated laws is compounded by the fact that such law is often
very complex and, at least in some jurisdictions, accompanied
by inadequate
explanatory material provided by the
Delegated legislation raises concerns about the democratic
of the lawmaking process and concentration of power in the executive
Delegated legislation is
often made ‘behind closed doors’ and is not subjected to ‘the
safeguards of the ordinary
parliamentary processes’: unlike Bills, it is
never read out or debated on the floor of Parliament except on the rare occasion
when there is a motion to
disallow.9F
Parliamentary scrutiny in the form of a dedicated legislative review
committee is widely understood as one of the safeguards to mitigate
concerns regarding executive
Such committees have the role of examining the compatibility of delegated
legislation with the enabling legislation and with standards
‘personal rights and liberties’ (and other common law principles)
and to bring these potential incompatibilities
to the attention of
Parliament.
But the reality of legislative review committees does not always match the
promise. This is not always well understood by the three
arms of government,
including the courts, as highlighted in the 2023 High Court case of
Disorganized Developments v South Australia
in which members of the Court
expressed different views about the significance of legislative scrutiny of a
pair of impugned
regulations.
In this article, we argue that
Disorganized Developments
the gap between the promise and reality of legislative review committees. The
article demonstrates that the courts should
be cautious about making any
assumptions or findings about the legislative scrutiny process.
Part II of this article analyses and explains the different views of
parliamentary scrutiny articulated by the High Court in
Disorganized
Developments
. Part III examines how legislative scrutiny works in practice,
focusing on the work of the South Australian Parliament’s Legislative
Review Committee (‘LRC’). It shows that the LRC lacks the resources
and legislative framework to perform rigorous scrutiny
of most regulations.
excavates the question raised by
Disorganized Developments
of whether the courts can understand
legislative scrutiny and parliamentary oversight committees as safeguards that
require or obviate
the need for procedural fairness. Building on these insights,
Part IV reflects on what weight courts might place on legislative scrutiny
mechanisms when drawing conclusions about the process by which delegated
legislation is made.
Disorganized Developments
, the High Court
and Legislative Scrutiny
Disorganized Developments
raises broad questions regarding the
accountability, transparency and quality of delegated legislation. The case was
a challenge
to the validity of two regulations, known as the Cowirra
Regulations, which purported to declare two portions of land as
‘prescribed
places’ for the purposes of the
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
’). The first
appellant, Disorganized Developments, was the registered proprietor of the two
parcels of land while the second
and third appellants were the directors and
only shareholders of Disorganized Developments and were the occupiers of the
were also members of the Hells Angels motorcycle club and so were
‘participant[s] in a criminal organisation’ within
the meaning of
As the High Court noted, the appellants wished to access the land in order to
exercise their property rights and, at times, to reside
It was common ground
that if the regulations were valid, the appellants would commit an offence if
they entered or attempted to enter
the Cowirra land. This offence carried a
maximum penalty of three years’ imprisonment. It was also common ground
that the appellants
had not been notified or consulted prior to the making of
the Cowirra Regulations.
In the High Court the appellants challenged the validity of the regulations
on two grounds. The first, which all five Justices agreed
was made out, was that
the Cowirra Regulations were not effective in declaring the parcels of land to
be ‘prescribed places’
within the meaning of ss 83GA(1) and 83GD(1)
The second ground (and the more relevant for the purposes of this article)
was that the Cowirra Regulations were invalid as they were
made in breach of a
duty to afford procedural fairness to the appellants. On this second ground,
four members of the Court (Kiefel
CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ, writing
together) held there was an obligation to afford procedural fairness: an
obligation that
had not been fulfilled in relation to the Cowirra Regulations.
Steward J, dissenting, held that the statute impliedly excluded the
obligations
of procedural fairness.
Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ observed that there was an
established and strong presumption that the exercise of a statutory
implied the affording of procedural fairness and that this common law
presumption applies in the making of regulations where
the exercise of the power
adversely affects the interests of particular
individuals.
Such a presumption operates ‘unless clearly displaced by the particular
statutory scheme’.16F
This holding is significant for delegated legislation more generally.
Challenges to delegated legislation on the ground of failure
to comply with the
rules of procedural fairness are
Disorganized
Developments
appears to be the first time an Australian court ‘has
held that a regulation made by the Governor, upon the advice of Cabinet,
invalid by virtue of a failure to afford procedural
The rules of procedural fairness are presumed to attach to any statutory
power ‘the exercise of which is apt to affect an interest
individual’ in a ‘direct and immediate’ way, and not merely
‘as a member of the public or of a class
For this reason, the making of delegated legislation has often not been seen as
conditioned on observance of the rules of procedural
fairness.20F
Traditionally,
delegated legislation creates rules of general application rather than affecting
individuals in a direct way. As Brennan
J explained in the seminal case of
Kioa v West
The legislature is not likely to intend that a statutory power of a strictly
legislative nature be conditioned on the observance
of the principles of natural
justice, for the interests of all members of the public are affected in the same
way by the exercise
Disorganized Developments
shows, this is not true of all regulations. The
Cowirra Regulations clearly affected the appellants (as owners and occupiers of
affected land) in a direct and immediate way, quite distinct from the effect
on other members of the public. The High Court had no
difficulty in holding that
the making of the Cowirra Regulations was a decision that attracted the
presumption that the rules of
procedural fairness
applied.22F
The presumption that the rules of procedural fairness attach to such a power
can be displaced by ‘express words or necessary
implication’.23F
Disorganized Developments
was whether the presumption had been
displaced by necessary implication. The State of South Australia argued that
four textual and
contextual features of the
supported the
displacement of the presumption. First, the regulation-making power was vested
in the Governor-in-Council.24F
Secondly, the unfettered nature of the regulation-making power under the
indicated that the power could be exercised by reference to general
policy considerations rather than any specific statutory criteria
Thirdly, the unusual history of the procedure for declaring places to be
‘prescribed places’ indicated that the making
of the regulations was
not intended to attract a duty of procedural
fairness.26F
Finally, the
bespoke scheme of parliamentary scrutiny was consistent with the absence of any
implied duty to afford procedural fairness.
For the majority of the High Court,
these features were ‘insufficient, individually and cumulatively, to
establish an intention
to displace the common law presumption’ that the
rules of procedural fairness
applied.27F
Steward J dissented
on this point.
The final factor identified by South Australia is most relevant to this
article. South Australia argued that the regulation-making
power was not
impliedly conditioned by a requirement to afford procedural fairness because
‘delegated legislation is commonly
subject to parliamentary
oversight’.28F
argument asks the Court to reach conclusions about the quality and nature of
parliamentary oversight of delegated legislation:
the issue at the heart of this
article. Steward J embraced South Australia’s argument on this point but
the majority did not.
The majority in
Disorganized Developments
offered only brief
consideration of South Australia’s argument regarding parliamentary
oversight, referring to the ‘general
and limited’ oversight of the
Governor’s regulation-making power that was provided for by a
parliamentary committee and
the ability to disallow
regulations.
According to the majority, these mechanisms were ‘not the source of an
implication to exclude procedural
fairness’.30F
In reaching
this conclusion, the majority rejected South Australia’s submission that
the ‘bespoke scheme of parliamentary
supervision’ that accompanied
the regulation-making power in s 83GA(1) excluded an implied duty to afford
The majority did not delve into any of the detail of the legislative scrutiny
process, either in terms of what was available or what
actually occurred in this
case. As discussed below, there is evidence that the LRC had little opportunity
to scrutinise the Cowirra
Regulations within the period of disallowance. For the
majority, the mere existence of such oversight was insufficient to exclude
procedural fairness. Thus, for the majority, the efficacy of the parliamentary
scrutiny scheme for delegated legislation was not
a consideration. It is unclear
whether Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ drew any inference about the
quality of that scheme.
Their reasoning may, instead, have rested on the
fundamental difference between procedural fairness and parliamentary scrutiny.
Andrew Edgar has pointed out, ‘[p]rocedural fairness applies to
administrative decisions that affect a person directly and
individually, and not
to political or policy decisions that affect the public
generally’.
Parliamentary scrutiny is suited to the latter type of decision: policy
decisions with broad consequences, not decisions applying
directly to specific
individuals (even if such a decision comes in the form of delegated
legislation). In short, the textual and
contextual features identified by South
Australia were not sufficient to exclude the obligations of procedural fairness.
For Steward J, in contrast, the existence of ‘effective parliamentary
supervision and oversight’ was one of four considerations
leading to the
conclusion.
Unlike the majority justices, his Honour ruled that there was a
‘sufficient indication’ of Parliament’s intention
any obligations of procedural
fairness.34F
In reaching this
conclusion, Steward J noted that the
Legislative Instruments Act 1978
obliges the Legislative Review Committee of Parliament to inquire into and
consider the regulation. The Committee can, if it so wishes,
form an opinion
that the regulation ought to be disallowed and, if so, it must report that
opinion to both Houses of
Parliament.35F
J also referred to a ‘further layer of Parliamentary oversight’ in
the form of review by the Crime and Public
Integrity Policy
Committee.36F
The existence of
both of these mechanisms, in Steward J’s view, ‘strongly suggests
that Parliament intended for this
to be the principal way of ensuring that
regulations made [under the Act] are both effective and
appropriate’.37F
to this view, Steward J relied on the mere existence of these two mechanisms,
with no regard to how they actually work
in practice or the extent of the
scrutiny that had in fact occurred in the making of the Cowirra Regulations.
This is something we
explore later in the article.
In addition, Steward J contrasted the procedure in place in the Cowirra
Regulations for declaring property to be a prescribed place
with the complex
regime set out in the
Serious and Organised Crime (Control) Act 2008
(SA). Under that legislation, there is a complex procedure for declaring an
organisation to be a ‘declared organisation’.
That procedure
involves detailed requirements to inform the affected organisation of the
grounds and material being relied upon.
In other words, the legislation itself
provides a ‘clear statutory mechanism for the giving of procedural
fairness’.38F
As Steward J
noted, the absence of this kind of complex procedure from the Cowirra
Regulations was a ‘further indication of
Parliament’s intention of
what was required’ when declaring property to be a prescribed
Disorganized Developments
thus provides a useful case study of how
courts draw inferences about parliamentary scrutiny mechanisms when determining
the validity
of delegated legislation. While for both the majority and minority
justices the existence of scrutiny processes was only one factor
that bore upon
their consideration of whether Parliament intended to exclude procedural
fairness, there were some differences in
their approaches. Both the majority and
minority referred to the existence of these oversight mechanisms but took
different views
as to their significance. While the majority justices noted the
‘limited’ oversight of delegated legislation, Steward
J appeared to
place more weight on the existence of parliamentary oversight mechanisms.
As explained above, Steward J appeared to assume that these mechanisms
offered effective scrutiny, with no examination of how they
operate in practice
or whether they offer any meaningful check on the regulation-making
There was no
consideration, by any of the justices, of the extent to which the Cowirra
Regulations had in fact been subject to parliamentary
scrutiny before being
enacted. This was also not addressed in the written submissions.
The next Part questions whether the legislative scrutiny process actually
performed by the LRC fits Steward J’s description
of ‘effective
parliamentary supervision and
oversight’.41F
‘Effective Parliamentary Supervision and
Oversight’?
In every Australian jurisdiction, a dedicated legislative review committee is
responsible for scrutinising delegated
legislation.42F
McNamara and
Quilter explain that the rationale for such scrutiny committees is that they
‘might curb (intended and unintended)
infringements of rights and
liberties arising from Parliamentary
law-making’.43F
observes that such committees are ‘more effective in regard to delegated
legislation than primary legislation as government
control of the parliament can
secure the passage of what might be regarded as oppressive provisions in
The scrutiny
process provides an opportunity upstream to correct any problems. Hence there is
the potential for this scrutiny process
to lift the quality of executive
lawmaking as well as transparency and accountability.
It is worth noting that across Australia’s scrutiny committees for
delegated legislation, there is diversity in their composition,
powers and resources. This is made clear by Pearce and Argument’s tome
Delegated Legislation in Australia
which also offers an understanding of
the strengths and weaknesses of these committees. Producing this diversity is
the varying size
of parliaments in Australia, with South Australia, Tasmania,
the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory having the
parliaments. Where the scrutiny committee operates in a bicameral parliament,
much depends on whether it is a joint committee
drawn from both the houses of
parliament. Bastoni and Macintyre explain:
Most of the committees that exist at a State level are joint committees ... This
cripples the committees in terms of time, as lower
house members have to devote
a significant amount of time to electorate duties, and thus reduces the time in
which the committees
can sit. The use of joint committees can also often result
in governing party dominance of the committee system. ... Committees at
level are not always resourced
appropriately.45F
They flag that ‘[s]mall parliaments present problems in
carrying out these key democratic functions’, by which they mean
function of keeping the government of the day
accountable.46F
reasons, it is not possible to evaluate the effectiveness of legislative
scrutiny committees across the board by basing
this evaluation on an
understanding of Australia’s pre-eminent committee for scrutinising
delegated legislation, the Senate
Standing Committee on Regulations and
Ordinances (‘SSCRO’) — established by federal Parliament in
1932 and later
renamed the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of
Delegated Legislation (‘SSCSDL’). It is more fruitful to examine
scrutiny mechanisms that exist in particular jurisdictions: in this case, South
Australia. At the same time, it is worth noting
that the operation and
innovations of the federal scrutiny system can have a flow-on effect for
legislative scrutiny across Australia,
particularly in smaller parliaments.
The South Australian Parliament was the first of the state and territory
parliaments to establish such a scrutiny committee, the Joint
Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, in 1938. The current LRC took on the functions of the
Joint Committee via the
Parliamentary Committees Act 1991
’). The LRC is a joint committee of six members, three
from each house, with Ministers being
ineligible.
The Presiding Member comes from the Upper House and has a casting
To evaluate the effectiveness of the LRC,
Part III(A)
of this article
considers the LRC’s workload, functions, powers and processes and seeks to
gauge the strength of the legislative
framework that supports its work.
questions whether it is possible to understand a parliamentary committee
for scrutinising delegated legislation to be ‘effective’
in terms of
its capacity to offer a substitute to affording procedural fairness to adversely
affected individuals, such as the owners
and occupiers who were affected by the
Cowirra Regulations.
The LRC’s Workload and
A lack of time and resources is commonly identified by parliamentarians as
one of the main constraints on the capacity of committees
to perform legislative
This is compounded where a parliamentary committee has multiple functions. This
is the case for the LRC which under the
has multiple functions which
include conducting inquiries into a broad range of matters including law reform
and petitions.50F
Relevantly, s
12(b) of the
provides that one of the LRC’s functions is
‘to inquire into, consider and report on subordinate legislation’.
The process of performing this scrutiny function is set out in
Legislative Instruments Act 1978
(SA) which provide that all
regulations are to be laid before each House of Parliament within six sitting
days of being made and
that all regulations are referred to the LRC for
The process of scrutinising delegated legislation involves a formidable
workload. In August 2021, the Inquiry into the Effectiveness
of the Current
System of Parliamentary Committees reported that in the South Australian
Parliament secondary legislation constituted
70% of all law
which translates into 86% of total enactments in South Australia between 2018
and 2020. Each year the LRC scrutinises approximately
400 instruments based on
its scrutiny principles. While the making of regulations for prescribing a place
requires that each place be a separate
regulation,53F
this is not the
case with all instruments, some of which can be very
In 2020, the year the Cowirra Regulations were laid before Parliament, the LRC
considered 469 instruments which made up 91% of all
legislation made that year
by the South Australian
Parliament.55F
In terms of time, in practice the LRC generally meets for 1 to 1.5 hours each
sitting week.56F
In 2020, it met
on 21 occasions.57F
This equates
to 21 to 30 hours in which to scrutinise 469 instruments and any petitions. In
2020, the LRC subsequently tabled 20
scrutiny reports in the Parliament in
regard to these instruments.58F
The frequency of meetings and reporting is largely due to the time limit of 14
sitting days for the disallowance of regulations,
which places pressure on the
The timeline for scrutinising the Cowirra Regulations illustrates this
pressure starkly. The regulations were made (and commenced)
on 17 December 2020:
after the final sitting day of the year. The first sitting day of 2021 was
Tuesday 2 February. Since the LRC
meets on the Wednesday of a sitting
its first opportunity to consider the Cowirra Regulations was Wednesday
3 February, over six weeks after they commenced. While the
agenda and minutes are not made public, the LRC tabled a report on 31 March 2021
advising that the Committee
considers it necessary for a Notice of Motion for Disallowance to be given in
relation to each of the Regulations in both Houses,
before the expiration of 14
sitting days, to allow the Committee time to complete its
deliberations.
suggests the LRC had not had time to scrutinise the Cowirra Regulations in the
more-than-three months since they had been made.
Seeking extra time in this way
is an established practice of the LRC, albeit ‘not
preferred’.61F
2021 the LRC provided a further report advising it had resolved to take no
action and to not proceed with the notice of
motion to disallow the Cowirra
Regulations.
While it is difficult to draw conclusions in the absence of evidence of the
LRC’s substantive deliberations, the experience
with the Cowirra
Regulations does demonstrate the length of time the LRC can take to scrutinise
even relatively straightforward delegated
legislation. This, we surmise, is
likely the result of the Committee’s heavy workload and light resourcing.
Delay is troubling
in this context because regulations often commence before the
LRC completes its scrutiny.63F
The Cowirra Regulations, for example, had been in force for more than five
months before the LRC completed its scrutiny process.
Once delegated legislation
has commenced, that very fact may affect parliamentary scrutiny; potential
confusion and uncertainty may
weigh against disallowing a regulation that has
already come into force.
The LRC performs its work with minimal personnel. As noted above, the LRC
consists of six members of Parliament. Their work is supported
by less than two
full-time staff members, only one of whom is legally
trained.64F
comparison, the SSCSDL has five staff including an independent legal advisor,
the New South Wales Parliament has four staff
to assist its Legislative Review
Committee and the Western Australian Parliament has
There is a real
question whether the LRC is adequately resourced to deal with its onerous
workload,66F
especially when we
examine the breadth of the scrutiny principles against which regulations are
assessed. In a bid to manage and
reduce its workload, in mid-2020 the LRC tabled
a detailed Information Guide on its 11 scrutiny principles and distributed this
to all parts of the executive, thus giving them notice of the
explanatory material required by the Committee for each
instrument.67F
The LRC’s Scrutiny
The LRC’s 11 scrutiny principles are not set out in legislation or
Standing Orders
but they are set out informally in other documents such
as the LRC’s
2022 Information Guide (‘
LRC Information
informal articulation of these principles has allowed for their expansion and
contraction and also their close alignment with
those principles used by other
similar scrutiny committees in Australia, in particular the
Since mid-2020 the LRC’s scrutiny principles cover 38 considerations.
In common with other scrutiny bodies, this remit is ‘extremely
Information Guide
on the SSCSDL’s
first set of Guidelines.72F
SSCSDL explains that these scrutiny grounds are underpinned by the protection
and promotion of fundamental rule of law principles
including procedural
fairness, separation of powers and transparency and
accountability.
To evaluate Steward J’s view in
Disorganized Developments
the existence of the LRC suggests the declaration of a prescribed place is not
subject to the rules of procedural fairness,
it is relevant to examine those
scrutiny principles that invoke procedural fairness. Until mid-2020, the
scrutiny principles required
direct consideration of whether instruments were
‘inconsistent with the principles of natural justice’ but amendments
made in June 2020 removed this direct
reference.74F
Information Guide
explains that, in relation to each instrument referred to
the committee, the LRC scrutinises whether, inter alia:
(d) those likely to be affected by the instrument were adequately consulted
in relation to it; and
(h) it trespasses unduly on personal rights and liberties; and
(k) it complies with any other ground relating to the technical scrutiny of
delegated legislation that the committee considers
appropriate.75F
LRC Information Guide
explains that in regard to scrutiny
principle (k), one consideration is ‘whether an instrument referred to the
Committee ...
is inconsistent with principles of natural
justice’.76F
The affording
of procedural fairness is thus within this
consideration.77F
assessment of procedural fairness may also be caught by scrutiny principles (d)
Adequate Consultation
In relation to scrutiny principle (d), on adequate consultation, the
Information Guide
explains that
the Committee may consider, for example:
(a) if adequate
opportunity was given to persons likely to be affected by an instrument referred
to the Committee in accordance with
the spirit or intent of the Parliament,
including by inviting submissions or encouraging participation in public
hearings ...78F
While this consideration can be useful in ensuring that the Parliament offers
avenues of consultation to those persons or classes
of persons directly and
adversely affected by an instrument, it is clear that context is important. In
the context of both the Cowirra
Regulations and the
, consultation
via participation in public hearings would not be ‘in accordance with the
spirit or intent of the Parliament’
which is to disrupt the sphere of
organised crime.
South Australian legislation is silent as to whether consultation should take
place. Given that the LRC draws on the processes of
the SSCSDL, it is useful to
consider how consultation is understood at the federal level where there is a
stronger legislative framework
that supports the scrutiny process. The
overarching purpose of the
Legislation Act 2003
Legislation Act
’) as articulated by
provide a comprehensive regime for the management’ of legislation. The Act
seeks to achieve this overarching purpose
by, inter alia, ‘encouraging
rule-makers to undertake appropriate consultation before making legislative
instruments’
and ‘establishing improved mechanisms for Parliamentary
scrutiny of legislative
instruments’.
Section 17(1) of the Act provides:
Before a legislative instrument is made, the rule-maker must be satisfied that
there has been undertaken any consultation that is:
(a) considered by the rule-maker to be appropriate; and
(b) reasonably practicable to
Section 17(3) explains that ‘such consultation
notification’ of persons or bodies likely to be affected by the proposed
instrument and furthermore that ‘[s]uch
notification
submissions’.81F
consultation is not mandatory: a failure to consult does not affect the validity
of the legislation,82F
explanation must be given.83F
These provisions in the
Legislation Act
set up a formal system.
is a ‘substantive consultation
obligation’.84F
gives the federal executive discretion as to the level of consultation
produces a presumption, flagged in
consultation will take place in regard to federal delegated
legislation.85F
Rights and Liberties
Scrutiny principle (h) requires consideration of whether a regulation
‘trespasses unduly on personal rights and liberties’.
this broad scrutiny principle has been used widely across Australian scrutiny
committees86F
as well as in
Zealand.88F
At times this
principle has been dismissed as being overly vague to the point of being
‘meaningless’.89F
This criticism has presumably been one of the prompts for scrutiny bodies to
produce an information guide or a set of guidelines
in order to make public
their detailed interpretation of these principles.
In regard to principle (h), the
LRC Information Guide
explains that ‘the Committee may consider, for example, whether an
instrument referred to the Committee contains:
... (g) provisions that interfere
with property rights
In regard to this
principle, there is some divergence between the
Information
and the SSCSDL’s
as the latter’s
interpretation of this scrutiny principle omits any reference to property rights
but includes an explicit reference
to ‘procedural
fairness’.91F
The LRC’s set of 11 scrutiny principles, with its 38 considerations, is
laudable but it raises questions as to whether this
extremely wide remit is
feasible given South Australia’s weak legislative framework for scrutiny
and the LRC’s resources
and workload.
Provision of Explanatory Material to the
For the LRC to perform its scrutiny process, the
LRC Information Guide
indicates that the Committee is to receive explanatory material from the
executive to accompany and explain the effect or purpose
of each instrument.
This requirement is set out as scrutiny principle
In theory, the material
should provide information about the consultations with those affected by the
instrument and, if this is
not provided, the Committee can request this
information.93F
latter, it may defer the instrument so as to complete its
deliberations.94F
Unlike the Commonwealth, South Australia does not have a legislative
framework whereby explanatory memoranda or explanatory statements
are provided
either for Bills or for
regulations.95F
At the federal
level, explanatory statements are tabled in each House of Parliament.
Legislation Act
sets out the requirements for explanatory
statements, including that they ‘must ... explain the purpose and
operation of the
instrument’.96F
example, if consultation has taken place, a description of that consultation
must be included.97F
Explanatory
statements are also used by the Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital
Territory;98F
its scrutiny body,
the Standing Committee on Justice and Community Safety (‘JACS’),
must consider whether an explanatory
statement ‘meets the technical or
stylistic standards expected by the
Assembly’.99F
South Wales, a regulatory impact statement must be forwarded to its
parliamentary scrutiny committee as must ‘all written
comments and
submissions received’ as part of the required consultation
process.100F
While the quality
of these documents may
and there is no
consequence for executive non-compliance, these formal systems may reduce the
time spent by a scrutiny committee
in seeking this information from the
Despite the detailed
LRC Information Guide
, inadequate explanatory
material from the executive continues to pose a major problem for the
The LRC has expressed concern that ‘[t]oo often the Committee receives
supporting reports that insufficiently detailed the
effect of provisions of
legislative instruments or included extraneous information that is of little
assistance’.103F
varying ‘quality of explanatory material that accompany those
instruments’104F
also compound the complexity of some of the instruments scrutinised. According
to two (non-government) LRC members, ‘[o]ne
of the greatest abuses in [the
explanatory material] reports is the absence of information relating to any
consultation the department
and agencies have undertaken in drafting those
regulations’.105F
argue that the ‘difficulty in obtaining information ... can often prevent
proper scrutiny by the
Committee’.106F
Inadequate information also hampers the scrutiny of federal delegated
legislation.107F
federal system of explanatory statements set out in the
Legislation Act
the problem for the SSCSDL is predominantly one of the ‘quality’ of
these statements, in particular whether they ‘are
drafted with sufficient
precision’.108F
level of care and precision is also relevant to information about consultation.
In its guideline on consultation, the SSCRO explains
does not interpret [s 15 of the
Legislation Act
] as requiring a highly
detailed description of any consultation undertaken. However, a bare or very
generalised statement ... may
be considered insufficient to meet the
requirements of the [
Legislation
From reading the
Workload Report
, it appears
that the provision of ‘bare or very generalised statements’ may be
the norm for the South Australian executive
and that the
provision of
information may also be a problem. Via the
Legislation Act
, the federal
framework for the scrutiny of delegated legislation offers a formal system of
requiring the executive to provide information
to Parliament, including on
whether consultation has been undertaken.
In South Australia, the ongoing problem of the executive failing consistently
to provide adequate explanatory material underlines
two things: first, the
executive is not taking sufficiently seriously the role of the LRC in performing
this scrutiny role on behalf
of Parliament; and second, the LRC has a
legislative framework that is weaker than that under which the federal SSCSDL,
the Australian
Capital Territory’s JACS and New South Wales’s
Legislative Review Committee perform. These dynamics impact on whether
can effectively perform its scrutiny function. They also illustrate the
diversity of practice across legislative scrutiny
committees in different
The LRC and the Power to Disallow
Like other legislative scrutiny committees, the LRC does not have the power
to disallow regulations. Where the Committee decides that
an instrument should
be disallowed, its representative in each House gives notice of a motion to
disallow an instrument and provides
the Committee’s grounds for that
opinion.110F
period of 14 sitting days to introduce a notice of motion once a regulation has
been laid before
Parliament.111F
It is up to
each House to determine by vote any motion to disallow the instrument in
accordance with its standing orders. As the
Lower House is controlled by
government and there is strong party discipline in Australia, it is the Upper
House which exercises
this veto power over regulations. According to
, in the Commonwealth Parliament, the Senate has never rejected a
committee recommendation that an offending instrument be
disallowed.112F
In practice, such scrutiny committees generally take a less confrontational
approach, by first seeking to engage in dialogue with
the part of the executive
responsible for the instrument and to request further information and thus
encourage compliance and correction.
This is demonstrated by the LRC’s
2020 Annual Report
which details 13 regulations which raised concerns for
the Committee, with only one set of regulations being disallowed by the Upper
This is similar to
dynamics in the federal Senate where the potential for a disallowance motion
notice means the executive understands
that it must either seek to accommodate
the concerns of the scrutiny committee or risk losing its
legislation.114F
‘behind the scenes’ work by a scrutiny committee is not always
apparent to the public or other Members of Parliament
and can impact on the
LRC’s workload.
Evaluations of the LRC’s
Effectiveness
There are three sources by which we can evaluate the LRC’s
effectiveness. The first is an evaluation offered by Professor Lorne
comparative law scholar who studies the scrutiny of delegated legislation across
Westminster parliaments in the Anglosphere.
In Neudorf’s view, the process
for making delegated legislation in South Australia is ‘paper thin’
because the
process ‘fails to impose adequate and meaningful controls on
lawmaking’.115F
pins a large part of the problem on the fact that the legislative framework does
not impose ‘robust accountability
and transparency measures found in the
ordinary parliamentary
process’.116F
example, the South Australia legislation does not impose any requirements on the
executive to provide explanatory materials or
to conduct consultation of any
kind before new delegated laws are
Neudorf also points
to the LRC’s limited resources to handle its significant workload, and
argues that it ‘is in desperate
need of additional staffing
resources’.118F
its resourcing, he asks: ‘How can you possibly be applying effectively 38
different considerations for 1,300 pages of
new text every year, and then
reading all that enabling
legislation?’119F
A second source for evaluating the Committee is an inquiry, conducted in
2020–21 by the South Australian Select Committee on
the Effectiveness of
the Current System of Parliamentary Committees, which reported that the
functions of the LRC ‘have become
clouded with other unrelated
functions’ such as the function to report and inquire into petitions which
was added in 2019.120F
report of the inquiry, quoted by legislation experts Pearce and Argument, agrees
that the workload of the LRC has ‘increased
to an untenable level ... and
takes away the important scrutiny focus of that
Committee’.121F
A third source for evaluating the Committee is the internal evaluations
conducted in early 2021 by the Committee itself. In this evaluation,
members (one opposition member and one crossbench member) publicly flagged the
Committee’s
‘dysfunction’.122F
The two non-government members warn that ‘[t]he inherent risk in the
Committee’s current practice and time restraints
is that despite its best
intentions, issues of significance could easily be
overlooked’.123F
urge: ‘There must be a change in approach to the Committee structure
one of technical review
rather than perceiving this Committee as a
stamp for the policy of the government of the
points to a divergence between the aspiration and reality of scrutiny committees
taking a technical approach to scrutinising
delegated legislation. The
aspiration is set out in the
LRC Information Guide
: ‘The Committee
takes a non-partisan technical approach to its inquiry into and consideration of
instruments referred to
aligned with the statements of most scrutiny committees in bicameral Australian
parliaments who style themselves as technical
scrutiny committees that avoid
scrutinising policy and adhere as strictly as possible to applying scrutiny
principles.126F
The reality
is indicated by a comment made by the two members that
it has become common practice for successive chairs of the Committee to exercise
their casting vote to wave through legislative instruments
that clearly
don’t meet the scrutiny expectations of at least half of the Committee
members.127F
They express concern that Parliament may be unaware of these
‘contentious votes’ and that there is no system by which
alert Parliament when this problem
arises.128F
As Presiding Members and Chairs of the LRC have always been government
members,129F
we can gain a
glimpse of the partisan dynamics that can dominate parliamentary committees. For
government members, there may be a
temptation to take a ‘tick and
flick’ approach to the Committee’s scrutiny function, while the
Chair, who holds
the casting vote, might be tempted to wave through regulations
or to declare issues to be matters of policy and hence off
limits.130F
At the same time,
opposition and crossbench members might have more motivation to take a rigorous
approach. These partisan dynamics
might be motivating members to lose sight of
the LRC’s safeguard function of performing technical scrutiny on the
Parliament as whole.
To sum up, the LRC’s under-resourcing and multiple functions, combined
with its weak legislative scheme and the half-hearted
approach of the executive
to supporting the scrutiny process, mean that the Committee is not positioned to
parliamentary scrutiny and oversight’ to the
extent that it could form the context for displacing the common law duty to
procedural fairness. The effectiveness of the ‘safeguard’
provided by the LRC is dependent on many dynamics within both
Parliament and the
system of government.
Thus, the High Court majority’s assessment of the parliamentary
oversight offered by South Australian parliamentary committees
‘general and limited’ is an apt characterisation, certainly more
accurate than Steward J’s sanguine reference
to ‘effective
parliamentary supervision and
oversight’.131F
the majority nor Steward J, however, offer any explanation of how they reached
their view about the efficacy of the scrutiny
process. Both positions —
that scrutiny of the Cowirra Regulations was ‘general and limited’
that it was ‘effective’
— reflect unexamined assumptions about
the nature of the legislative scrutiny mechanisms.
Courts and Facts: Assumptions about Legislative
The disconnect discussed in Part III between judicial assumptions about
legislative scrutiny and the realities of the limited oversight
by Parliament
that occurs in practice raises the question of how courts are, or ought to be,
informed of the relevant factual matrix
when considering the validity of
delegated legislation. Of course, this question — about the facts that
underpin judicial determinations
— is by no means limited to delegated
legislation. Similar difficulties arise in other
contexts.132F
However, in
this article we are focusing our enquiry on the process of making delegated
legislation for two reasons. First, this
is the context that arose in
Disorganized Developments
and the Court’s approach in that case
shows how different assumptions about these processes can have divergent results
of validity. Secondly, the particular factual matrix that underpins the
making of delegated legislation will be quite different to
other contexts, where
more general legislative or social facts — including, where necessary,
specialist expertise — may
be required. We are not, in this article,
concerned with investigating the factual bases of courts’ decisions
generally. Rather,
we are concerned with the effectiveness of the existing
legislative scrutiny processes, and the reliance that courts can and should
place on these processes. The sheer volume of delegated legislation, as well as
the impact it has on the lives of
citizens,133F
suggests these
questions deserve attention.
There are a number of circumstances in which a court might consider the
effectiveness of a legislative scrutiny process in relation
to delegated
legislation. As
Disorganized Developments
illustrated, the existence and
efficacy of legislative scrutiny mechanisms may be one consideration relevant to
determining whether
the making of delegated legislation attracts a duty of
procedural fairness. Another example relates to the interpretation of delegated
legislation. In
Environment Protection Authority v Condon
, Leeming JA
explained that, when construing regulations, ‘[i]t is legitimate to have
regard to the fact that regulations are
less carefully drafted, and less keenly
scrutinised, than primary
legislation’.
Therefore, ‘minor divergences in
wording’135F
language’136F
hold the same significance as they would in primary legislation. Applying this
reasoning, in
Day v Harness Racing New South Wales
, an obvious error in
the name of a prohibited substance listed in local rules made by a statutory
authority was explained on the
basis that the rules were
not drafted by Parliamentary Counsel, nor scrutinised in the way that tends to
occur of a Bill as it passes through Parliament and
receives assent. It is
legitimate to have regard to the fact that regulations are less carefully
drafted, and less keenly scrutinised,
than primary legislation. It is equally
legitimate to have regard to the fact that [the relevant local rule] was drafted
by Mr Sanders
[Harness Racing NSW’s Manager Integrity and Chairman of
Stewards], and adopted by the five members of HRNSW. I mean no disrespect,
none of those men would profess to expertise in legal drafting. Their rules
should be construed bearing as much in
Accordingly,
the Court held that the reference in the local rules to ‘cobalt
chloride’ was clearly intended to be a reference
to ‘cobalt’.
A variation on this theme appears in
Croc’s Franchising v Alamdo
construing regulations designed to give commercial tenants relief during the
COVID-19 pandemic, the New South Wales Court of Appeal
took ‘judicial
notice of the fact that many steps were taken in haste at the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic’.139F
Accordingly, the Court had ‘greater than usual leeway in construing the
language’ of the
regulations.140F
The existence of parliamentary scrutiny may also be relevant to the
interpretation of so-called ‘Henry VIII’ clauses:
that is, clauses
that allow delegated legislation to amend primary legislation. In
Constructions v Goudappel
Gageler J considered the provision for
committee scrutiny and disallowance when interpreting such a
clause.141F
That parliamentary oversight, together with the scope for judicial review of the
exercise of the regulation-making power, diminishes
the utility of the
pejorative labelling of the empowering provisions as ‘Henry VIII
clauses’. The empowering provisions
reflect not a return to the executive
autocracy of a Tudor monarch, but the striking of a legislated balance between
flexibility
and accountability in the working out of the detail of replacing one
modern complex statutory scheme with
another.142F
this reasoning, the requirement of parliamentary scrutiny justifies a more
generous interpretation of the executive’s regulation-making
Each of these approaches reflects underlying factual assumptions about the
process of making delegated legislation. It is well accepted
fact-finding role of courts is constrained. Judges are, on the whole, not
permitted to simply conduct free-range inquiries
in order to establish relevant
facts or to acquire background information or context. With limited exceptions,
the scheme of fact-finding
before courts is party driven. As Mason CJ observed
Cunliffe v Commonwealth
in the context of establishing a burden on the
implied freedom of political communication, the ‘relevant facts must
be agreed or proved or be such that the Court is prepared to take account
of them by judicial notice or
otherwise’.143F
Judicial notice operates as a shortcut to formal proof. It enables judges to
have regard to well-known facts without regard to evidence
or making any further
inquiries, as well as to those facts that can be ascertained by reference to
authoritative works.144F
Although the boundaries of judicial notice are somewhat indistinct and have been
subject to criticism,145F
is not in dispute that judicial notice is an essential component of judicial
decision-making. It would simply not be feasible
for courts to require evidence
on every factual matter.
When assessing the validity of delegated legislation, as occurred in
Disorganized Developments
, the relevant context concerns the processes of
lawmaking. Courts are routinely called upon to assess the validity of
legislation,146F
delegated legislation, and it can be assumed that judges have knowledge of the
processes by which laws are made. It is
assumed that judges, in courts of all
levels, have general knowledge of the passage of laws through Parliament as well
as the general
processes that attend the making of delegated legislation.
Indeed, this might be seen as squarely within the expertise of courts,
something that courts routinely take into account when assessing legislation. It
is common, for example, for courts to have regard
to parliamentary materials
such as second reading speeches when considering questions of interpretation or
validity.147F
Whether or not
the label of judicial notice is used, it seems unquestionable that courts can
and do take notice of these basic facts
processes.148F
Less clear is the extent to which courts can and should scrutinise the
of these lawmaking processes. In the context of primary
legislation, there has been a longstanding British tradition which prevents
questioning of proceedings in Parliament. This prohibition, which emerges from
art 9 of the
Bill of Rights 1689
, was designed to protect parliamentary
privilege. While for many years it operated to prevent courts referring to
parliamentary debates,
this has been relaxed — both in the United Kingdom
and Australia — and it is now commonplace for courts to rely on extrinsic
material.149F
In addition, as
Kavanagh has argued in the context of the United Kingdom, there is a distinction
between courts analysing the quality
of the decision-making
parliament, and a court analysing the substantive decision or outcome of the
parliamentary process.150F
Kavanagh explains, it is ‘possible to assess the
quality of the
decision-making process
without evaluating the merits of the individual
arguments’, meaning that this would ‘fall outside the forbidden
territory’.151F
context of secondary legislation, courts in the United Kingdom have assessed the
adequacy of scrutiny
processes,152F
incompatibility was pointed out but Parliament chose to proceed anyway, and also
where there was simply insufficient scrutiny
debate.153F
In both types of
cases the United Kingdom Supreme Court has concluded that the secondary
legislation was incompatible with rights
set out in the
European Convention
on Human Rights
Of course, here we are concerned with the adequacy of parliamentary scrutiny
of delegated legislation rather than primary legislation.
In this context, the
relevant question is whether the mere existence of such measures is sufficient,
or whether courts should assess
the adequacy of these measures. In the context
of the United Kingdom’s
Human Rights Act 1998
, Richard Edwards has
suggested that the level of deference to be accorded to Parliament should vary
depending on the relevant lawmaking
Moreover, the origin of the legal measure in question can to some extent colour
the level of deference to be applied. The stronger
the democratic pedigree of
the measure the more appropriate deference may be. Clearly, rules promulgated by
un-elected decision-makers
and rules based on the common law should receive less
deference than those made by
Parliament.155F
to this reasoning, delegated and other subordinate forms of legislation should
be subject to less weight — or
deference156F
they have not been subject to rigorous Parliamentary debate. As we have shown in
Part III above, the regulations
in question in
Disorganized Developments
were, in practice, subject to a ‘paper thin’ level of scrutiny. It
must be noted that in this context the High Court
was not concerned with
assessing whether the regulations infringed a protected right or freedom, and so
the Court was not conducting
a proportionality inquiry, which is often the
context in which deference is applied. Instead, the Court considered
parliamentary
scrutiny processes as one factor in determining whether Parliament
intended to exclude the obligation to afford procedural fairness.
explained in Part II above, both the majority and minority justices considered
of such processes might be relevant. For the majority, the
‘general and limited’ oversight did not support any implication
exclude procedural fairness. In contrast, Steward J appeared to place more
weight on the existence of scrutiny mechanisms, suggesting
that ‘effective
parliamentary supervision and oversight’ supported an intention to exclude
procedural fairness.
We suggest that courts ought to be cautious about drawing inferences
regarding the quality of the scrutiny of delegated legislation
from the mere
existence of legislative scrutiny mechanisms. Just because mechanisms exist,
such as the LRC in South Australia and
analogous bodies in other jurisdictions,
this does not mean there is ‘effective’ parliamentary scrutiny. In
Disorganized Developments
the majority’s recognition of the
‘limited’ parliamentary scrutiny more accurately reflects the
situation in practice.
The consequence of the majority’s view was, as we
have explained, that they placed little weight on the existence of scrutiny
terms of assessing whether procedural fairness applied. We suggest that if
want to place reliance on the existence of parliamentary
scrutiny, they would need to be satisfied that such scrutiny occurred.
We suggest two different vehicles by which courts could become informed of
the relevant level of scrutiny. First, courts may take
judicial notice of
general facts about the effectiveness of parliamentary scrutiny. For example, a
body of literature deals with
the deficiencies of such scrutiny
mechanisms,157F
and the work
of these committees themselves is often documented in publicly available
reports.158F
If courts were
to take judicial notice in this way, it would be incumbent on them to afford
procedural fairness to the parties by
informing them that the court proposed to
take judicial notice of certain matters and giving the parties the opportunity
proposal.159F
Secondly, material about the adequacy of scrutiny that in fact occurred in
relation to a particular legislative instrument could be
the subject of
submissions and/or evidence by counsel. Counsel could, for example, submit
evidence about the actual scrutiny that
occurred. This evidence may be included
in submissions or appended to submissions, as commonly occurs in constitutional
Although in
proceedings for the judicial review of administrative action extrinsic
evidence161F
is not routinely
adduced,162F
at times such
evidence will be relevant. For instance, evidence may be relevant to questions
such as whether a regulation is unreasonable
disproportionate.163F
Evidence of questions asked in committees about, for example, the consultation
that has taken place with affected parties might be
relevant to whether the
rules of procedural fairness have been complied
In practice,
evidence about the adequacy of the scrutiny process is likely to be presented by
those seeking to defend the validity
of delegated legislation (often the state,
as was the case in
Disorganized Developments
century, parliaments across Australia established
legislative scrutiny committees as safeguards to counter the danger of
having no direct control over regulations and to minimise the risk of
regulations ‘slipping through without any member being
aware of its
contents’.165F
hard to argue with the following assessment of this scrutiny work:
Considering the number of regulations made each year, and the enormous variety
of subjects, on which members generally have little
information, the
committee’s work will be
arduous.166F
Both of these statements were made in 1938, when South
Australia’s Joint Committee on Subordinate Legislation was first
established, and they remain pertinent. In the 21
century, scrutiny committees for delegated legislation continue to have an
‘arduous’ and onerous role in scrutinising
the ever-increasing
number of regulations, and, without adequate resources and support from the
executive, there is much chance of
more instruments like the Cowirra Regulations
‘slipping through’ without adequate scrutiny. This could be
if Parliament were to enact a legal framework by which the executive
was compelled to make public its explanation of the purpose
of each regulation
as well as its consultation process. Scrutinising the stream of ‘executive
law-making creep’167F
requires a more robust system in order for Parliament to retain control over its
delegated legislative power. Given the executive’s
dominance of Parliament
in our system of government, a shifting away from a largely informal and
discretionary system is unlikely
unless there is some incentive to follow the
lead of federal Parliament via its
Legislation
In this article, our examination of the work of the LRC shows the High Court
majority were correct not to use the Committee’s
existence as a
justification for procedural fairness being excluded, albeit without providing
any clear reasons for this position.
We suggest the Committee suffers from
significant constraints, both in terms of resources and process, which mean it
is ultimately
hamstrung in terms of its ability to provide adequate scrutiny.
Furthermore, the existence of parliamentary committees cannot be
used to obviate
the executive’s obligation to consider individual common law rights when
making delegated legislation.
In this article we question whether it is prudent for judges to make
assumptions about legislative oversight committees in relation
to delegated
legislation. Using
Disorganized Developments
and South Australia as a
case study, we argue that an idealised view of the delegated lawmaking process
bears little resemblance to
practice where there are serious concerns regarding
the transparency, accountability and quality of delegated lawmaking. While some
aspects of this case study are distinctly South Australian, our examination of
delegated lawmaking elsewhere reveals both common
challenges and jurisdictional
variations. This underscores our point that courts should be cautious about
drawing inferences from
the mere existence of a parliamentary scrutiny
Please cite this article as:
Laura Grenfell, Anne Carter and Anna Olijnyk, ‘Scrutinising the
Scrutiny Process in the Courts’
[2024] SydLawRw 14
(2024) 46(3)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20373.
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution.
∗ Associate Professor, Adelaide Law School, University of Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia. Email: laura.grenfell@adelaide.edu.au;
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6172-6719.
† Senior Lecturer, Adelaide Law School, University of Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. Email: anne.carter@adelaide.edu.au;
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2862-4777.
‡ Senior Lecturer, Adelaide Law School, University of Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. Email: anna.olijnyk@adelaide.edu.au;
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0140-7657.
The authors are grateful to Georgia Chiswell for her research assistance and
to Matthew Boisseau for his guidance on the procedural
fairness issues.
The reasons for delegated
lawmaking are canvassed in Dennis Pearce and Stephen Argument,
Legislation in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 6
Cheryl Saunders,
‘Australian Democracy and Executive Law-Making: Practice and
(2016) 66 (October)
Papers on Parliament
By volume, about half of the
law of the Commonwealth consists of delegated legislation, and since the
mid-1980s tabled disallowable
instruments have risen from approximately 850 to
around 1,700 each year: Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances,
Parliament of Australia,
Parliamentary Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation
(Report, 3 June 2019) 6 [1.15] (‘
Parliamentary Scrutiny
According to an analysis
submitted by Professor Lorne Neudorf, by volume, 87% of legislation enacted by
the New South Wales Parliament
in 2019 was delegated legislation: Regulation
Committee, Parliament of New South Wales,
Making of Delegated Legislation in
New South Wales
(Report No 7 of 2020, October 2020) 3 [1.11]. In regard to
South Australia, see Lorne Neudorf, ‘Time to Take Lawmaking Seriously:
Problem of Delegated Legislation in South Australia’ (2021) 43(8)
Bulletin: Law Society of South Australia
10 (‘The Problem of
Delegated Legislation in South Australia’). For example, 88% of all new
laws in South Australia in
2020 were delegated laws.
Legislative Review Committee,
Parliament of South Australia,
The Workload of the Legislative Review
(Report, 3 February 2021) 2 (‘
LRC Workload
See Denise Meyerson,
‘Rethinking the Constitutionality of Delegated Legislation’
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
, 53; Gabrielle Appleby
and Joanna Howe, ‘Scrutinising Parliament’s Scrutiny of Delegated
Legislative Power’
(2015) 15(1)
Oxford University Commonwealth Law
Meyerson (n
Lorne Neudorf, Submission No 11 to Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into Exemption of Delegated Legislation from Parliamentary
(25 June 2020) 3; Lorne Neudorf, ‘Strengthening the
Parliamentary Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation: Lessons from Australia’
(2019) 42(4)
Canadian Parliamentary Review
25. Thilagaratnam points out
that at the federal level the lack of robust scrutiny of delegated legislation
is ‘a troubling
development, particularly as the government not
infrequently seeks to give effect to controversial policies via delegated
legislation’:
Renuka Thilagaratnam, ‘Legislative Instruments:
2012–2014’,
Human Rights Scrutiny Blog
(Blog Post, 23
December 2014)
<https://hrscrutiny.wordpress.com/2014/12/23/‌legislative-instruments-2012-2014>.
Other safeguards include the
requirement that the executive table delegated legislation in Parliament and
various requirements as
to when it can come into operation or continue in
operation: see Pearce and Argument (n
Disorganized
Developments Pty Ltd v South Australia
[2023] HCA 22
(2023) 410 ALR 508
Disorganized Developments
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Disorganized
Developments
[27] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ).
On this first ground the
High Court allowed the appeal, agreeing that the Cowirra Regulations were
ineffective as they did not declare
any place to be a prescribed place. The
Cowirra Regulations were, therefore, not supported by the Governor’s
regulation-making
power under
) s 370 and were invalid by reason of
their inefficacy.
Disorganized
Developments
) 584 [33];
Plaintiff S10/2011 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
, 666 [97];
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZSSJ
(2016) 259 CLR 180
, 205 [75] (‘
) 205 [75] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell,
Gageler, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ), cited in
Disorganized Developments
) 584 [33].
See Pearce and Argument (n
South Australia,
‘Respondent’s Submissions’, Submission in
Disorganized
Developments Pty Ltd v South Australia
, Case No A22/2022, 25 November 2022,
20 [51] (‘Respondent’s Submissions’).
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550
, 584 (Mason J) (‘
[1943] NSWStRp 20
(1934) 43 SR (NSW) 312
, 318 (Jordan CJ); Pearce and Argument (n
) 620 (citations omitted).
Disorganized
Developments
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ).
Ibid 516 [28] (Kiefel CJ,
Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ).
[38]–[40] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ).
Respondent’s
Submissions
Ibid 13 [33]. When the
regime relating to prescribed places was introduced, an initial list of 16
prescribed places was included
in regulations that formed a schedule to the
Statutes Amendment (Serious and Organised Crime) Act 2015
Disorganized
Developments
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ).
See Respondent’s
Submissions (n
) [32]–[34];
Disorganized Developments
518 [36] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ).
Disorganized
Developments
[42] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ). Note the majority did not refer
to the LRC specifically, but only
to ‘a Parliamentary Committee’ in
Note that in making this
submission South Australia pointed to the ‘Statutory Review
Committee’ established under the
Subordinate Legislation Act 1978
(SA), as well as the ‘further layer of parliamentary oversight’
provided by the Crime and Public Integrity Policy Committee
established by the
Parliamentary Committees Act 1991
this point the majority acknowledged that South Australia’s submissions
did not suggest that review by parliamentary
committees was likely to afford
procedural fairness to owners or occupiers or that such parliamentary scrutiny
would involve consideration
of matters that might be raised by an owner or
occupier if procedural fairness was afforded:
Disorganized Developments
) at 519–20 [42] (Kiefel
CJ, Gageler, Gleeson and Jagot JJ). Furthermore, they acknowledged that the
scheme of parliamentary
scrutiny was not presented by South Australia as a means
that ‘might avoid the arbitrary exercise of the regulation-making
power’: at 520 [42].
Andrew Edgar,
‘Administrative Regulation-Making: Contrasting Parliamentary and
Deliberative Legitimacy’
[2017] MelbULawRw 9
(2017) 40(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
Disorganized
Developments
) 529 [82].
Ibid 527 [73].
Ibid (citations
Ibid 593 [82], citing
The Crime and
Public Integrity Policy Committee (‘CPIPC’) is a committee that
undertakes public inquiry into the merits
of the relevant state legislative
scheme for serious and organised crime and how this scheme balances community
safety with individuals’
common law rights such as natural justice: see
Crime and Public Integrity Policy Committee, Parliament of South Australia,
Legislation Pertaining to Serious and Organised Crime
(Report No 6,
November 2021) 55 [6.7]. The CPIPC is an oversight committee but it is not a
legislative scrutiny committee. As it
does not scrutinise individual
regulations, its role is tangential in this article’s consideration of how
the courts understand
the legislative scrutiny process.
Disorganized
Developments
) 529 [82].
Ibid 529–30 [83]
(Steward J).
Though, as we explain
above, this was only one factor relied upon by Steward J and so was not, on its
own, decisive.
Disorganized
Developments
In the Commonwealth, the
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation was
established by the Senate,
Standing Orders
(October 2022) ch 5; in the
Australian Capital Territory, the Standing Committee on Justice and Community
Safety (Legislative Scrutiny
Role) was established by resolution of the
Legislative Assembly on 2 December 2020; in New South Wales, the Legislative
Review Committee
was established by the
Legislation Review Act 1987
; in the Northern Territory, the Subordinate Legislation and Publications
Committee was established by the Legislative Assembly,
Standing Orders
(21 April 2016) ord 176; in Queensland, the Scrutiny of Legislation
Committee ceased on 30 June 2011 and was devolved to seven ‘portfolio
committees’ under the
Parliament of Queensland Act 2001
(Qld) ch 5;
in South Australia, the LRC was established by the
; in Tasmania, the
Subordinate Legislation Committee was established by the
Subordinate
Legislation Committee Act 1969
; in Victoria, the Scrutiny of Acts
and Regulations Committee was established by the
Parliamentary Committees Act
; in Western Australia, the Joint Standing Committee
on Delegated Legislation was jointly established by the Legislative Assembly,
Standing Orders
(29 November 2017) ord 296 and Legislative Council,
Standing Orders
(August 2023) sch 1 item 10.
Luke McNamara and Julia
Quilter, ‘Institutional Influences on the Parameters of Criminalisation:
Parliamentary Scrutiny of
Criminal Law Bills in New South Wales’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
Dennis Pearce,
Interpretation in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 10
2023) 244 [5.1]. It is possible that Pearce’s observations are primarily
based on the performance of the Australian Senate
and its Standing Committee for
the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation.
Jordan Bastoni and Clement
Macintyre, ‘What’s in It for Us? Why Governments Need Well Resourced
Parliaments’ (2010)
Australasian Parliamentary Review
181 (citations omitted).
Ibid ss 11,
Carolyn Evans and Simon
Evans, ‘Messages from the Front Line: Parliamentarians’ Perspectives
on Rights Protection’
in Tom Campbell, KD Ewing and Adam Tomkins (eds),
The Legal Protection of Human Rights: Sceptical Essays
(Oxford University
Press, 2011) 329, 342.
These include ‘any
matter concerned with legal, constitutional or parliamentary reform or with the
administration of justice
... any matter concerned with inter-governmental
relations’ and any Act or subordinate legislation (or part of such
legislation)
having sunset clauses:
) ss 12(a)(i)–(iii), (matters
referred), (ba) (petitions).
‘“Regulation” means any regulation, rule or by-law made under
Legislative Instruments Act 1978
Select Committee on the
Effectiveness of the Current System of Parliamentary Committees, Parliament of
South Australia,
Inquiry into the Effectiveness of the Current System of
Parliamentary Committees
(Report, 25 August 2021) 66–7
Effectiveness Inquiry Report
) s 83GA(2).
For example, the 2020
Uniform Civil Rules consisted of more than 1,000 pages. These were reviewed and
scrutinised by the LRC which
provided extensive comments: see Legislative Review
Committee, Parliament of South Australia,
Annual Report of the Legislative
Review Committee 2020
(Report, 18 May 2022) 18 (‘
Annual Report
Ibid 6. Commentators note
that delegated lawmaking was at its height during the first year of the COVID-19
LRC Workload Report
) app B, 2.
Annual Report
Ibid 7. In addition, in
2020 the LRC conducted inquiries in regard to three petitions. Note that these
reports are not publicly
available on the LRC website
<https://www.parliament.sa.gov.au/‌committees/lrc>.
Legislative Review
Committee, Parliament of South Australia,
Information Guide
2022) 5 [1.7] (‘
LRC Information Guide
Legislative Review
Committee, Parliament of South Australia,
Report No 33
(31 March 2021) 1.
LRC Workload Report
Legislative Review
Committee, Parliament of South Australia,
Report No 35
(5 May 2021).
Lorne Neudorf, ‘The
Problem of Delegated Legislation in South Australia’ (n
LRC Workload Report
) 11. The 2021 Inquiry report
noted Neudorf’s recommendation of ‘five staff members to do the
technical scrutiny work
in addition to administrative support for
reporting’:
Effectiveness Inquiry Report
LRC Workload
Legislative Review
Committee, Parliament of South Australia,
Legislative Review Committee
Information Guide
(June 2020). The explanatory material required by the
Committee for each instrument is set out in the updated
LRC Information Guide
[4.1]–[4.6]
See also Department of
Premier and Cabinet, Parliament of South Australia,
Referral of Subordinate
Legislation to the Legislative Review Committee
(Premier and Cabinet
Circular 34
October 2012).
LRC Annual Report
Pearce and Argument (n
LRC Information
) (dated January
2022) was presumably modelled on the first edition of the SSCSDL’s
Guidelines which were amended in February
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation, Parliament of Australia,
(February 2020).
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation, Parliament of Australia,
Report 2021
(Report, 28 September 2022) 15–16 [2.19] (‘
Annual Report
LRC Annual Report
LRC Information
Ibid 9 [3.3(12)]. In 1998
the LRC made public its scrutiny principles in the report
Committee’s
Policy for Its Examination of Regulations
tabled in the South Australian
Parliament on 3 June 1998. The second principle relevantly provided that the
Committee would examine:
‘(b) whether the regulations unduly trespassed on
rights previously established by law or are inconsistent with the principles
natural justice ...’: at 3. This indicates that the LRC has long
considered natural justice as part of its scrutiny process.
Note that the terms
‘natural justice’ and ‘procedural fairness’ are commonly
considered to be interchangeable:
) 583 (Mason J).
LRC Information
) 8 [3.3(5)].
Legislation Act 2003
Legislation Act
In its 2019 Inquiry Report,
the SSCRO (later the SSCSDL) noted that it had limited ability to assess whether
those likely to be
affected by the instrument were adequately consulted
(scrutiny principle (d)) because of the discretion given by
Legislation
to the rule maker regarding consultation and because
satisfied with limited information: see
Parliamentary Scrutiny Report
[3.34]–[3.54]. The
Legislation Act
Review Committee has recommended that
this subjective standard for rule makers be replaced with an objective standard:
Legislation Act
Review Committee,
2021–2022 Review of the
Legislation Act 2003
(June 2022) 62 (Recommendation 5.3) (‘
2021–22 Review
Legislation Act
) s 17(3) (emphasis added).
Ibid s 15J(2)(e).
LARC 2021–22
Other Australian
Subordinate Legislation Act 1989
Subordinate Legislation Act 1992
and Victoria
Subordinate Legislation Act 1994
). Besides South
Australia, other jurisdictions without public consultation provisions are the
Australian Capital Territory (
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT)), the Northern
Territory (
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT)), Queensland (
Instruments Act 1992
(Qld)) and Western Australia (
Interpretation Act
Legislation Review Act
s 9(1)(b)(i)
; Legislative Council (NT), Standing Orders, April
2016, SO 176.3(b);
Legislative Standards Act 1992
Subordinate Legislation Committee Act 1969
s 8(1)(a)(iii)
Legislative Council (WA), Standing Orders, January 2019, sch
SO 10.6(b).
Standing Joint Committee
for the Scrutiny of Regulations (Canada), Mandate, sub-s (9).
House of Representatives
(NZ), Standing Orders of the House of Representatives, August
SO 319(2)(b).
Standing Committee on Law
and Justice, Parliament of New South Wales,
A NSW Bill of Rights
No 17, October 2001) 127–8 [8.44].
LRC Information Guide
) 9 [3.3(9)]. This aligns with
the position of the SSCSDL at the time the
LRC Information Guide
updated in January 2022. In February 2022 the SSCSDL amended its interpretation
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation, Parliament of Australia,
ed, July 2024) 25. In mid-2021, the SSCSDL
expanded its scrutiny principles from 11 to 13 via Standing Order 23 and this
was reflected
edition of the SSCSDL’s
(February 2022) as well as the 3
edition of the
‘The Committee
scrutinises each instrument referred to it as to whether: ... (g) the
accompanying explanatory material provides
sufficient information to gain a
clear understanding of the instrument ...’:
LRC Information Guide
10 [3.5(4)(b)],
In federal Parliament, an
Explanatory Statement is required for legislative instruments pursuant to
Legislation Act
House of Representatives Standing Order 141 provides that when a Bill (except an
Appropriation or Supply Bill) is presented,
the Minister must present a signed
Explanatory Memorandum including an explanation of the reasons for the Bill. The
Office of Parliamentary
Counsel does not have any role in the drafting of
Explanatory Statements: see
2021–22 Review
Legislation Act
) s 15J(2)(b). For an analysis
of this Act (before amendments were made in 2015) see Andrew Edgar,
‘Deliberative Processes for
Administrative Regulations: Unenforceable
Public Consultation Provisions and the Courts’
(2016) 27(1)
Legislation Act
) ss 15J(1), (2)(d).
‘All bills and
subordinate legislation (including regulations and disallowable instruments)
require an explanatory statement’:
ACT Government
Legislation
(March 2017) 27.
Legislative Assembly
(ACT), Standing Committees — Establishment: Resolution of Appointment,
2 December 2020 [(10)(a)(vi)].
See also Legislative Assembly (ACT),
Standing Committee on JACS,
Guide to Writing an Explanatory Statement
(March 2011).
Subordinate
Legislation Act 1989
provides the executive
discretion in complying with
On whether regulatory impact statements add
value to the scrutiny process, see Simon Evans, ‘Improving Human Rights
in the Legislative and Policy Processes’
[2005] MelbULawRw 21
(2005) 29(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
See Alex Hickman,
‘Explanatory Memorandums for Proposed Legislation in Australia: Are They
Fulfilling Their Purpose?’
(2014) 29(1)
Australasian Parliamentary
Legislative Review
Committee, Parliament of South Australia,
SA Productivity Commission’s
Inquiry into Reform of South Australia’s Regulatory Framework
12 May 2021) 3 (Presiding Member Nicola Centofanti) (‘
SA Productivity
Commission Inquiry
LRC Annual Report
) 25. See also
LRC Workload
LRC Workload Report
Ibid app B, 3.
Parliamentary
Scrutiny Report
[3.76]–[3.78].
Senate Standing
Committee on Regulations and Ordinances,
Report on the Work of the Committee
in the 41st Parliament
(Report No 114) app 3, 2 (‘Guideline for
Preparation of Explanatory Statements: Consultation’)
LRC Information Guide
) 11 [3.8].
s 10(5b)(a).
This is the same in
Queensland (
Statutory Instruments Act 1992
and Western
Australia (
Interpretation Act 1984
It is 6 sitting days in
the Australian Capital Territory (
Legislation Act 2001
New South Wales (
Interpretation Act 1987
and Tasmania
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
in the Northern
Territory (
Interpretation Act 2011
(NT) s 63) and 12–18 in Victoria
Subordinate Legislation Act 1994
On approaches in other
Parliamentary Scrutiny Report
) 118–20 [8.20]–[8.25].
Australian Senate Practice
, rev Harry Evans, ed Rosemary Laing (Department
of the Senate, 14
ed, 2016) ch 15.
LRC Annual Report
Parliamentary
Scrutiny Report
[8.33]–[8.34].
Lorne Neudorf,
‘The Problem of Delegated Legislation in South Australia’ (n
Evidence to Legislative
Council Legislative Review Committee, Parliament of South Australia, Adelaide,
17 February 2021, 5 (Associate
Professor Lorne Neudorf).
Effectiveness Inquiry
Ibid; Pearce and
Argument (n
LRC Workload Report
) app B, 2.
Ibid 3 (emphasis added).
This is consistent with the evidence given by LRC members Hon Nicola Centofanti
and Hon Irene Pnevmatikos
who emphasise that the focus of the LRC is not on the
substantive content or merits of the policy or regulation but on ‘its
technicalities’:
SA Productivity Commission Inquiry
LRC Information Guide
) 10 [3.5(1)].
For example, the
Annual Report
) explains that it performs
‘technical legislative scrutiny ... The committee does not consider the
policy merits of delegated
legislation, although the policy content of an
instrument may provide context for the committee’s scrutiny’: at
In most circumstances, the NSW Legislative Review Committee is precluded
from considering the underlying policy of delegated legislation:
Legislation
Review Act 1987
The NSW Legislative Council has
established a separate parliamentary committee with an express policy scrutiny
role in relation to
delegated legislation: see Pearce and Argument (n
) [11.15], [3.47].
LRC Workload Report
) app B, 3.
At the federal level,
the Chair of the SSCSDL is a government member while the deputy chair is an
opposition party member. The converse
is the case for the Chair and Deputy Chair
of the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills. The NSW Legislation
Committee has a government Chair and Deputy Chair.
In an empirical study
involving interviews with 55 Australian parliamentarians, party discipline and
‘the necessity to compromise
for political reasons’ were raised by
many interviewees as an obstacle to the effectiveness of scrutiny committees:
See text accompanying nn
For example, in
determining constitutional disputes courts will sometimes have to make findings
of ‘constitutional fact’:
see Anne Carter,
Proportionality and
Facts in Constitutional Adjudication
(Hart Publishing, 2021) ch 3.
Ruth Fox and Joel
Blackwell, ‘The Devil Is in the Detail: Parliament and Delegated
Legislation’ (Report, Hansard Society,
Environment
Protection Authority v Condon
[2014] NSWCA 149
(2014) 86 NSWLR 499
Ibid 510 [52].
Liversidge v Anderson
[1941] UKHL 1
[1942] AC 206
, 223 (Viscount Maugham).
Day v Harness Racing
New South Wales
[2014] NSWCA 423
(2014) 88 NSWLR 594
, 610 [79] (Leeming JA) (citations
omitted). For another application of
Lake v Municipal Association
of Victoria
[2018] VSC 561.
Franchising Pty Ltd v Alamdo Holdings Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 256.
Ibid [203] (Basten AJA).
ADCO Constructions
Pty Ltd v Goudappel
(2014) 254 CLR 1.
Ibid 25 [61] (citations
Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
(1994) 182 CLR 272
Note these two
categories were developed by Dixon J in
Australian Communist Party v
Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
, 196. They are often referred to as
‘judicial notice without inquiry’ and ‘judicial notice after
see further JD Heydon,
Cross on Evidence
(LexisNexis
Butterworths, 12
Australian edition, 2020) ch 2.
See, eg, IR Freckelton,
Expert Evidence: Law, Practice, Procedure and Advocacy
(Thomson Reuters,
ed, 2019) 155 [2.30.40].
It is now routinely
remarked that we live in an ‘age of statutes’: see Guido Calabresi,
A Common Law for the Age of Statutes
(Harvard University Press, 1982);
Lisa Burton Crawford, ‘The Rule of Law in the Age of Statutes’
(2020) 48(2)
Federal Law Review
At the federal level,
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
See also Jacinta
Dharmananda, ‘Using Parliamentary Materials in Interpretation: Insights
from Parliamentary Process’
[2018] UNSWLawJl 1
(2018) 41(1)
UNSW Law Journal
Legislation
For instance, in
Australia the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) was amended in 1984 to
permit reliance on
Parliamentary Debates
(or ‘Hansard’) in
certain circumstances.
Aileen Kavanagh,
‘Proportionality and Parliamentary Debates: Exploring Some Forbidden
(2014) 34(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
Ibid 465 (emphasis in
Note that in the United
Kingdom the amount of scrutiny depends on whether the affirmative procedure or
negative procedure is followed,
with the bulk of secondary legislation following
the negative procedure. This means that the instrument becomes law immediately
it is signed, unless it is actively annulled within a 40-day period.
Merris Amos,
‘Law-Making in the Rights Hostile Environment of the United Kingdom’
in Julie Debeljak and Laura Grenfell
Law Making and Human Rights:
Executive and Parliamentary Scrutiny Across Australian Jurisdictions
(Thomson Reuters, 2020) 385, 395–6.
Ibid. Note that the
context for reviewing delegated legislation is quite different in the United
Kingdom compared to Australia due
Human Rights Act 1998
Richard A Edwards,
‘Judicial Deference under the Human Rights Act’
(2002) 65(6)
Modern Law Review
, 876 (citations omitted).
Although Australian
courts have been uncomfortable with explicit references to the concept of
‘deference’, in the constitutional
context it has been argued that
when conducting proportionality analysis courts should assess the investigations
and deliberations
made by parliaments: see Appleby and Carter, who propose a
‘spectrum of inter-institutional relations’: Gabrielle Appleby
Anne Carter, ‘Parliaments, Proportionality and Facts’
[2021] SydLawRw 11
(2021) 43(3)
Sydney Law Review
, 271. See also Gabrielle Appleby and Anne Carter,
‘Parliaments and Facts: Deepening Deliberation’ in Joe Tomlinson and
Anne Carter (eds),
Facts in Public Law Adjudication
(Hart Publishing,
See, eg, Evans and
See above Part III for
Note that under
Evidence Act 1995
, a judge taking judicial notice is
required to give a party an opportunity to make submissions or refer to relevant
information.
See, eg, Rosalind Dixon,
‘The Functional
Constitution
: Re-Reading the 2014 High Court
Constitutional Term’
(2015) 43(3)
Federal Law Review
Gabrielle Appleby, ‘Functionalism in Constitutional Interpretation:
Factual and Participatory Challenges — Commentary
Federal Law Review
In this context we use
‘extrinsic evidence’ to refer to material that was not before the
primary decision-maker.
Longte Grinding Ball Co Ltd v Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for
Industry, Innovation and Science [No 1]
[2017] FCA 1114
, [6] (Griffiths
Energy Regulator v Snowy Hydro Ltd
(2014) 8 ARLR 332, where Beach J refused
to hear an interim application as the evidentiary foundation had not been
established. See
Comcare v Lilley
[2013] FCAFC 121
(2013) 216 FCR 214
, 238 [103].
Noting, however, that
public consultation through parliamentary processes can play a quite distinct
role from the rules of procedural
fairness: see text accompanying n
referencing Edgar.
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 19 July 1938, 473 (Hon WG
Duncan). The first report of the ‘Honorary Committee on Subordinate
Legislation’,
chaired by Baden Pattinson, in 1935 used the expressions
‘danger’ and ‘safeguards’: see South Australia,
Parliamentary Papers
, 1935 vol II no 52.
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 19 July 1938, 474 (Hon H
Saunders (n
For federal Parliament,
one of the ‘incentives’ in setting out a formal system in the
Legislation Act
comprehensive review of the practice of executive lawmaking at the federal level
by the Administrative Review Council,
Rule Making by Commonwealth Agencies
(Report No 35, 1992). See also
Legislative Instruments Act
Review Committee,
Parliament of Australia,
2008 Review of the
Legislative Instruments Act
(Parliamentary Paper No 98, March 2009).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (272 KB)
PDF format (362 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter