URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawSymp/2006/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Radan, Peter --- "Is Intelligent Design Science? Who decides If It Is?" [2006] MqLawSymp 7; (2006) 1(1) Macquarie Law Symposium 67
IS INTELLIGENT DESIGN SCIENCE? WHO DECIDES IF IT IS?
PETER RADAN*
I INTRODUCTION
In his expansive paper Professor Smith notes that its focal point is ‘a
consideration of the legitimacy of ... evolutionary
science and its acceptance
in public education’, because evolution is the ‘science from which
the whole study of genetics
and eugenics
arises[s]’.
He later details the
bitterly contested litigation in the United States, beginning with the
in 1925, on the place in public school curricula of evolution and its
rival theories on the issue of the origins of life. As Professor
Smith points
out, the teaching of non-naturalistic theories on this question has been
rejected on the basis that they are religiously
based with the result that
legislative or school board directives that they be taught, violate the First
Amendment’s establishment
Scopes Trial
the first proffered alternative to evolution was the
biblically inspired ‘creation science’ theory. Attempts to mandate
‘balanced treatment’ of both evolution and creation science were
rebuffed on constitutional grounds in
McLean v Arkansas Board of
Pivotal to these decisions was
the ruling that creation science was not science. However, as pointed out by
Professor Smith,
during the 1990s, with the
emergence of the field of ‘intelligent design’, with its questioning
of the core of evolutionary
theory, evolution’s place in public school
curricula was again challenged. This issue was confronted by a Pennsylvania
Kitzmiller v Dover Area School
a decision handed down after
Professor Smith’s paper was presented.
Intelligent design claims to be a scientific alternative to evolution. A core
of scientists, mathematicians and other scholars, building
upon recent
discoveries in cell biology and molecular genetics in particular, argue that
naturalistic explanations relating to the
complexity that characterises life at
the cellular and molecular levels are completely inadequate. Furthermore, on the
basis of the
techniques of information theory, they claim that ‘certain
features of the universe and of living things are best explained
intelligent cause rather than an undirected process such as natural
selection’, thereby placing themselves in ‘a
scientific disagreement
with the core claim of evolutionary theory that the apparent design of living
systems is an illusion’.
intelligent design claim that it is simply creationism under another name
– ‘creationism in a cheap
– and that the designer is
a masked reference to God.
In 2004 the Dover Area School Board in Pennsylvania passed a resolution that
stipulated:
Students will be made aware of gaps/problems in Darwin’s theory and of
other theories of evolution including, but not limited
to, intelligent design.
Note: Origins of Life is not taught.
the Board’s resolution was held to have violated
the First Amendment’s establishment clause. In the course of his judgment,
Judge Jones, after an extensive analysis of the nature of intelligent design,
concluded that ‘[intelligent design] is a religious
view, a mere
re-labeling of creationism, and not a scientific
In the wake of
, two questions are worthy of debate. The
first, directly arising from
, is the question of whether
intelligent design is science and thus, a proper subject to be taught in public
schools. The second is
whether the courtroom is the proper place to seek an
answer to the first question. This is a bitterly contested issue in the wider
context of America’s on-going culture wars between what Hunter terms as
‘cultural progressivism’ and ‘cultural
orthodoxy’,
which, in relation to the
issue of evolution, has raged since the
Scopes Trial
II IS ID SCIENCE?
At the heart of Judge Jones’ decision is his ruling that intelligent
design is not science. However, there is respectable intellectual
opinion that
suggests that intelligent design is within the scope of a science curriculum and
therefore could be taught in public
, it was held that the essential characteristics of science
1. It is guided by natural law;
2. It has to be explanatory by reference to natural law;
3. It is testable against the empirical world;
4. Its conclusions are tentative, ie, are not necessarily the final word;
5. It is falsifiable.
Is this too narrow a definition of science? Columbia University Law Professor
Kent Greenawalt suggests that it is. Greenawalt does
not find intelligent design
particularly persuasive as science within the scope of a
definition, nor does he suggest that the teaching of evolution would be enhanced
by references to intelligent design. Nevertheless,
he concludes that intelligent
design is ‘within the range of constitutionally permissible
judgment’ as ‘one conceivable’
alternative to the standard
evolutionary theory.
His argument is based
upon the legitimacy of teaching intelligent design in reference to the question
limits of science
. In this respect Greenawalt writes:
Advocates of ... intelligent design [theories] claim that the available
scientific evidence suggests that a purely scientific explanation
of the origin
of species is not only unavailable now, but is unlikely in the future. So
understood, the theories, relying on scientific
evidence, are partly about the
limits of science.
Greenawalt’s argument that theories about the limits of science do
belong in science is stated in the following terms:
Science cannot explain why anything at all exists, why our lives have
meaning, if they do, and why we should be ethical. These intrinsic
limits, set
by the nature of the scientific enterprise, should definitively be mentioned in
science courses, and it it would be appropriate
for texts and teachers to
discuss controversies over the exact nature of these limits, including competing
suppositions about the
relationship of science and religion. ... If convincing
evidence of such limits lay within science itself, their analysis would
appropriately
fall within the scope of science
In the context of the limits in evolutionary theory, intelligent design
theorists have argued that complex biochemical processes,
such as the
blood-clotting cascade of events which, when activated by a cut, lead to the
formation of a blood clot, lack any explanation
within an evolutionary
framework, a point conceded by many scientists who otherwise embrace
For Greenawalt, this amounts to
an ‘evidential gap’ in evolution.
From the perspective of what would be constitutionally legal in relation to
such gaps, Greenawalt explains the proper role of the
science teacher as
[S]cience teachers should cover the evidential gaps and controversies
surrounding the neo-Darwinian synthesis. Any evidence for a
kind of order of a
sort not yet integrated into the dominant theory should be fairly presented. ...
Science teachers should
get far into the question of whether any as
yet undiscovered principles of order in evolution, were they to exist, are
have proceeded from a creative intelligence. One reason not to engage
this possibility at any length is that students with religious
objections to
standard evolutionary theory may build much more than is warranted from any
scientific perspective from conjectures
Greenawalt’s insightful analysis is important as it gives a basis to
distinguish the decision in
. Greenawalt’s argument is
not dependant upon rejecting the point of
, namely that
intelligent design is not science. Rather, he argues that a science curriculum
is not confined to teaching what comes
within the definition of science, but
legitimately extends to an understanding of the limits of science and scientific
If so, Greenawalt makes a reasonable case for intelligent design being
useful as a prism through which to explore the limits of science.
The majority
Edwards v Aguillard
, with its suggestion that ‘teaching
a variety of scientific theories about the origins of humankind to
schoolchildren might
be validly done with the clear secular intent of enhancing
effectiveness of science instruction
’ (empahsis
tends to support this argument.
III WHO DECIDES WHAT IS SCIENCE?
Professor Smith laments the Supreme Court’s failure to stem the
‘spread of creationism’.
Whether this is or is not so, is a matter of contention. However, his comment
leaves unanswered the far more important question of
whether the Supreme Court
is the appropriate venue for resolving the issue of evolution’s place in
public school curricula.
Ever since the
Scopes Trial
there has been keen debate over this
question. Should education policy be determined by a state legislature or local
area school
board, or by the courts? In the former arena the people’s
voice is paramount whereas, in the latter, the voice of the people
over-ruled. In the
Scopes Trial
, William Jennings Bryan passionately
advocated the primacy of the voice of the people when he said ‘[the court]
place to prove that the law ought never to have been passed. The
place to prove that, or teach that, [is] the
legislature’.
His opponent, the
legendary defence lawyer Clarence Darrow, opposed Bryan’s democratic
majoritarianism principle, arguing that
the purpose of the trial was to
‘[prevent] bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the
United States’.
This divide of opinion was repeated in later cases. Thus, at the trial at
first instance of
counsel for Arkansas invoked
Bryan’s majoritarianism by arguing that that state’s anti-evolution
legislation should not
be declared unconstitutional because ‘the people
[had] spoken’ and that to undermine the people’s decision would
that there ‘is no longer a government of the people, by the people, and
for the people’.
On the other hand,
McLean v Arkansas Board of Education
, Judge Overton emphatically
asserted the decisive role of the courts when he said:
The application and content of First Amendment principles are not determined
by public opinion polls or by a majority vote. Whether
the proponents of Act 590
constitute the majority or the minority is quite irrelevant under a
constitutional system of government.
No group, no matter how large or small, may
use the organs of government, of which the public schools are the most
conspicuous and
influential, to foist its religious beliefs on
This passage undoubtedly represents current practice. However, Bryan’s
democratic majoritarian principle is not without its
merits. When the cases
dealing with evolution are considered, the real question raised in all of them,
is whether what is to be taught
or not taught is in fact science. It is a
legitimate question to ask whether a courtroom, in which the main actors are
lawyers operating
within the constraints of an adversarial judicial system, is
the optimal venue for resolving this question.
A compelling argument can be made for the proposition that the legislative
process, be it at a state or local school board level,
operates as a far better
venue, provided that there are appropriate processes in place for debate and
discussion so that legislators
and their advisers can be properly informed on
the respective merits of a particular case before votes are cast. As Bryan
successfully
argued in the context of the
Scopes Trial
, the appropriate
place for experts to give their opinions was before the legislature and not, as
Darrow claimed, in the courtroom.
The argument being made here is not one that implies support or sympathy for
any particular side in the debate over whether intelligent
design is or is not
science. The present support that cultural progressivists give to judicial
determination of this question is
the fact that, to a large degree, federal
courts, and in particular the Supreme Court, have in recent decades been
generally sympathetic
to their agenda. What is of concern to them is that the
present domination of a conservative executive and legislature at the federal
level will lead to judicial appointments that will tilt the balance the other
Were that to happen, it is arguable
that cultural progressivists would look to the legislators, rather than the
judges, to achieve
their goals, and their culture wars rivals would look to the
judiciary to achieve their goals. In effect both sides would, as they
in the past, engage in forum shopping.
However, there are groups who, on principle, object to forum shopping. An
illustration is provided from the
Scopes Trial
New Republic
magazine opposed Tennessee’s anti-evolution legislation and took the view
that the legislators who voted for it were foolish
and misinformed.
Nevertheless, the
New Republic
argued that Tennesseans had the right to
make what others might take to be bad decisions. To have denied the Tennesseans
to ban the teaching of evolution was akin to asking them to commit a
On the other hand, if legislators realise that they have made a bad decision,
it can readily be repealed.
As detailed by
Professor Smith in his paper,
exactly what happened with the 1999 decision of the Kansas Board of Education
which was reversed two years later. One can
also that, 13 months after the 2004
decision of the Dover Area School Board, a newly elected board reversed its
predecessor’s
decision. These examples suggest that legislative ‘bad
decisions’ are ‘corrected’ much more quickly than
‘judicial bad decisions’ given that it was 43 years before the
Supreme Court in
overruled the decision in
that had upheld the
constitutional validity of legislation banning the teaching of evolution.
The current approach to the establishment clause was neatly summed up by
Souter J in
Lee v Weisman
], we have consistently held
the [Establishment] Clause applicable no less to government acts favoring
religion generally than to
acts favoring one religion over
A shift to adopting the democratic majoritarianism principle would require a
dramatic reversal in the jurisprudence of the First Amendment’s
clauses that would necessitate a return to the jurisprudence epitomized by
Joseph Story, who, in his influential
Commentaries on the
Constitution
United States
, wrote as follows:
The real object of the [first] amendment was ... to prevent any national
ecclesiastical establishment, which should give to an hierarchy
the exclusive
patronage of the national government.
Many would argue that such a reversal would be ‘turning back the
clock’ on nearly a century’s progress in relation
to First Amendment
jurisprudence, and in particular, a return to the days when there was a dominant
‘Republican Protestantism’
that in fact amounted to an informal
religious establishment.
Such suggestions
reflect misconceptions of what underpinned this informal establishment.
America’s religious landscape today
is vastly different from that of the
nineteenth century. The informal establishment of Republican Protestantism
arose, not because
the courts were not resolving the kind of issues that emerged
in the twentieth century, but because a particular brand of Protestantism,
steeped in Calvinist doctrine, reigned supreme in terms of religious beliefs. In
contemporary America, with its significant diversity
of religious traditions,
such an informal establishment would be impossible.
The choice of venue for determining the content of science curricula will in
no way affect the reality that the process will continue
to be bitterly
contested, irrespective of whether the venue is the courtroom, or the
legislature or school board. The argument here
is that the better venue for
determining this, and indeed the plethora of issues affecting America’s
culture wars, is the legislature
and not the courtroom.
Professor Smith may well be correct that the Supreme Court has failed to stem
the appeal of fundamentalist-inspired creationism. It
is indeed unlikely that
this goal would have been achieved if the debate over evolution had been
conducted in America’s legislatures
or school boards. The religious
history of America indicates that the demise of fundamentalism is not on the
horizon. As Garry Wills
has written, America’s culture wars, including the
one being fought over the teaching of evolution in public schools, deeply
in religion as they are, show no signs of abating, for ‘the obvious
cultural reason that the Bible is not going to stop
being the central book in
[America’s] intellectual
* Associate Professor, Division of Law, Macquarie
1 G P Smith, ‘Law, Religion and Medicine: Conjunctive or
Disjunctive?’ (2006)
Macquarie Law Symposium - Law, Religion and
Medical Science
Smith above n 1, 31.
McLean v Arkansas Board of
529 F Supp 1255
Edwards v Aguillard
[1987] USSC 120
Smith, above n 1, 29.
Kitzmiller v Dover Area School
400 F Supp 2d 707
Cited from the homepage of the
Intelligent Design Network, http://www. intelligentdesignnetwork.org/.
Dan Peterson, ‘The Little Engine
That Could Undo Darwinism’,
The American Spectator
, (Arlington,
US), June 2005, 34-43, 36.
Kitzmiller v Dover Area School
400 F Supp 2d 707
, 726 (2005).
James Davison Hunter,
Culture Wars,
The Struggle to Define America
(1991) 44-45.
McLean v Arkansas Board of
529 F Supp 1255
, 1267 (1982).
Kent Greenawalt,
Does God Belong in
Public Schools?
(2005) 124.
Peterson, above n 8, 34-43, 39.
Greenawalt, above n 12, 115.
Edwards v Aguillard
[1987] USSC 120
594 (1987).
Smith, above n 1, 34.
World’s Most
Famous Court Trial, Tennessee Evolution Case
(1999) 171.
Epperson v Arkansas
[1968] USSC 204
Quoted in Randy Moore,
Evolution in
the Courtroom, A Reference Guide
(2002) 52-53.
McLean v Arkansas Board of
529 F Supp 1255
, 1274 (1982).
The World’s Most Famous Court
Trial, Tennessee Evolution Case
, above n 19, 171.
See for example Phillip E Hammond,
David W Machacek and Eric Michael Mazur,
Religion on Trial, How Supreme Court
Trends Threaten Freedom of Conscience in America
(2004) 127-149.
Paul K Conkin,
When all the Gods
Trembled, Darwinism, Scopes, and American Intellectuals
(1998) 106.
Smith, above n 1, 33-34.
Scopes v State
, 154 Tenn 105
Lee v Weisman
[1992] USSC 104
Everson v Board of Education
[1947] USSC 44
Lee v Weisman
[1992] USSC 104
Joseph Story,
Commentaries on the
Constitution
of the United States
(1833) quoted in Edward J Larson,
and Error, The American Controversy Over Creation and Evolution
edition, 1989) 93.
, above n 25, 48,
Garry Wills,
Under God, Religion
and American Politics
(1990) 124.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter