URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Furlong, P J --- "Justinian and Mathematics: An Analysis of the Digest�s Compilation Plan" [2005] AUJlLegHist 4; (2005) 9(1) Australian Journal of Legal History 85
Justinian And Mathematics: An Analysis Of The Digest’s Compilation Plan*
Justinian and Mathematics: An Analysis of the
Digest’s Compilation
P J FURLONG
I INTRODUCTION
The major task of Justinian’s Second Law Commission was the compilation
, a collection of existing Roman private legal writings that
was issued in a single volume of fifty books. It took three years to
being authorised on 15 December 530 with the issuing of
C Deo auctore,
and promulgated in
on 16 December
The commission was chaired by Tribonian,
who initially held the post of quaestor, and included the following
commissioners: Constantinus,
a senior legal government official; Theophilus,
dean of the law school in Constantinople; Dorotheus, a renowned professor of law
summoned from Beirut; Anatolius, also a professor of law from Beirut; and
Cratinus, another law professor from
Constantinople.
Codex Iustinianus
comprised the
Corpus Iuris,
of which Kunkel wrote: ‘For as the Bible was to the
theologians so was the
Corpus Iuris
to the jurists of the Middle Ages. It
was the repository of all wisdom’.
The first major advance towards discovering the method used to assemble the
occurred in 1820, when Bluhme proposed that the original books of
legal writings (
) had been excerpted in an orderly manner to produce
four masses (bodies of text), which were subsequently combined during an editing
stage to form the
Bluhme also
argued that these four masses had been assigned to three committees, which he
named the Sabinian, the Edictal and the
Papinian; the smaller fourth mass, the
Appendix, was later appended to the Papinian
Subsequently, Krueger made some minor
amendments to Bluhme’s list, which shows the order in which the committees
their material. This revised list is called the
Bluhme-Krueger
model has generally withstood all
In 1969, Honoré embarked upon a detailed study of the
intending to shed further light upon its method of compilation. This major
scholarly enterprise culminated with the publication
Honoré’s research
methodology consisted of two quite distinct forms of analysis. Firstly, he
attempted to establish
a stylistic norm for Tribonian’s works, mostly as
found in the constitutions of Justinian drafted during the two quaestorships
These marks of style were then
used more widely to identify the contributions made by Justinian, Tribonian and
others to the compilation
Secondly, Honoré carried out a numerical analysis of the
text, as regards the number of lines per book excerpted from each of the
, and he attempted to show how these excerpts were
assembled to compile the
as it appears in the
Noting various features of the
within each of the three masses,
Honoré proposed that the three committees were further divided into
subcommittees for the
purpose of excerpting. Furthermore, each committee is said
to possess a senior and junior commissioner, who are initially titled
and E-F respectively. Subsequently, each letter was identified with one of the
six named commissioners.
Honoré’s thesis has received a mixed response. Moreover, the
primary focus of reviewers has been with Honoré’s
analysis approach and other qualitative aspects of his work, as used in
and other works.
quantitative component of Honoré’s ‘compilation model’
has received considerably less attention. However,
in 1985, Osler published a
paper that rigorously dealt with just this aspect, and where he strongly argued
that the numerical basis
of Honoré’s theory is
Subsequent research by Mantovani
is also directly relevant to this aspect of Honoré’s
I will return to the substance of
Osler’s criticisms below, however, it is first necessary to explain
certain aspects of Honoré’s
model regarding his allocation of texts
subcommittees.
The legal texts assigned by Honoré to each subcommittee were arrived
at by selecting alternate sections from each committee
mass to form an odd and
even-numbered stream of texts, which were then allocated to group headings
(numbered I-XLIII).
Within each committee,
each subcommittee was theoretically said to receive an equal number of books.
However, in practice, complete
parity was not achieved because of complicating
factors linked to the different excerpting methods employed (ie, joint
and successive excerpting) to allocate particular books to the odd
and even-numbered streams. At the heart of Honoré’s
compilation
theory is the assertion that within each committee the two commissioners worked
to a very detailed timetable. Tribonian
is considered the great organiser whose
expertise was essential to convincing Justinian of the
practicability by demonstrating ‘precisely how the work could be
terminated in three years’.
timetable was based upon the assumption that the Sabinian and Edictal committees
would excerpt seven books, and the Papinian
committee five books, a
Tribonian is said to have originally
intended that the Sabinian and Edictal committees were to receive an equal
distribution of books
(559½ each), though due to other factors the actual
number of books they excerpted amounted to 546 and 573
respectively.
The Papinian committee
received a reduced allocation of only 409 books, which Honoré argued was
fixed at 5/7th of the Edictal
figure of 573 books so as to allow Constantinus
– the senior commissioner of the Papinian committee according to
– extra time for his official
Also, when the excerpting stage
began on 15 December 530, it was further planned that the three committees
should finish excerpting
Moreover, it was intended from the start of the commission’s work that
each committee was ‘required to work at a stated
and invariable
rate’, finishing each group of books in strict conformity with their
respective daily or weekly timetable.
However, within each group of books, the two commissioners could vary their
pace, with the proviso that they finish the group
concurrently.
When Honoré’s ‘timetable’ model is judged against
the actual excerpting practices of the subcommittees a
number of problems and
inconsistencies seem apparent. It may be instructive at this point to discuss
one such example, both to more
fully understand the methodology used by
Honoré, and to show why an alternative to his fixed timetable hypothesis
found in order to explain the final structure of the
The example I have chosen comprises Groups XL-XLIII of the Papinian
Turning first to Group XLII, which
contains Scaevola’s
(books 1-40) and Lab 8 Paul
(eight books),
we see that these books are
divided into four sections (i-iv). Commissioner E excerpted sections (i), Scae
1-13 and (iii), Scae
30-40, and commissioner F
excerpted sections (ii), Scae
14-29 and (iv), Lab 8 Paul
Number of lines excerpted from each book
69, 49, 10, 48, 142, 43, 118, 9, 32, 30, 52, 0, 6
74. 176, 260, 197, 260, 118, 227, 276, 359, 59, 111, 70, 47,
86, 121, 58 lines
4, 26, 11, 33, 9, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 lines
Total number of lines 299
One can see from these figures that both E (46.8 to 7.5) and F (156.2 to
37.4) show a marked reduction in their rate of excerpting,
in lines per book
(lpb), between their respective first and second sections. Honoré notes
this type of ‘collapse’
as a regular occurrence, and writes:
When they [the commissioners] were approaching the end of an assignment [ie,
a group] and were pressed for time, there would come
a point at which the rate
of extraction per book dropped to a minimum. ... Then in the very last book or
books the rate picks up
again, since the commissioner now knows that he is going
to reach the end in time.
To explain the collapse between sections (i) and (iii) (ie, in a ratio of
6.2:1), Honoré suggests that it may be partly due
to the preoccupation of
chairman E with other business, and partly to the ‘division of the
into codices, which may have meant that the chairman did not have
these books [ie, books 30-40] available to him while his colleague
was reading
books 14-29’.
In order to finish the
group on time, commissioner E had to then hastily read section (iii), thereby
causing him to excerpt less
text. However, the collapse between sections (ii)
and (iv) (ie, in a ratio of 4.2:1) is surely also significant, yet it cannot be
similarly explained since, according to Honoré’s argument,
commissioner F should have excerpted section (iv) before
beginning section (ii),
and while he waited for commissioner E to finish with books 1-13. Neither can
this collapse be reasonably
assigned to the different subject-matter in section
(iv), since it is excerpted at a rate almost equal to that in section (i) when
commissioner E was under no apparent time pressure.
Honoré argues that the rate of excerpting is indicative of the work
rate of each commissioner.
However, the
evidence does not support this view. As regards the average excerpting rate over
both their sections in Group XLII,
E contributed 28.8 and F 116.6 lpb. This
means that overall F excerpted more than four times as much as E and,
furthermore, that
F was still excerpting in section (iv) at a 30 per cent higher
rate than E’s average (ie, 37.4 compared to 28.8 lpb). Moreover,
XL, the excerpting rates are almost completely reversed, with E now averaging
129.7 and F only 39.4 lpb; while in Group
XLI, E averaged 5.8 and F 37.4 lpb.
And it is only in Group XLIII that both commissioners actually achieve
approximate parity with
average excerpting rates of 14.4 and 19.0 lpb
respectively.
Honoré identifies E as
Constantinus and F as Cratinus, and goes on to argue that following the Nika
revolt – which he
estimates would have approximately coincided with the
beginning of excerpting the Appendix mass (Groups XLI-XLIII) –
Constantinus
was required for extra magisterial duty, which would then explain
his low excerpting rate during the Appendix as compared to his
rate during the
main Papinian mass.
In the three groups of
the Appendix, F averaged 61.8 lpb compared to E’s 18.8 lpb, a ratio of
3.3:1. However, in the last three
groups of the main Papinian mass, E averaged
85.5 lpb compared to F’s 28.5 lpb, a similar ratio of 3:1. So what
significance,
if any, should be attached to the reduced work rate of E during
the Appendix? Honoré’s answer is to compare the figures
Appendix with the average excerpting rate of Constantinus and Cratinus over the
whole of the main Papinian mass: ‘the
chairman and his junior colleague
kept pace with one another, E in fact averaging 77 lines per book to F’s
But such a comparison is
inappropriate in this context. Rather, what should be compared is their relative
excerpting rates within
each group of the
mass since, according to
Honoré’s timetable model, the two commissioners within each
committee excerpted their allotted
number of books according to the same strict
time limit.
When the ‘Summary of Papinian mass’ table is examined one can see
a dramatic difference between the contemporaneous group
excerpting rates of the
two commissioners E and F. A very similar inequality is found between the
excerpting rates of the two commissioners
A and B in the ‘Summary of
Sabinian mass’ table, and between commissioners C and D in the
‘Summary of Edictal mass’
table. Furthermore, there is a general
decline in the sequential group excerpting rates from the beginning to the end
of each mass,
which in itself is inconsistent with the explanation that groups
were excerpted to a strict timetable, since had that been the primary
controlling factor then the excerpting rate decline should have been limited to
within each group, and not have extended over the
II JUSTINIAN’S ‘FIVE PER CENT COMPILATION
LIMIT’ PLAN
The above findings would appear inexplicable in terms of
Honoré’s timetable model. So what alternative solution might
explain Honoré’s detailed findings regarding the proposed division
of labour between the two commissioners within
each of the three committees?
Despite the considerable variability in the excerpting rates of the
commissioners within and between
groups, when the ‘Summary of whole
’ table is examined we witness the striking figures which
Honoré’s analysis has revealed. The average rates of
excerpting (in
lpb) for commissioner A (91.10) and B (92.60) are almost identical, as are C
(66.82) and D (67.68) and, though not
quite equal, E (60.60) and F (67.24) are
reasonably close. Such a result immediately indicated to me that these figures
have arisen by chance alone. Rather, there must have been some
underlying, and unseen, organising factor at work in controlling the
structure of the
To see what this factor was, let us examine the calculated excerpting rates
of the six commissioners in more detail:
A = 91.1, B = 92.6 C = 66.82, D = 67.68 E = 60.60, F = 67.24
Because of the almost identical values of C, D and F, I provisionally assumed
that E’s original rate of excerpting had also
been fixed at the average
value for these three commissioners, ie, at 67 lpb to the nearest whole number.
The average excerpting
rate for A and B is similarly calculated to be 92 lpb.
Now the number 67 is very close to 75 per cent of 92. If, for the moment,
accept these figures (incorrectly as it turns out in the case of E) then one
achieves the following arithmetical relationship:
A:B:C:D:E:F = 1:1:3/4:3/4:3/4:3/4 (accurate to approximately 2 per cent)
= 2:1½:1½ (at the committee level)
The sum of these six proportionally related numbers (ie, 2 × 1 + 4
× ¾) equals 5. And to see why the number 5 is so
important we must
, where Justinian tells us that nearly 2000
containing 3 000 000
(lines) were reduced to 150 000
While these figures were
exaggerated in all three respects in terms of the final composition of the
, what had previously not been recognised was the significance of
the relationship of the three numbers, ie, that 150 000 is exactly
5 per cent of
3 000 000, and that one Roman
would have nominally measured 1500
lines (3 000 000 lines divided by 2000
Furthermore, Justinian had
predetermined that the
should contain 50
And 150 000 lines divided by fifty
equals 3000 lines per book, which is exactly twice the nominal length of the
. This degree of precision should inform us that Justinian
must also have limited the number of lines to be included in the
since books were clearly of a limited size, be that 1500 or 3000
The above findings strongly suggest that the controlling factor responsible
for the final appearance of the
was the requirement that it be
limited in length to five per cent of the total number of
from which it was compiled. Indeed, Justinian surely points us in this direction
when he writes, regarding the
project, that he entrusted Tribonian
with ‘the task of collecting together and transmitting,
with a certain
reduction in volume
, the most learned works of ancient
And since 5 per cent of 1500
lines equals 75 lines, this latter figure would have been the intended average
rate of excerpting from
each of the
made available to the
commission in Constantinople. Phrased differently, the allocation of excerpting
rates to subcommittees A-F,
in accordance with our hypothesized ratio of
1:1:¾:¾:¾:¾, would have divided the available 450 (6 ×
lines, per six book group, as follows:
90:90:67½:67½:67½:67½; figures that approximate very closely
those produced
above by Honoré.
It is also clear from
that many more books were read than
those which were finally included in the
, for we read, regarding
the large quantity of books collected by Tribonian, that:
the authors of this work did not read through those books only from which
they took the laws they have included; they read many others
in which they found
nothing useful or new to extract and insert in our
, and which with
good judgment they rejected.
Two important conclusions can be drawn from this passage. Firstly, many more
books were read than finally made their appearance in
secondly, all the books originally gathered together by the commission in
Constantinople were treated with equal respect and
consideration, irrespective
of whether or not extracts were finally taken from them to include in the
. Therefore, the final length of the
, as regards the
total number of lines permitted, would have been calculated according to the
total number of books collected by the
commission, and not just those presently
found in the
. Indeed, it would have been a strange form of
argument to exclude from this calculation those books from which no extracts
were taken,
while, at the same time, counting all other books as equal,
irrespective of the widely differing numbers of lines which they each
contributed.
) of a Roman
averages 39 letters, and one
line of Lenel’s
Palingenesia
, on which Honoré’s
calculations are based, averages about 43 or 44 letters, or approximately 43.5
1 Lenel line therefore = 1 +
43.5/39 = 1.12
. Excluding any material lost at the editing stage
, Honoré found that from a total of 1528 books that
appear in the
, there were 113 301 remaining Lenel lines, which
equates to an average excerpting rate of 74.15 lines per
This number of Lenel lines equals 113
301 × 1.12 = 126 897
. If, as argued above, the commission was
limited to excerpting at an average rate of 75 lines from all the books they
would translate into 126 897/75 = 1692
However, this is not quite the whole story for we remain uncertain whether
any lines were lost during the editing stage.
cannot see the need for two drafts of the
prior to final
publication; and, indeed, the changes made during this proposed second draft are
judged to have been ‘relatively
As for whether a significant
number of lines were lost during the presently proposed first (and only) editing
stage, this cannot
be answered with certainty. However, the stipulation by
Justinian that the ancient texts should be gathered together and transmitted
‘with a certain reduction in volume’– and which I argue to be
precisely five per cent – strongly suggests
that only minor additions
and/or deletions were made to the excerpted material during the editing phase.
The need to reduce the ancient
works to a mere five per cent of their original
volume would have been difficult enough, and one presumes heart-breaking for the
legally trained commissioners – to liberally discard even more material at
the editing stage might seem just too perverse.
It seems reasonable to assume that all three committees were initially
expected to read the same number of books during the considerably
period that the excerpting phase of the
would last; and that all
six commissioners were more or less equally industrious with their time.
Furthermore, one may assume that
all three committees were expected to finish
excerpting concurrently, as otherwise the editing stage would have been
unnecessarily
delayed. That all three committees did indeed finish excerpting
to the Sabinian committee (Iav 10 post Lab) were transferred to the Papinian
committee to read, and inserted partly in
the Sabinian, partly in the Papinian
(Appendix) mass.
This minor transfer of
books could suggest that the Papinian committee had only just finished their
excerpting work as the last twenty,
or so, books of the Sabinian committee
remained to be read. That being the case then the Papinian committee, which
excerpted 409
books, would have fallen significantly behind the average number
of books excerpted by the other two committees, at 559½ each,
as calculated
If we assume that the actual number of books read by the commission was 1692,
and taking into account that one Lenel line equals 1.12
Honoré’s calculated average excerpting rate of 74.15 Lenel lpb
would be increased to precisely 75
lpb, which is the same figure I
previously calculated to be the predetermined excerption rate for the original
. To the degree we are willing to allow lines to have been lost at
the editing stage, so, in direct proportion, the number of books
read by the
commission will be increased, in line with the overriding condition that the
commission was instructed to excerpt precisely
5 per cent of the original
material. If we proceed with the figure of 1692 books as that which was read by
the commission, then the
‘many other’ books referred to in
and from which nothing was extracted, can now be calculated as
1692-1528 = 164 books. While 1692 books falls well short of the nearly
mentioned by Justinian – though it should be emphasised that this number
was merely an educated guess by Tribonian during
the preliminary investigation
– it is still a significantly
higher figure than the 1528 books ultimately included in the
therefore worthy of special mention by Justinian, as noted above.
I would also note here that the actual number of ancient
the commission, with their corresponding effect on the average excerpting rate
figures calculated by Honoré, do not
alter the previous argument that
Honoré’s findings regarding the average excerpting rates of the six
commissioners are
a direct result of Justinian’s ‘five per cent
compilation limit’ plan. This is because I treated the actual excerpting
rate figures of commissioners A-F as
One should also note that the
division of five per cent between the three committees in the ratio of
2:1½:1½ (as previously
discussed) would only produce a reduction to 5
per cent of the original mass of texts if each committee were allocated the same
of books. This is because the Sabinian committee was excerpting at a
third higher rate than both the Edictal and Papinian committees.
distribution of
books saw the Sabinian and Edictal committees
with approximately equal numbers, and the Papinian committee with about 5/7th
the average
of the other two committees. This unequal distribution would then
have required a certain fine tuning, at the point where the final
books allocated to each committee was established, in order that the total
reduction of ancient legal writings was limited
to just five per cent of the
original. No adjustment needed to be made for any unequal distribution of books
between the two commissioners
within each committee, since, as previously
argued, they would each have excerpted at the same initially defined rate.
We are now in a position to explain the sudden, and dramatic, collapse in the
excerpting rate of commissioner E during the 118-book
Appendix section (ie,
Groups XLI-XLIII – and discussed above). Commissioner E had been
excerpting at an average rate of 77.78
lpb during the previous 143½ books
in the Papinian mass, but he excerpted an average of only 18.81 lpb for his
allocation of
59 Appendix books; the relevant figures for Commissioner F in the
main Papinian mass and in the Appendix are 69.41 and 61.83 lpb
respectively.
The Appendix books arrived
sometime after the commission had started its work of
excerpting.
It may be assumed that these
books came from regional centres of learning outside the immediate environs of
Constantinople. It would
have been completely inefficient and impractical to
expect the provinces to deliver to the commission all the ancient legal books
that they possessed before the commission had drawn up a list of those that were
already available in Constantinople. Furthermore,
it would not have been
possible to know the final number of books which would make up the Appendix
until the Papinian committee had
finished excerpting the Papinian mass, and so
therefore have reached the cut-off date for the final calculation of the number
books from which the
would be composed, including those books
from which no material was excerpted. Up until that date the commissioners could
retained the preliminary expectation that the commission would have
nearly 2000 books from which to excerpt. Noting that the excerpting
all the commissioners began high (ie, significantly above their average
excerpting rate) and finished low (ie, significantly
below their average
excerpting rate)
then it is clear that they
must have ‘borrowed’ some lines during the early stage of
excerpting, knowing that they would
have had to repay the ‘borrowed’
lines during the later stage of excerpting. However, when the final number of
became fixed at only 1692 books – or whatever higher figure,
less than 2000, we judge to have been the actual number read –
number of books within which the ‘borrowed’ lines were to be repaid
suddenly shrank, thereby requiring that
the actual average excerpting rate for
the books read, after the cut-off date, should be even more sharply reduced than
been the case had the commission received the originally calculated
2000 books.
Rather than all the commissioners sharing equally this necessary late cut in
excerpting rate, the main burden would seem to have fallen
disproportionately
upon commissioner E, whose rate of excerpting in the Appendix fell so sharply,
and, consequently, whose excerpting
rate was reduced from the figure
provisionally allocated to the other three commissioners in the Edictal and
Papinian committees,
of 67½ per cent, to approximately 60 per cent. This
equates to commissioner E having lost about 1060 lines that he would otherwise
have excerpted. These lines removed from commissioner E may have been required
by the Sabinian and Edictal committees, and presumably
because they could simply
not restrict themselves to their proportionate line count without leaving out
material from their later
books that the commission deemed of greater
importance. If this explanation is accepted – and it seems the most
logical conclusion
that I can think of – then it says two important
things. Firstly, that Justinian’s five per cent compilation limit was
strictly adhered to, otherwise commissioner E could have been allowed his
initially allotted 67½ per cent excerpting rate, and
without making even a
one per cent difference in the overall excerpting rate of the commission.
Secondly, since it would clearly
define two distinct bodies of text within the
Papinian committee, it is consistent with Honoré’s thesis that the
work of each committee was further divided among subcommittees.
I previously proposed that the original allocation of excerpting rates was
calculated on the basis that there were 2000 books to be
evenly distributed
among the three committees, and in such a manner that subcommittees A-F received
provisional excerpting rates,
in lines per book, of:
90:90:67½:67½:67½:67½ respectively. When it eventuated that
only 1692 books (or thereabouts)
were to be included in the
became necessary (in order to maintain the overall five per cent compilation
limit) to make the following minor adjustments from
these provisional values,
such that the average rate for C, D and F remained essentially the same at 67.25
lpb, the average rate
for A and B increased from 90 to 91.85 lpb, and the value
for E was reduced from 67.5 to 60.5 lpb. These figures are not meant to
as gospel, since clearly they would change according to which books, with their
corresponding rates of excerpting, were
allocated by Honoré to each of
the six commissioners. However, the probability that Honoré is far wrong
in his division
of books must be considered very low, for otherwise one would
have to accept that he so happened to divide the
books between the
respective subcommittees that, by chance alone, he achieved the actual figures
for the excerpting rates of subcommittees
A-F that are in such close agreement
with the most logical theoretical figures derived from dividing
Justinian’s overall five
per cent figure between three committees, and six
subcommittees. Nonetheless, one must test the possibility that his results were
accidental, and that the excerpting rate was fixed at the committee rather than
the subcommittee level.
To test the hypothesis that the excerpting rate was fixed at the subcommittee
level, we need to calculate the probability that Honoré
arrived at his figures for subcommittees A-F by chance alone. This argument
obviously excludes the possibility that he
had intentionally set out to achieve
the excerpting rate figures that he did, or that Honoré unintentionally
arrived at those
figures by virtue of some non-random aspect of his
calculations. Any knowledgeable understanding of Honoré’s
compilation
model would rule out the first possibility; and I have eliminated
the second possibility in my statistical calculations (see Appendix
Considering the variability in excerpting rates between the individual books of
, and within and between the group excerpting rates, as found
by Honoré, then common sense would indicate a high improbability
average excerpting rates for A (91.10) and B (92.60) would have deviated by such
a small amount from their mean value (of
91.85) by chance alone; or that the
values for C (66.82) and D (67.68) would have deviated by such a small amount
from their mean
value (of 67.25) by chance alone. The situation with the
Papinian mass is somewhat different, since, according to previous argument,
unequal rates of approximately 60 and 67 lpb were deliberately assigned to
commissioners E and F respectively at a late stage of
in order that the overall rate of reduction would be precisely five per cent.
Therefore, as a consequence, it becomes significantly
more difficult to argue
the ‘null hypothesis’ that the actual figures that Honoré
assigns to commissioners E (60.60)
and F (67.24) occurred by chance alone. The
statistical results found in Appendix 1 demonstrate: that the probability that
the figures
for subcommittees A and B occurred by chance alone is 7.00 per cent;
that for subcommittees C and D is 4.00 per cent; and that for
subcommittees E
and F is 44.00 per cent. Therefore, restricting ourselves to just the Sabinian
and Edictal committees combined, the
resulting probability that
Honoré’s figures could have occurred by chance alone is: 7.00%
× 4.00% = 0.28%, or less
than 1 in 350.
III CRITICISMS OF HONORé’S ‘COMPILATION
I referred above to the important paper by Osler, whose findings, if
substantiated, would cast considerable doubt on Honoré’s
regarding the compilation of the
especially as it relates to the
division of each of the three committees into subcommittees, and with each
subcommittee said to be
responsible for excerpting a specific body of work.
Osler argues that if Honoré’s division of works between the
subcommittees
can be shown to be contradictory, and/or internally inconsistent,
then ‘the numerical foundation of the theory is
invalided’.
It will prove instructive
to closely examine the specific criticisms made by Osler, since his main
findings can be shown to actually
support Honoré’s division of
texts among the six subcommittees when understood in terms of Justinian’s
per cent compilation limit’ plan. Osler’s analysis is
carried out in two stages: firstly, dealing with works excerpted
jointly; and
secondly, with works excerpted successively. This division of texts according to
‘excerpting type’ appears
in Bluhme’s list, and is central to
the methodology employed by Honoré to argue the merits of his model.
Joint Excerpting
In Bluhme’s list, the majority of classical works follow one another in
succession. However, with longer works, such as the
commentaries on the Edict
ius civile,
they were generally first divided into sections, and
it was these sections, rather than the work as a whole, which were read
successively.
According to
Honoré’s theory the two commissioners within each committee worked
simultaneously on these different sections,
with the first Commissioner
responsible for the odd-numbered sections and the second Commissioner
responsible for the even-numbered
sections – ie, they excerpted the works
jointly. Furthermore, this division of labour between the two commissioners is
to be identifiable by means of two distinct ‘styles’ of
excerpting that correspond to the odd and even-numbered sections.
Osler lists
the four indicia used by Honoré to distinguish between the styles of the
two commissioners, according to whether
they excerpted the odd or even-numbered
sections, as follows: (1) the rate at which each commissioner worked; (2) the
length of extracts
made by him; (3) his preference for one type of
subject-matter over another; and 4) his preference for one author over
Let us now examine Osler’s
critique of each of these four indicia in turn.
The Rate at which Each Commissioner Worked
Osler is initially somewhat confused about precisely what Honoré means
by the rate at which each commissioner worked, but he
finally settles on the
speed at which books were read by each of the
commissioners.
He next presents a table of
works excerpted jointly, detailing the number of books read in
Honoré’s odd-numbered (A
and C) and even-numbered (B and D)
sections, in both the Sabinian and Edictal
Sabinian mass: Group I A 68½ B 33½
II A 36½ B 28½
VI A 30 B 9
VII A 8 B 3
Total 147 78
Edictal mass: Group XVIII C 38 2/3 D 25 1/12
XIX C 50 1/12 D 34 1/6
XXI C 36 D 34
Total 163 3/4 124 1/4
With just one exception – Group XIV, where the same number of books was
read – the odd-numbered sections contain more
books than the even-numbered
sections. Osler argues that these figures would mean that the commissioners
responsible for the odd
and even-numbered sections were working at quite
different rates, and that this would appear incompatible with
claim that, in works excerpted successively, ‘the
compilers went to very great lengths to distribute an exactly equal number
between the two
commissioners’.
countered this difficulty by suggesting that the difference in reading rates was
‘in order to expedite the
work and perhaps because the assistants [ie, the
barristers] were available only irregularly
While Osler has rightly pointed
out the flaws in this suggestion,
still forced to recognise the consistent pattern of the odd-numbered sections
having more books than the even-numbered sections
within each of
Honoré’s groups. If we ignore Group XIV, where commissioners A and
B read just four books each, then
the probability of such a consistent pattern
occurring, by chance alone, for eight groups is just 1 in 128.
This consistent pattern of there being more books assigned to the
even-numbered, as compared to the odd-numbered, sections is clearly
outcome that Honoré could have favoured, as it is quite contrary to the
logical conclusions derived from his timetable
model, thereby requiring that he
must make certain ad hoc suggestions to account for this pattern. However, once
timetable model is rejected, then there is absolutely no
reason to assume that during joint excerpting the odd and even-numbered
were allocated exactly equal numbers of books. With both commissioners within
each of the Sabinian and Edictal committees
excerpting at the same predetermined
rate (as previously argued), it made absolutely no difference which of the two
committee members
excerpted which book, or how many books, provided that the
committee could maintain the overall reading timetable that one presumes
received at the outset of excerpting. This was clearly advantageous, as it meant
that during joint excerpting the work could continue
apace, even when one of the
commissioners was absent. Indeed, the consistently unequal distribution of books
found above would strongly
suggest that this pattern was not accidental, and
that it reflected outside commitments of commissioners B and D of the Sabinian
and Edictal committees respectively during the joint excerpting
The Length of Extracts Made by a Commissioner
Osler notes the considerable variation in the average group excerpting rates
between the odd and even-numbered commissioners within
each of the three masses,
and he underlines the commissioner within each group who excerpts the most,
claiming that no consistent
stylistic pattern emerges: in the Sabinian mass, A
excerpts more lines than B in 7 groups out of 17; in the Edictal mass, C
more lines than D in 7 groups out of 13; and in the Papinian mass, E
excerpts more lines than F in 7 groups out of
This finding is then said to contradict
Honoré’s ‘hypothesis of a single Commissioner responsible for
and even-numbered sections
respectively’.
However, once again,
when the timetable model is rejected, these figures are exactly what one would
expect from the two commissioners
within each committee, since it demonstrates a
consistent pattern, in line with our hypothesis that the commissioners were
to a fixed and equal rate (albeit approximate in the case of E and
F). In order that the two commissioners should arrive at the same
excerpting rate for their particular mass, it follows that respective individual
group rates must oscillate about the mean
excerpting rate for that committee,
and so that each commissioner would approximately share the high and low
excerpting rate values
with his colleague. Of course, this theoretical situation
would vary slightly depending upon which specific books, with their variable
excerpting rates, are assigned to each group. Nonetheless, an equal sharing of
high and low values should be approximately correct,
as Honoré’s
figures reveal.
The Preference for one type of Subject-Matter over Another
This stylistic characteristic is totally subsidiary to indicia 1 and 2 above,
and is only used by Honoré to try to identify
the personalities of the
two commissioners within each committee.
Therefore, whether the two commissioners within each committee favoured one type
of subject-matter over another is not significant
Honoré’s central thesis.
The Preference for one Author over Another
This stylistic characteristic would appear to have been the catalyst for
Honoré to devise his theory that the excerpting process
was carried out
at the subcommittee, rather than the committee,
And, of course, it is reasonable to
imagine, other factors being equal, that individual commissioners would have
preferred some ancient
authors to others. However, the difficulty in
establishing a statistically significant pattern of preference for one author
another is that, unlike in Honoré’s unrestrictive timetable
model, the commissioners were, in fact, constrained in their
choice of preferred
authors. That is, they had to conform to an overall fixed excerpting rate, which
would have placed severe limits
on precisely which authors, and which
subject-matter, was included in the
Successive Excerpting
The second stage of Osler’s critique deals with works excerpted
successively; and in particular Honoré’s division
of the Bluhme
list into groups each ‘consisting of two “Lots” which contain
an equal number of
demonstrate this concept, let us examine Groups III, IV and V, which are placed
between Groups II and VI (excerpted jointly),
and which may therefore be treated
as a self-contained sequence.
The works are:
Group III A 10 Ulp 10
B 11 Ulp 10
IV A 12 Ulp 6
V A 14 a Iul
1-62 Total = 62 books
} Total = 63 books
18 Iul 4 Urs Feroc }
19 Iul 6 Minic }
20 Africanus 9
Groups III and IV are each composed of two distinct sections which can
readily produce an equal division of texts (of 10 + 6 books
each). Honoré
made the ‘split’ between Iul
because he noticed a dramatic drop in the excerpting rate profile of the books
at this point. The first 62 books average 49.2
lpb while the last 28 average
only 11.54 lpb; and, furthermore, the sudden ‘collapse’ in
excerpting rate at book 62 appears
pronounced.
If this characteristic split
could be shown to be significantly representative of distinct excerpting
practices, then the neat division
of Group V into two almost equal sections,
together with the numerical equality of Groups III and IV, would considerably
Honoré’s theoretical model of lots containing an equal
number of books, and would thus support the broad outlines of
his distribution
mass between subcommittees. Osler maintains that unless the
various explanations Honoré offers for determining where the commencement
and ending of a group must fall are irrefutable, then ‘the numerical basis
of the theory will be undermined’.
Osler’s criticism of these ‘explanations’ is presented under
three headings: ‘Bluhme’s Split Works’;
Works’; and ‘Sandwich
Bluhme’s Split Works
Osler argues that the equal division of works into groups, as envisaged by
Honoré, could be similarly arranged into other groups
different collections of books; and he particularly finds fault with the
collapse argument used by Honoré to make
his division between sections
and between groups. Osler first demonstrates, as an example, that the texts in
the Sabinian mass numbered
32-63 in the Bluhme list may be divided into various
alternative sections to those proposed by Honoré, and he further infers
that constructing such alternative sections could be extended to many more of
Honoré’s group divisions. However, he
adds that this in itself
would not necessarily refute Honoré’s division into groups, simply
that it is ‘sufficient
to demonstrate that no argument whatsoever proceeds
from the numerical division alone’.
But surely the manner of dividing works to make up lots containing an equal
number of books cannot be a matter of simple arithmetic,
and so that the
preference for Honoré’s groups, as against Osler’s groups,
should be argued on the basis of such
factors as subject-matter, author and
other relevant factors. I previously argued that each commissioner within both
the Sabinian
and Edictal committees was expected to excerpt at precisely the
same rate as his colleague. Therefore, the fact that Honoré’s
average excerpting rate figures for the two commissioners within both these
committees is not quite equal would then offer the theoretical
opportunity to
fine-tune Honoré’s groups so as to bring the rates even closer
together. In this context, Osler’s
suggested alternate groups might have
some validity.
Divided Works
Osler is here concerned with the type of division discussed above in relation
to Iulianus
where a split occurs at books 62-63. Honoré
has cited this same phenomenon in relation to Papinian’s
quaestiones
and Scaevola’s
The essence of his argument
is that these three large works were split ‘at a point determined not for
any reason of subject-matter
but in order to make up an appropriate even number
However, Osler has
revealed that this phenomenon of a collapse in excerpting rate is not restricted
to the three cases quoted above,
but ‘in fact is universally maintained in
this ... genre of Roman “problematical” juristic literature,
works with such titles as
Quaestiones
including also the works called
There are two
sections to these works, a larger one that follows the order of the
Praetor’s Edict, followed by a shorter section
dealing with
senatus consulta
, and imperial
constitutions
; Osler continues:
‘if we investigate these works by counting lines extracted per book by the
compilers, we find that the universal rule is that very much less
material is taken from the books in the “statutory”
The first point to make here is that in Honoré’s three examples
the division of works to make up lots of an equal number
of books is completely
contained within these individual groups (see Table 1, nos 1-3, for individual
lpb figures). Therefore, even
if one were not to accept Honoré’s
hypothesis as to why the sudden and dramatic decline in excerpting rate occurred
in these three works, we must still seek an explanation as to why it occurred at
just those particular points. That the collapse
should have occurred by chance
alone, and yet somehow have managed to make up lots containing an equal number
of books, seems improbable.
And this would apply equally well whether
Osler’s argument concerning the Edictal and statutory sections is valid or
does not deny this dramatic fall in excerpting rate, rather he
stresses, and rightly so, that it is incompatible with Honoré’s
timetable model.
Turning to Table 1, let us
first deal with Honoré’s three examples.
1. In Papinian’s
Quaestiones
the Edictal section comprises books
1-28 and the statutory section books 29-37, and Honoré introduces his
split between books
Honoré’s criterion, books 24-29 average 124.7 lpb and books 30-35
only 15.7 lpb. Using Osler’s criterion,
the Edictal books 23-28 average
115.5 lpb and the statutory section 39 lpb. Moreover, there is now no longer the
obvious collapse
in excerpting rate, since the statutory section begins with
book 29 that has a value of 162 lines.
2. In Julian’s
the Edictal section comprises books 1-58
and the statutory section books 59-90, and Honoré introduces his split
between books
Honoré’s criterion, books 57-62 average 60 lpb and books 63-68 only
11.7 lpb. Using Osler’s criterion, the
Edictal books 53-58 average 52.7
lpb and the statutory books average 57.3 lpb, so that there is little change in
the excerpting rate.
And, once again, there is now no obvious collapse in
excerpting rate, since the statutory section begins with books 59-62 (having
values of 28, 79, 97 and 97 lines respectively).
3. In Scaevola’s
the Edictal section comprises books
1-29 and the statutory section books 30-40, and Honoré introduces his
split precisely
between books 29 and 30.
However, in this case, Honoré makes up his two lots of equal numbers of
books by combining section (i), books 1-13, with section
(iii), books 30-40, and
section (ii), books 14-29, with section (iv), Lab. 8 Paul
previously detailed (above), there is a dramatic collapse in excerpting rate
between sections (ii) and (iii), and also an even
larger increase in excerpting
rate between sections (i) and (ii). Books 8-13 average 21.5 lpb and books 14-19
average 180.8 lpb,
a ratio of 1:8.4. Books 24-29 average 82.2 lpb and books
30-35 average only 13.8 lpb, a ratio of 6:1. Since the Edictal material
comprises both sections (i) and (ii), the dramatic increase between these two
sections would seem inexplicable in terms of Osler’s
We continue by quantifying the collapse in excerpting rates evident in
Osler’s seven examples (See Table 1, nos. 4-10, below).
There is no
requirement here for a break according to Honoré’s theory of a
change of commissioner, since these works
are either in groups jointly excerpted
or in groups of two equal lots of undivided
4. In Papinian’s
, books 8-13 average 208.8 lpb and
books 14-19 average 40.7 lpb.
5. In Paul’s
Quaestiones
, books 11-16 average 82.7 lpb and books
17-22 average 30 lpb.
6. In Paul’s
, books 10-15 average 86.8 lpb and books
16-21 average 19.7 lpb.
7. In Scaevola’s
Quaestiones
, books 8-13 average 19.5 lpb and
books 14-19 average 8.7 lpb.
8. In Modestinus’s
, books 8-13 average 64.5 lpb and
books 14-19 average 9.3 lpb.
9. In Marcellus’
, books 16-21 average 40.2 lpb and books
22-27 average 19.3 lpb.
10. In the Celsus
, books 22-27 average 31.5 lpb and books
28-33 average 9.8 lpb.
We can now simply add together the figures just calculated for
Honoré’s criterion (nos. 1-3) and for Osler’s criterion
1-10), and compare the relative average collapse.
For Honoré’s criterion the collapse ratio is:
(124.7 + 60 + 82.2):(15.7 + 11.1 + 13.8)
= 266.9:41.2
For Osler’s criterion the collapse ratio is:
(115.5 + 52.7 + 82.2 + 208.8 + 82.7 + 86.8 + 19.5 + 65.5 + 40.2 + 31.5):
(39 + 57.3 + 13.8 + 40.7 + 30 + 19.7 + 8.7 + 9.3 + 19.3 +9.8)
= 784.4:247.6
Therefore, despite the collapse in excerpting rate due to Osler’s
hypothesis – that very much less material was taken
from books in the
statutory sections as compared to the Edictal sections – there is still a
significant residual collapse (in
the ratio of approximately 2:1) consistent
with Honoré’s hypothesis, ie, that works were divided so as to
deliberately
create equal lots for excerption at the subcommittee level.
Furthermore, Osler’s hypothesis does nothing to explain the dramatic
collapse in excerpting rates noted above in Honoré’s examples. And
if Honoré’s hypothesis can be shown
to be highly probable for these
three examples then his argument for there being two commissioners working
independently within each
committee is similarly enhanced.
Sandwich Groups
Osler’s principal criticism of this category of division of works into
equal lots is that it ‘again rests upon [Honoré’s]
that the rate of excerpting indicates the speed at which a Commissioner was
In the remaining pages of
his article, Osler then goes on to show that such an assumption is inconsistent
with the total group evidence.
However, this legitimate refutation of
Honoré’s compilation assumption does not mean that his division of
equal lots is any less valid. I previously argued in relation to
‘Joint Excerpting’ that the evidence, while inconsistent
Honoré’s timetable model, was, in fact, totally consistent with the
two independent commissioners within each committee
having excerpted at an equal
and predetermined average excerpting rate. This same excerpting rate
characteristic is found in the
group examples that Osler uses to refute
Honoré’s timetable model. In the five groups he discusses in
detail, Osler
argues that, according to Honoré’s assumption, the
number of lines excerpted by the second Commissioner within each
group should
always exceed those of the first Commissioner, a position which he then
demonstrates not to be the case.
despite the great variability found in the ratio of the excerpting rates between
the first and second commissioner – measuring
as much as 6.4:1 for Group
XLI and as little as 1.1:1 for Group XX – the total average excerpting
rate ratio between the 1st
and 2nd commissioner for all five groups almost
reaches parity at 1.3:1. And this close proximity in the average excerpting rate
for the two commissioners, over this significant body of works, is precisely
what our hypothesis of a fixed excerpting rate for each
committee would clearly
Osler’s paper fails to disprove Honoré’s principal
discovery that the excerpting phase of the
’s compilation was
carried out at the subcommittee, rather than the committee, level. However, he
does succeed in pointing out
many logical inconsistencies in
Honoré’s timetable model. Concerning the criteria used by
Honoré to compose his
groups, Osler fails to explain the statistically
improbable event that in groups excerpted jointly the odd-numbered sections
consistently
contained more
than the even-numbered sections. As
regards the other clearly quantifiable criterion – that is, the sudden and
dramatic collapse
in the excerpting rates in ‘Divided Works’ which
were split to form groups of an equal number of
having discovered half the truth, namely that the statutory sections contain
significantly less material than the
Edictal sections, failed to exhaust his
enquiry, which would have shown that there still remained a significant residual
effect consistent
with Honoré’s proposal that the ‘Divided
Works’ were excerpted by separate individuals.
To conclude this section, I can do no better that quote the words of
Justinian, in
Deo auctore
, that ‘[we] have found the whole extent
of our laws which has come down from the foundation of the city of Rome ... to
confused that it extends to an inordinate length and is beyond the
comprehension of any human nature’.
The problem with the existing body of Roman law was therefore its great size and
confused state, requiring that the commission find
a solution that would make it
both ordered and manageable. In this regard, Honoré’s timetable
plan would have been very
risky, as it would have handed over complete
responsibility for the excerpting process to the six commissioners, with all
their individual
traits and preferences. The most competent and conscientious of
the commissioners would undoubtedly have been more judicious in their
than the less competent and less conscientious members, which in itself would
present a major flaw in the
plan’s design. On the other
hand, Justinian’s ‘five per cent compilation limit’ plan was
conceptually brilliant:
it combined great simplicity with complete control over
project; it decided the number of committees, and that
each committee could have two commissioners excerpting independently of each
other; it established the relative value of the Sabinian mass over the Edictal
and Papinian masses; and it predetermined the precise
volume of the finished
We learn from
Deo auctore
(15 December 530) that Justinian had by this
date already assembled in his palace at Constantinople the six commissioners, as
as the barristers, who were to work on the compilation of the
This date would then seem
the most appropriate to begin the excerpting phase. That the full Appendix mass
had not arrived by this
unimportant, since I previously argued that the initial excerpting rates
assigned to each of the three committees was based upon
the provisional belief
that the number of ancient legal texts amounted to some 2000
was completed, Justinian gave instructions to Tribonian,
Theophilus and Dorotheus to prepare a new student’s textbook, the
. This work is known to have been finished by 21 November
The excerpting and editing stages of
both these works were therefore completed in just less than three years.
I calculated above that the minimum number of
read by the
commission was 1692, though one cannot exclude the possibility that the maximum
number read might have amounted to a
few more. Furthermore, it was surely
intended at the outset of excerpting that these
distributed more or less evenly among the three committees, and so that each
committee would therefore have had the expected
task of reading about 564 books.
And, since the editing phase could not begin until the excerpting phase had
finished, a projected
equal distribution of books among the three committees
should also mean that the committees were intended to read their allotted
of books at the same rate, so that all three committees would finish their
excerpting phase at approximately the same time.
The only plausible rate that
the commission could have planned to read the
an average of one book per day per committee, since the alternatives are either
impossible or highly improbable. At half a
book per day per committee, and even
using the lowest figure of 564 books, then even the excerpting phase of the
could not have been completed in three years. At two books per
day, that is, one book per commissioner per day, and even using the
possible figure of 667 (2000/3) books, then the excerpting phase would have been
completed in a little over a year. This
is clearly too short a time frame, as it
would have left over one and a half years for the editing phase. Considering the
duration of the
project, it seems unreasonable (at least
to the modern observer) to imagine that the commissioners were expected to work
per week, so let us assume that their Sabbath was a day of rest and
prayer. To have been expected to work six days per week but to
excerpt seven
books per week
has little conceptual
attractiveness. If we proceed upon the basis that each committee excerpted an
average of six books per week,
then, the excerpting phase would have taken 94
(564/6) weeks, or 1 year 10 months. The excerpting stage therefore finished
the middle of October 532, 22 months on from 15 December 530.
At the editing stage, the Commission brought together the excerpted texts
from the three masses to compile the 50 books of the
Honoré argues that: the
book rather than the
title was used as the editorial unit; and that books 30-32 formed a single unit
for editorial purposes.
If we accept that
each committee had to submit a draft of two books per
that is, one book per commissioner
per month, then the drafting phase took eight (48/6) months for each
commissioner to complete
drafting his section of the
. The editing
was therefore finished about the middle of June 533, leaving five months for the
project to be completed. At an editing rate of half a book per
commissioner per month, the
could not have been completed in time,
and at a rate of two books per commissioner per month, the
would be allocated far too long a period compared to the much larger
Was five months sufficient time to execute the
Although there is little dispute over how many commissioners compiled the
, the situation is not so clear as regards the
Three commissioners, Tribonian, Theophilus and Dorotheus, were cited in
Imperatoriam
as members of the
’ subcommittee, but
Huschke has argued that only Dorotheus and Theophilus took part in the drafting,
with Tribonian playing
a supervisory role.
However, Justinian had commanded the commission to bring the
‘to a satisfactory end as speedily as possible
Subsequently, in
(16 December 533), it is written that, ‘in hastening to issue these laws
in our third consulship we have done well
Bearing in mind this stated
need for (responsible) speed in the commission’s work, one must agree with
Honoré that Tribonian
could not simply have confined himself to a
supervisory role.
And yet the argument in
favour of an equal division of books, that is, 4 books divided between 2
commissioners, is totally in accordance
with what we already know of the
practice of equal division devised for the compilation of the
How then can we best resolve a situation that at first sight appears
contradictory? Let us suppose that Theophilus and Dorotheus excerpted
two books, in like manner to the practice adopted during the excerpting phase of
project. With the editing of the
just completed,
Tribonian could have used this opportunity to supervise any remaining
organisational tasks such as consulting with
Justinian over any last minute
changes required to the
, and preparing copies for subsequent
distribution once it had been authorised by the emperor. Once Theophilus and
Dorotheus had excerpted
Books 1 and 2, they would presumably have been handed
over to Tribonian for editing. The inclusion of references to Justinian’s
legislation was made at this stage.
somewhat different situation would have arisen following the excerpting stage
for Books 3 and 4, because now there are three commissioners
(assuming Tribonian
had finished the editing of Books 1 and 2 by this point) available to edit two
books. As the most senior member,
Tribonian must surely have delegated this work
to his junior colleagues, since, even if he chose to edit one of the books, he
would not have delayed the editing of the second book while two
eminent commissioners stood idly by.
What evidence is there for this proposal? Huschke argued that there is a
difference in style between, on the one hand, Books 1 and
2 and, on the other,
Books 3 and 4; stylistic differences which he attributed to Dorotheus and
Theophilus respectively.
In addition, he
argued that: three passages in Book 2 ascribe to Tribonian the credit for
proposing certain of Justinian’s
legislative reforms, but that such
references do not occur in Books 3 and 4; and that a number of passages contain
references to
earlier or later parts of the text, but always within the half in
which the reference occurs.
passages there are six references dealing exclusively with Books 1 and 2, and
two of these (i.e., 33 per cent) involve cross-references
between Books 1 and 2,
which is consistent with one person having edited both books. However, of the
fourteen passages cited in the
second half, all but two (ie, 14 per cent)
4.1. pr – remain within their
respective books, which statistically speaking should indicate a greater
probability that these
two books were independently edited. Another argument
used by Huschke was to cite references in Books 3 and 4 that indicate that
editor was unaware of what had been said in Books 1 and
All these arguments are consistent with
the two halves of the
having been the responsibility of
different editors, as just outlined.
As regards constructing the timetable for the
, we can be
guided by another finding of Huschke, namely that
4.18 was an
addendum to a draft which originally stopped at
4.17, and which was
probably by the same author who edited Books 1 and
This would then signal another
contribution by Tribonian. Let us assume that the commissioners were as
industrious during the
as they had been during the
book required one month to edit, and
where the average time to excerpt the
for each of the 48 books was
22 months divided by 8 books per commissioner, which equals approximately
2½ months per
book per commissioner. However, instead of the
read for the
used only a
, primarily the
Cottidianae
of Gaius, as well as the
of Marcian,
Florentinus and Ulpian, and perhaps those of Paulus, plus several references to
Justinian’s own legislation.
might then reasonably suggest that instead of 2½ months to excerpt the
for each book of the
, a figure of 1½ months
per book seems more realistic as a hypothetical starting point. The excerpting
of Books 1 and 2 would
have taken 1½ months for Theophilus and Dorotheus to
complete, at which time they were handed over to Tribonian, who required
further 2 (2 × 1) months to edit them. Upon completion of Books 1 and 2,
Theophilus and Dorotheus immediately started excerpting
Books 3 and 4, which
would have been finished half a month before Tribonian had completed editing
Books 1 and 2. These two commissioners
then proceeded to edit Books 3 and 4,
which would have been completed one month later, and half a month after
Tribonian had finished
editing Books 1 and 2. This half-month period would have
allowed Tribonian time to compose
4.18 for inclusion in Book 4, and
before the two books were presented to Justinian for approval. Might not
Tribonian have both excerpted
and edited Books 1 and 2 while, at the same time,
Theophilus and Dorotheus excerpted and edited Books 3 and 4? Had this been the
case, then, Tribonian would have required 5 months to complete his task.
Meanwhile, Theophilus and Dorotheus would have required
only 2½ months each
to excerpt and edit Books 3 and 4. For Tribonian to have written the last title
(4.18) would then have incurred an even longer delay in
presenting the finished work to Justinian, which is clearly less attractive
scenario than having Tribonian write
4.18 while he waited for
Theophilus and Dorotheus to finish editing Books 3 and 4. That
may have been an afterthought is suggested by the fact that 1.1.4 seems to have
been added to the end of the first draft of
title 1.1 so as to link up with
project would thus have taken four months to complete,
ending about the middle of October. Justinian makes clear that once this stage
was finished, he received and scrutinised the
This task could have been carried out
during the month remaining until the promulgation of
C Imperatoriam
November 533. A total period of six months would have elapsed between finishing
the editing phase of the Digest in mid-June
and the promulgation of
on 16 December 533. One may imagine that this was sufficient time for
Justinian to inspect the completed
, and to allow time for its
The above arguments lead to the following provisional timetable:
15 December 530
Deo auctore
promulgated and
phase begun
Middle of October 532
Excerpting phase finished and drafting phase
Middle of June 533
draft finished and
Middle of October 533
draft finished
21 November 533
C Imperatoriam
promulgated
16 December 533
promulgated
V IDENTIFICATION OF COMMISSIONERS
The precision of Justinian’s ‘five per cent compilation
limit’ plan even allows us to assign, with a good degree
of confidence,
each of the six named commissioners to their appropriate subcommittees. The
relative weighting given to the Sabinian
mass, as regards its superior
excerpting rate, must mean that it was considered the most important of the
three masses. It therefore
surely follows that Tribonian was chairman of this
committee. When I previously discussed ‘Joint Excerpting’, it was
seen that more books were consistently assigned to the even-numbered, as
compared to the odd-numbered, sections in both the Sabinian
and Edictal
committees. On the other hand, the two commissioners in the Papinian committee
excerpted almost precisely the same number
of books. To my mind, the most
plausible explanation for this relative excerpting-rate profile is that the
odd-numbered commissioners
in the Sabinian and Edictal committees, B and D, were
Tribonian and Constantinus respectively. I believe that this unequal
distribution
of books was deliberate, and that it reflected outside commitments
of Tribonian and Constantinus during the joint excerpting phase.
If there is one historical event that must surely have had an impact on the
commission’s work then it would have been the Nika
riots, which began
is 13 months after the commission began its work in mid-December 530. According
to the above-argued timetable, this would
equate to one 13/22nd of the total
time taken during the excerpting phase, and which translates in the Sabinian
committee (which
finally excerpted from a total of 546 books) to about Book 323
(ie, 13/22 × 546). Note, then, that Group VI of the Sabinian
began with Book 326. The two previous groups (IV and V), totalling 137 books,
had shared the work equally between commissioners
A and B. Then, in Group VI, A
read 30 books to B’s 9 and in Group VII, A read 8 books to B’s 3.
During the remaining
groups belonging to the Sabinian committee, A and B again
shared equally the books to be read. Combining the 50 books in Groups VI
VII, A read 3.2 times the number of books read by B. At an average of 6 books
per week per committee (see above), the reading
of these two groups would have
lasted almost two months, that is, from mid-January to mid-March 532. In the
previous two groups excerpted
jointly (I and II), the respective ratios of books
read by A to those read by B, are 2.0:1 and 1.3:1. Therefore, even in comparison
to these two other cases of joint excerpting, Groups VI and VII remain quite
anomalous. And they are even more anomalous when compared
to the groups
excerpted jointly in the Edictal committee, where the highest ratio of books
read by C compared to those read by D
is only 1.5:1 (in Groups XVIII and XIX).
In light of this combined evidence – namely: (1) that we can independently
Tribonian is most likely to have been the senior commissioner on the
Sabinian committee; (2) that there is such a dramatic difference
in the number
of books read by commissioners A and B in Groups VI and VII; and (3) that such a
close chronological synchronism has
been achieved between the start of the Nika
riots and our calculated date for commencement of reading Group VI – I
would argue
that Tribonian must have been intimately involved in the political
and legal ramifications associated with the Nika riots and its
aftermath. This
finding might seem counter-intuitive, since Tribonian is known to have lost his
position as quaestor only a few days
after the Nika riots began; although he
retained his position as chairman of the
commission and continued
to be a very valued official in Justinian’s
One might therefore assume that
during the Nika riots Tribonian had more, not less, free time on his hands to
devote exclusively
to the work of the commission. However, the evidence would
seem to contradict this position. While it may have been politically expedient
for Justinian to remove Tribonian from the office of quaestor, it would also
appear that the emperor was in particular need of his
service and legal
expertise during the following two
The remaining commissioners can now be distributed among the three committees
in their order of seniority:
becomes the senior commissioner on the Papinian committee; Dorotheus the
assistant to Tribonian; Anatolius the assistant
to Constantinus; and Cratinus
the assistant to Theophilus. That Tribonian, Theophilus and Dorotheus still
appear in the same order
when assigned as commissioners to the
project would further support this view of their relative status within the
imperial court, so that Theophilus should become the
chairman of the third
committee. Dorotheus, whom Justinian esteemed for his very great reputation and
renown, would have received
the important post of Tribonian’s assistant on
the Sabinian committee. Moreover, this arrangement of commissioners neatly ties
in with the excerpting behaviour of commissioners E and F during the Appendix
mass. As previously argued, once the final number of
to be included
was established at approximately 1692, E was forced to
accept a reduction in his initially allocated excerpting rate, from 67½
approximately 60 lines per book, in order that the
not exceed the
five per cent excerpting limit imposed by Justinian’s compilation plan.
This unenviable duty would then have
fallen to Cratinus, the least senior member
of the six-man commission. Furthermore, it is now possible to suggest why the
committee excerpted significantly fewer books than both the Sabinian
and Edictal committees. Theophilus and Cratinus, as resident
professors in the
law faculty at Constantinople, may well have been called upon to continue some
teaching duties, the ultimate extent
of which might have made it difficult for
them to conscientiously read all of their allotted number of books at the
required average
rate. Dorotheus and Anatolius, as visiting professors from
Beirut, would presumably not have been so burdened. And, indeed, there
support for this proposal in that commissioners A and C excerpted almost exactly
the same number of books each (303 and 301
respectively); figures which were
significantly higher than those of any of the other commissioners, and a full
fifty per cent higher
than the number of books (again almost equal) excerpted by
commissioners E and F (202½ and 206½ respectively). In conclusion,
commission would have been composed as
Identification Table
Sabinian Edictal Papinian
chairman Tribonian (B) Constantinus (D) Theophilus (F)
assistant Dorotheus (A) Anatolius (C) Cratinus (E)
Appendix 1: Statistical
Calculations
The purpose of this appendix is to calculate the statistical probability that
the average excerpting rates (in lines per book) found
by Honoré, for the
specific selection of books he allotted to the six subcommittees (A-F), could
have occurred by chance alone.
Since the relative figures for all the individual
books of the
are not published in
neither readily available nor easily calculated, I therefore relied upon the
most detailed breakdown of the figures found
‘Appendix One’, and supplemented this with the individual
figures supplied by both Honoré and Osler for the books
detailed in Table
1 (below). In total there were 704 data entries from just over 1500 books, a
more than satisfactory degree of detail
for the purpose required. In Table 2
(below), the figures from ‘Appendix One’ include the group
classification in Roman
numerals and the subcommittee classification in
capitals. For example, Group I contained the 51 books of
and the 16 books of
. The 51 books of
are detailed in Table 2, in strict numerical order, depending
upon whether they were excerpted, according to Honoré, by the
odd-numbered (A) or even-numbered (B) commissioner. The same procedure was
adopted for the books of
, and for the
remaining groups in the Sabinian committee. This process was repeated for both
groups in the Edictal committee, whose
odd and even-numbered commissioners were
C and D respectively, and for the Papinian committee, whose odd and
even-numbered commissioners
were E and F respectively.
It was then necessary to compare Honoré’s allocation of books to
subcommittees A, B, C, D, E and F with a random allocation
of books to six
comparable subcommittees which I called A’, B’, C’, D’,
E’ and F’. In order that
this comparison should be identical in all
other respects, I maintained the same ratios, in terms of the number of books
by Honoré to the odd and even-numbered sections (as found in
, Appendix One), for subcommittees A’-F’. This, in
turn, means that the same number of books in subcommittees A-F will
subcommittees A’-F’ respectively. For example, in Group I, sections
the section length ratios (in
number of books) between subcommittees A and B are: 20-16, 9-4,
15½-10½, 14-3 and 10-0.
some of the data for the Sabinian mass occurred in ½-book units, it was
necessary to convert all the figures given in
1-book units into ½-book
units to facilitate the arithmetical manipulation of the data by computer. The
full data for the ratio
of section lengths allocated by Honoré in the
Sabinian mass is found below in Table 3, row 1. Based on these ratios, I used
the Microsoft Excel random number generation function to create 20 additional
sets of values for A’ and B’. I have included,
as an example, the
first of these alternative sets of ratios in row no 2. The excerpting rate
figures (in lpb) in Table 2 were then
allocated to subcommittees A’ and
B’ by creating alternate odd and even-numbered streams of books using the
generated section length ratios. The total number of lines were next
calculated for the A’ and B’ subcommittees, and
this figure was
divided by the number of books in each subcommittee to give the average
excerpting rates for A’ and B’,
as shown below (A’ av,
B’ av, in Table 3, row nos 1 and 2). The relevant average excerpting rate
figures for the remaining
data sets are also presented in row nos. 3-21.
The average excerpting rates for subcommittees A and B, as presented in
Honoré’s ‘Summary of Sabinian mass’
table, are 91.10
and 92.60 lpb respectively, which represents a deviation of ± 0.75 from the
mean value of 91.85. Whereas Honoré
used various criteria to select the
particular books to be allocated to each of the odd and even-numbered sections
he defined in
the Sabinian mass, I have simply randomly selected the books for
subcommittees A’ and B’. The Standard Deviation and
mean of the
above listed A’ and B’ values, from row nos 1-21, were calculated
using the Microsoft Excel descriptive statistics
function. Assuming that these
figures approximate to a normal distribution
we can calculate the probability
that Honoré’s figures for subcommittees A and B could have occurred
by chance alone.
With a mean of 91.49 lpb and a standard deviation of 9.11 for
the A’ and B’ figures, the probability that the values
for A and B
could have deviated by only ± 0.75 from their mean is calculated to be 7.00
The relevant figures for the Edictal mass were calculated in a similar manner
to those of the Sabinian mass.
average excerpting rates for subcommittees C and D, as presented in the
‘Summary of Edictal mass’ table, are 66.82
and 67.68 lpb
respectively, giving a deviation of ± 0.43 from their mean value of 67.25.
The statistical analysis of the excerpting
rate deviations for C’ and
D’ (as detailed in my 1996 thesis) gave a mean value of 67.02 lpb and a
standard deviation
of 9.20. The probability that the values of C and D could
have deviated from their mean by only ± 0.43 by chance alone is calculated
to be 4.00 per cent. As previously discussed, it is significantly more difficult
to argue the ‘null hypothesis’ that
the figures Honoré has
assigned to commissioners E and F occurred by chance alone since I propose that
these figures include
deliberate actions taken at the end of the excerpting
process in order to achieve a specific end. Nonetheless, the average excerpting
rates for subcommittees E and F, as presented in the ‘Summary of Papinian
mass’ table, are 60.60 and 67.24 lpb respectively,
giving a deviation of
± 3.32 from their mean value of 63.92. The statistical analysis of the
excerpting rate deviations for
E’ and F’ (as detailed in my 1996
thesis) gave a mean value of 63.96 lpb and a standard deviation of 5.72. The
probability
that the values for E and F deviated from their mean by only ±
3.32 by chance alone is calculated to be 44.00 per cent, which
is just slightly
better than an even chance. That being the case, the total probability that
Honoré could have arrived at
the average excerpting rates for the four
commissioners in the Sabinian and Edictal committees by chance alone is: 7%
0.28%, or less than 1 in 350.
1. Papinian,
quaestiones
Books 20-29: 227, 44, 37, 107, 6, 15, 55, 273, 237, 162 lines
30-37: 14, 23, 25, 8, 2, 22, 70, 38 lines
2. Iulianus,
Books 50-62: 9, 49, 146, 45, 103, 38, 66, 49, 15, 28, 79, 97, 97 lines
Books 63-90: 3, 45, 22, 0, 0, 0, 21, 27, 0, 0, 7, 0, 0, 0, 4, 45, 0, 8, 5,
16, 2, 67, 3, 5, 3, 11 lines
3. Scaevola,
Books 1-13: 69, 49, 10, 48, 142, 43, 118, 9, 32, 30, 52, 0, 6 lines
Books 14-29: 74, 176, 260, 197, 260, 118, 227, 276, 359, 59, 111, 70,
47, 86, 121, 58 lines
Books 30-34: 4, 26, 11, 33, 9, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 lines
: Number of lines 299, av. 37.4.
4. Papinian,
(libri 19: Edictal Books 1-13; Statutory Books
Books 1-13: 197, 178, 275, 168, 178, 305, 274, 416, 274, 103, 232, 90, 138
Books 14-19: 63, 72, 50, 6, 0, 53 lines
Quaestiones
(libri 26: Edictal Books 1-16; Statutory Books
Books 1-16: 92, 173, 315, 178, 249, 97, 130, 24, 116, 132, 72, 75, 38, 92,
168, 51 lines
Books 17-26: 43, 0, 5, 0, 73, 59, 26, 15, 45, 0 lines
(libri 23: Edictal Books 1-15; Statutory Books
Books 1-15: 64, 39, 108, 127, 82, 63, 90, 11, 152, 29, 78, 52, 104, 148,
Books 16-23: 52, 5, 22, 23, 11, 6, 0, 0 lines
7. Scaevola,
Quaestiones
(libri 20: Edictal Books 1-13; Statutory
Books 14-20).
Books 1-13: 57, 100, 14, 25, 25, 140, 0, 51, 4, 0, 0, 19, 43 lines
Books 14-20: 0, 19, 6, 0, 21, 6, 0 lines
8. Modestinus,
(libri 19: Edictal Books 1-13; Statutory Books
Books 1-13: 84, 56, 28, 65, 72, 83, 8, 34, 43, 229, 29, 29, 23 lines
Books 14-19: 3, 5, 4, 39, 5, 0 lines
9. Marcellus,
(libri 31: Edictal Books 1-21; Statutory Books
Books 1-21: 17, 4, 55, 37, 25, 63, 91, 57, 90, 17, 4, 35, 49, 27, 96, 49,
27, 80, 44 lines
Books 22-31: 21, 15, 11, 0, 3, 9, 8, 14, 12, 22, 27, 28 lines
10. Celsus,
(libri 39: Edictal Books 1-27; Statutory Books
Books 1-27: 25, 11, 43, 7, 71, 70, 25, 38, 6, 11, 27, 48, 4, 3, 25, 80, 28,
84, 25, 36, 16, 42, 10, 39, 20, 62 lines
Books 28-39: 21, 15, 11, 0, 3, 9, 8, 14, 12, 22, 27, 28 lines
Sabinian mass
I Ulp 51 Sab (no of books) (lines per book)
A 1-14 14 av 140.4
B 15-25 11 av 281.2
A 26-29 4 av 274.0
B 30 1 av 231.0
A 31-40 in 9½ av 172.0
B 40 in-43 3½ av 266.3
A 44-50 7 av 162.1
B 51 1 av 45.0
Sabinian mass
1. [Honoré’s section length ratios, in half–book units.]
40-32, 18-8, 31-21, 28-6, 20-0, 23-11, 14-10, 11-22, 25-14, 20-20, 12-12,
22-10, 18-6, 6-2, 14-0, 16-6, 4-4, 30-30, 4-4, 20-20, 26-28, 14-14, 8-8,
20-20, 8-6,
A’ av = 103.91; B’ av =
2. 20-20, 16-6, 20-0, 31-21, 14-0, 4-4, 30-30, 20-20, 8-8, 20-20, 26-28,
22-10, 18-6,
18-8, 40-32, 124-126, 28-6, 14-10, 20-20, 23-11, 8-6, 14-14, 6-2, 11-22,
25-14, 4-4,
A’ av = 89.04; B’ av = 95.26
3. A’ av = 89.55; B’ av = 94.60 4. A’ av = 96.28;
B’ av = 85.92
5. A’ av = 84.88; B’ av = 100.61 6. A’ av = 88.39;
B’ av = 96.09
7. A’ av = 105.23; B’ av = 74.38 8. A’ av = 88.89;
B’ av = 95.45
9. A’ av = 104.35; B’ av = 75.51 10. A’ av = 92.66;
B’ av = 90.59
11. A’ av = 88.88; B’ av = 95.45 12. A’ av = 95.61;
B’ av = 86.78
13. A’ av = 96.65; B’ av = 85.45 14. A’ av = 100.11;
B’ av = 80.98
15. A’ av = 91.33; B’ av= 92.30 16. A’ av = 79.57;
B’ av = 107.46
17. A’ av = 93.34; B’ av = 89.71 18. A’ av = 78.72;
B’ av = 108.56
19. A’ av = 103.79; B’ av = 76.23 20. A’ av = 102.16;
B’ av = 78.34
21. A’ av = 91.16; B’ av = 92.53
The ideas presented in this paper were
first developed in my 1996 Honours thesis, 'Justinian and Mathematics: an
analysis of the
organising structure of the
’, which was
submitted to the University of Melbourne on 23 December 1996. A copy of this
work is held in the Department of
Classics and Archaeology, The University of
Melbourne, Australia. My supervisor was Dr Roger Scott.
BA (Hon). Currently enrolled in a
postgraduate degree at The University of Melbourne.
C Deo auctore,
in T Mommsen and P
Krueger (eds),
The Digest of Justinian
, vol 1(A Watson trans, 1985 ed)
An Introduction to Roman
Legal and Constitutional History
(J M Kelly trans, 1966 ed) 170 [trans of:
Römische Rechtsgeschichte
F Bluhme, ‘Die Ordnung der
Fragmenten in den Pandektentiteln’ (1820), reprinted in 6 Labeo (1960)
(1978) 150.
Various articles had appeared in the
intervening years: A Honoré and A Rodger, ‘How the
Commissioners worked’ (1970) 87
Zeitschrift der
Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte (Romanistische Abteilung
246-314 – although a joint work it is made clear that Rodger’s role
is ‘essentially subordinate’ (ibid
246); A Honoré,
‘Justinian’s
: Work in Progress’
Quarterly Review
(henceforth ‘Work in Progress’); A
Honoré, ‘Justinian’s
: Following the
Law Quarterly Review
(henceforth
‘Trail’); A Honoré, ‘The Distribution of the
texts’ (1972) 89
351-62; A Honoré,
‘The Editing of the
titles’ (1973) 90
262-304; A Honoré, ‘The Background to Justinian’s
Codification’
Tulane Law Review
Honoré, ‘Labeo’s
Commission’ in A Watson (ed),
Daube Noster
(1974) 161-81.
above n 5, 70.
A Cameron, ‘Book review of
Journal of Roman Studies
; H D Evjen,
‘Book Review of Tribonian’ (1980) 76
Classical Journal
368-70; B W Frier, ‘Law on the Installment Plan’
, esp 861, 867; W M Gordon, ‘Book Review of
Ulpian’ (1984) 34
Classical Review
232-34; A Lewis, ‘Book
English Historical Review
; F Miller, ‘A New Approach to Roman Jurists’
Journal of Roman Studies
, esp 278; A Rodger, ‘Behind the
Scenes of Roman Law’
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
, esp 385; C Starr, ‘Book Review of
Classical World
47; and P Stein, ‘Book Review of
Cambridge Law Journal
D Osler, ‘The Compilation of
Justinian’s
’ 102 (1985)
129-84. This paper
also includes a fuller list of responses to Honoré’s
‘compilation model’.
See D Osler, ‘Following Bluhme:
a note on Dario Mantovani,
Digesto e masse bluhmiane’
Revista Internazionale di Diritto Romano e Antico
137-58. Unfortunately, I was unable to obtain a copy of D Mantovani,
e masse bluhmiane
(1987). However, having read Osler’s
paper it would appear that there are two core points of Mantovani’s book
that potentially
affect the validity of Honoré’s quantitative
analysis, and therefore my thesis. Firstly, Mantovani’s assertion
is not absolutely precise, then, Honoré’s group
scheme must fall (Osler 1991, 141). And secondly, Mantovani’s
there is no intrinsic link between the Papinian mass and the Appendix; rather,
he posits a link between the Appendix and
the Sabinian mass (144). As regards
, I cannot understand Mantovani’s apparently absolutist
position, since it is surely the overall historical integrity of the
that matters. Indeed, Honoré made certain speculative
alterations to the
when compiling his group classifications, so
how can its
precision be deemed an integral aspect of his
analysis? Also, the flip side of Mantovani’s argument, if he denies that
groups genuinely reflect the historical division of the
during the excerpting phase, is that Honoré’s group
classifications are no better than would have occurred by a random
allocation of
to the six subcommittees. However, my findings demonstrate that the
probability of Honoré’s average excerpting rate
figures for these
subcommittees having occurred by chance alone is very low (see Appendix 1). And
this does not even take into account
the other quantitative and qualitative
arguments that can be found to support Honoré’s group scheme.
Turning to Mantovani’s
second point, that the Appendix should be linked to
the Sabinian rather than the Papinian mass, this presumably means that he is
arguing that the Papinian committee did not excerpt the Appendix
If that should prove to be the case, this would obviously have a profound effect
on Honoré’s average excerpting rates
for the six subcommittees,
which in turn would completely disrupt the symmetry that I claim to have
detected in those same figures.
Moreover, it was this very symmetry which has
been integral to the development of my thesis. Therefore, to the degree that my
arithmetical
and statistical findings prove acceptable, one can argue that the
Papinian mass and the Appendix were excerpted by the same committee.
Furthermore, I believe that the mathematical and statistical arguments presented
to support the validity of my thesis provide a degree
of quantitative proof not
normally found in such essentially literary topics.
, above n 5,
Appendix One 257-86, for full details.
, above n 5, 141.
Ibid 168-69 and ‘
Whole Digest
’ Table 286.
‘Trail’, above n 8,
, above n 5,
Ibid Appendix One, 278-86.
, above n 5, 163 and
Appendix One, 285.
Honoré, ‘Work in
Progress’, above n 8, 47.
, above n 5,
Ibid 170-71.
See ibid 268, 278 and 286 for relevant
, above n 1, 1.
The actual length of a
varied so that 1500 lines (or 10 000 words) was considered the average. See
Honoré, ‘The Background to Justinian’s
Codification’,
above n 8, 872.
C Deo auctore
, above n 1,
See D Pugsley, ‘Some reflections
on the compilation of Justinian’s
, who also realised that there must have been limitations on
the size of the
, though he chose to think primarily in terms of
the number of books. He noted that, ‘there must have been guidelines as to
quantity’, and he further suggested that the original intent ‘was to
reduce two thousand books to fifty, 2½% of
the original, or about 40 lines
per book’ 353-4. However, as regards any guideline for this reduction, he
adds that: ‘it
is difficult to see how we could calculate it. This line of
enquiry therefore runs into the sands ...’ 354.
, above n 1, 1 (emphasis
A Honoré, ‘How Tribonian
Organised the Compilation of Justinian’s Digest’ (2004) 121 ZSS.
Professor Honoré
kindly sent to me a draft copy of this paper to read. In
my 1996 thesis, I was under the misapprehension that the length of line
Honoré’s calculations was the same as the length of line in the
original Roman
; any difference in length between these two sources
would clearly have had a complicating affect. However, I was lulled into
that they were the same length because of the closeness of
Honoré’s calculated figure of 74.15 lpb – the approximate
average excerpting rate value for the whole
project, as found in
Summary of whole Digest
’ table (in
above n 5, 286) – and the theoretical value of 75 lpb derived from 5 per
cent of 1500
whole Digest
’ Table, above n 5, 286.
, above n 1, 1.
In order that the altered excerpting
rates of the six commissioners should retain the same relative proportions as
found by Honoré,
we must assume that the 164 books, from which no
extracts were taken, were distributed amongst the six subcommittees in direct
to the number of excerpted books they each contributed to the
. And, of course, there is no reason to suppose that these
un-excerpted
were not evenly distributed throughout the whole mass.
When this new calculation is done the revised figures become, in lpb: A (92.1),
B (91.1); C (67.6), D (68.5); E (61.4), F (68.1); average of A + B = 91.6;
average of C + D + F = 68.1; A + B as a percentage of
C + D + F = 74.3 per cent.
This latter value is then just 0.7 per cent below the theoretical figure of 75
per cent that I calculated
was the originally ordained relationship between the
excerpting rates of the Edictal and Papinian masses as a percentage of the
rate assigned to the Sabinian mass.
Summary of Papinian
, above n 5, 286.
See ibid ‘Summary’ Tables,
268, 278 and 286.
Osler, above n 11, 184.
Ibid 139. The Papinian mass is not
included since it contains only one case of joint excerpting (Group XXXII), ibid
Honoré and Rodger, above n 8,
See Osler, above n 11, 140-41.
In Section V
‘Identification of Commissioners’ (below), I identify Commissioner B
as Tribonian and D as Constantinus.
The greater importance of these two
individuals to the running of the State would readily explain their reduced
workload within the
Commission.
Osler, above n 11, 145. While these
figures relate to Groups excerpted both jointly and successively, they are used
by Osler to
reinforce his findings (141) regarding joint excerpting.
Ibid 142, 145.
, above n 5, 153.
Osler, above n 11, 153.
For a discussion of the group
selection criteria, see Honoré and Rodger, above n 8, 251, 263-64. I have
included in this
example the subcommittee identification, A and B, and the
Number, 10-20.
, above n 5, 162.
Osler, above n 11, 161.
Ibid 163-69, 170-77 and 177-84
respectively.
Honoré and Rodger, above n 8,
262 and 265 respectively.
Osler, above n 11, 174.
Ibid 171-72.
Osler, above n 11, 176. In order to
measure the degree of collapse in the excerpting rate, using both Honoré
and Osler’s
criteria, I have calculated the average excerpting rates for
the six books either side of the split. This is clearly an arbitrary
books but is, nonetheless, superior to the methods used by both Honoré
and Osler for two reasons. Firstly, as can
be seen from Table 1, there are a
variable number of books included in their calculations, which undermines the
statistical consistency
required in this sort of comparison. Secondly, the
greater the number of books either side of the split which are included in the
calculation of average excerpting rate, then the less we focus on the actual
change in excerpting rate which occurs at the split,
and the more our
calculation will be affected by the long term downward trends in excerpting
rates which are evident within, and
between, groups. See
n 5, Appendix One.
Osler, above n 11, 177.
Admittedly this is not precisely the
basis upon which Osler made his criticism of Honoré’s hypothesis.
In that case,
Osler calculated the separate excerpting rate collapse within each
of the works (nos 1-10) and not as I am doing by taking the average
all the works. However, the method I have adopted is completely acceptable
because I previously showed that each committee
is excerpting to a fixed average
rate per book, so that the excerpting rates within each work are inextricably
linked. However, even
when we calculate the average rate for the individual
works, as carried out by Osler, then produce a sum-total, and finally calculate
the average of that value, then the difference is not great. The respective
ratio for Honoré’s hypothesis becomes 6.3:1
and for Osler’s
hypothesis, 3.5:1.
Osler, above n 11, 179.
Ibid 181. The groups examined are XLI,
XXIV, XIII, XX and XXXVI, ibid 179-83.
Deo auctore
, above n 1,
, above n 5, 151.
C Imperatoriam
Institutes of Justinian: Text, Translation, and Commentary
(J A C Thomas
trans, 1975 ed) 1.
, above n 5, 172.
Honoré, ‘The editing of
titles’, above n 8, 274.
, above n 5, 185.
, above n 5,
Deo auctore
, above n 1,
, above n 1,
, above n 5, 190.
, above n 5,
Ibid 204, 205.
Ibid 206-7.
H F Jolowicz,
Introduction to the Study of Roman Law
(1932) 498-99.
, above n 5, 200.
, above n 1,
, above n 5,
Ibid 55-56.
Also note the respective ratios of
those books read by A to those read by B in the first two groups of the Sabinian
mass (2.0:1
and 1.3:1 respectively). One may again readily imagine that
Tribonian was particularly busy during this earliest phase of the
commission’s
Seniority is here denoted by the
order in which the six commissioners are introduced in
1, 9 and the order of the three commissioners who worked on the
, as recorded in
, above n 1, 11 and in
Imperatoriam (Prooemium
), above n 80, 3.
Cf, Honoré (in
, above n 5, 166-67), who analyses the various legal interests
of the commissioners within the CJ to apportion committee posts to
the various
named commissioners.
This appendix occupied 20 pages of
tables and calculations in my 1996 thesis. As it is not practical to present
this degree of detail
here, I have only included a description of the
methodology employed, and the results obtained.
, above n 5,
The number of books in Section (ix)
of Group I amounts to ten, and not nine as indicated in
A data set is considered normal if:
-1 ≤ skewness ≤ +1 and –1 ≤ kurtosis ≤ +1; see H J
Data Analysis in Plain English with Microsoft Excel
The relevant figures for the three masses are: Sabinian, skewness (-0.1) and
kurtosis (-0.6); Edictal, skewness (-0.1)
and kurtosis (-0.6); Papinian,
skewness (0.0) and kurtosis (-1.0). These three data sets can then be considered
as near bell shape
(or normal).
The NORMDIST Probability Tool was
used to calculate the area under the bell shape curve between 92.60 and 91.10.
The same procedure
was followed for the Edictal and Papinian data.
However, some minor alterations to
the data in Table 2 were made to facilitate the data handling by computer. In
order not to have
to compute the data in one-twelfth of a book units (the lowest
common-denominator of the ½, ⅓ and ¼ book measurements
in Honoré’s figures) I converted the ⅓-book units in
Gai ed prov
23 into half-book units of measurement. I
also combined the ¼ book figure for
Gai ed urb praed
(appearing in Group XVIII) with the figure for
Gai ed urb praed
books in Group XIX. This allowed me to proceed with half-book measurements as in
the Sabinian mass. In addition, I marginally
altered the section lengths to
eliminate the ¼, ⅓ and 1/6 book section length measurements appearing
in Honoré’s
figures, as follows. Group XVIII: section v (7⅓
bks > 7½ bks); section vii (3⅔ > 3½); section viii
> 2½); section ix (2⅓ > 2½); section xi (4 5/6
> 4½); and section xiv (3¼ > 3). And in Group
XIX: section i
(3¾ > 4); section iv (1 5/6 > 2); section v (2⅓ > 2½);
and section vi (2 5/6 > 2½).
The result of these changes to the section
lengths meant that the C’ subcommittee had 301 books and not 300¾
that the D’ subcommittee had 261 books and not 261¼ books,
as given in the ‘Summary of Edictal mass’ table
above n 5, 278). These various changes can have made no significant difference
to the outcome of our calculations, and were simply
introduced to make the data
computation much less cumbersome.
For individual figures: to Papinian
quaestiones
, above n 5, 161; to Iulianus
162; to Scaevola
, at 163; and to Lab 8 Paul
, ibid Appendix One, 285.
For individual figures: to Papinian
, see Osler, above n 11, 173; to Paul
Quaestiones
Quaestiones
, Modestinus
I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Dr Michael Dollinger, formerly of the Department of
Statistics, La Trobe University,
Melbourne, who, after I had reached this stage
of my thesis, suggested that I randomly select sections of text equivalent to
section length values found in
, Appendix One, above n 5, in
order to test the statistical significance of my findings. However, I must
accept full responsibility
for the methodology chosen, and its execution.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (1.01 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter