URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deng, Haodi --- "Fragmentation of International Digital Trade Rules: Current State, Reasons and Responses" [2024] JCULawRw 4; (2024) 30 James Cook University Law Review 47
Fragmentation of International Digital Trade Rules: Current
State, Reasons and Responses
While digital trade has become increasingly significant to international
trade, the legal framework of the World Trade Organization
is not yet properly equipped to govern it. Against this backdrop, digital trade
rules have rapidly increased
in various frameworks, particularly regional ones.
Nevertheless, the rules are fragmented because different groups headed by the
US, the EU and China have established different digital trade regimes. The main
causes for this fragmentation are differences in
domestic digital economies and
regulatory frameworks across jurisdictions. Disparities in digital economies
exist not only between
developed and developing countries in general, but also
among advanced players, causing their divergent attitudes towards digital
liberalisation. Furthermore, a country or region will internationalise its
domestic digital trade rules by transplanting them
into trade agreements, while
existing rules can affect governments’ willingness to commit to digital
trade liberalisation.
As a result, digital trade rules often reflect domestic
regulatory frameworks. To mitigate the fragmentation, a multilateral digital
trade agreement should be established within the WTO legal framework.
Negotiators should focus on the cross-border flow of data and
consider the
boundaries of international digital trade rules. Moreover, rules under regional
trade agreements (‘RTAs’)
can complement those in the WTO and should
be multilateralised in the long run.
Ⅰ Introduction
Digital trade can be described as all cross-border transactions that are
digitally ordered and/or delivered,
although there is currently no consensus on its meaning. Compared to
‘electronic commerce’ (‘e-commerce’),
which the World
Trade Organization (‘WTO’) defined as ‘the production,
distribution, marketing, sale or delivery
of goods and services by electronic
trade’ is a narrower concept.
However, the two terms are often used interchangeably. Most WTO members involved
in multilateral discussions on digital trade have
adopted both the expressions
‘digital trade’ and ‘e-commerce’ without explicitly
distinguishing between them.
Digital trade is becoming increasingly significant in international trade
while applications of digital technologies such as artificial
intelligence and
blockchain have revolutionised the global
In 2018, digital trade
accounted for approximately 24% of global
In the same year, exports of
digital deliverable services amounted to $2.9 trillion, accounting for over 50%
of global services exports.
share surged to 63% in 2021 following the far-reaching impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the composition and nature of international
Although the share
decreased to around 55% in 2023, the total value of exports of digitally
deliverable services increased by approximately
1.2% compared to
Meanwhile, domestic policies related to digital trade are increasing. More
data restriction policies have been implemented, such as
data localisation
requirements and privacy protection regulations, which can cause disruptions and
unintended externalities on digital
Likewise, an increasing
number of jurisdictions have adopted domestic measures towards trade-related
aspects of digital trade, which
may directly or indirectly impede data flows
across borders and form barriers to digital trade. These domestic policies and
can cause digital fragmentation, leading to negative economic
consequences, reduced competition and business opportunities, hindered
technological progress and barriers to inter-jurisdictional
cooperation.
international cooperation is necessary to mitigate digital fragmentation and
prevent undesirable
externalities.
Consequently,
many international digital trade rules regulating domestic measures have been
developed to reconcile digital trade
liberalisation with national
sovereignty.
This paper analyses the current state of international digital trade rules
and observes that these rules are fragmented. It further
discusses the reasons
for the fragmentation and proposes solutions to mitigate it.
Part II demonstrates the fragmentation of international digital trade rules.
It argues that the WTO has failed to address digital
trade-related issues in a
comprehensive manner, despite providing some rules for the governance of digital
trade. It also contends
that different groups headed by the US, the EU and China
have established different digital trade regimes through their regional
agreements (‘RTAs’), resulting in fragmentation at the bilateral and
regional levels.
Part Ⅲ identifies differences in domestic digital economies and
legal frameworks as the main causes for the fragmentation. It
contends that
disparities in digital economies exist not only between developed and developing
countries in general, but also among
advanced players, leading to their
divergent attitudes towards digital trade liberalisation. It also argues that a
country or region
will internationalise its domestic digital trade rules by
transplanting them into trade agreements, while established international
digital trade rules can in turn affect governments’ willingness to commit
to digital trade liberalisation.
Part Ⅳ advocates situating a multilateral digital trade agreement under
the WTO legal framework, complemented by RTAs, to mitigate
the fragmentation.
Considering the challenges of multilateral negotiations on digital trade rules,
this paper suggests that negotiations
focus on cross-border data flows and that
negotiating parties carefully consider what should be covered by digital trade
agreements.
Ⅱ The State of International Digital Trade Rules: The
Fragmentation
Limited Rules under the WTO Legal Framework
The digital trade rules under the WTO framework are largely found in the
General Agreement on Trade in Services
defines ‘trade in services’ as the supply of services
through four modes: cross-border supply (Mode 1), consumption aboard
commercial presence (Mode 3) and presence of natural persons (Mode
Digital trade is related to
all four modes, especially Mode 1. Meanwhile, WTO members’ obligations
are reflected in their schedules of specific commitments.
Most schedules cover sectors related to digital trade, such as computer
related services as well as telecommunication
Moreover, the
rules and commitments are technologically neutral. According to WTO
jurisprudence, the
does not distinguish between technical means of
service delivery.
Therefore, WTO
members’ specific commitments extend to services provided through
electronic means, unless they have made explicit
limitations.
Other WTO Agreements also include digital trade-related rules. For example,
Information Technology Agreement
has liberalised digital trade by
eliminating tariff barriers on certain information and communications
Likewise, the
General Agreement on
Agreement on
Facilitation
facilitated digitally enabled trade.
Overall, the WTO Agreements provide some rules governing digital
trade-related issues. However, most of these rules were negotiated
late 1980s to early 1990s, when digital trade was at an early stage of
development. Moreover, they have remained unchanged
despite rapid and profound
technological changes. Consequently, the multilateral rules are not
comprehensive and may not address
a number of issues, especially cross-border
data transfer.
Therefore, there
is a need for WTO members to negotiate new digital trade
On the other hand, multilateral discussions on digital trade have produced
few results so far. The negotiations started in 1998, with
the WTO launching its
E-Commerce Work Programme.
that time, WTO members agreed a temporary moratorium on customs duties on
electronic transmissions,
has been repeatedly renewed at each Ministerial
Conference.
However, the Work
Programme progressed slowly over the following two decades due to severe
divergences among members.
In 2017, 71 WTO Members issued a Joint Statement on E-Commerce at the
Ministerial Conference, initiating exploratory work towards
future WTO negotiations on trade-related aspects of
e-commerce.
negotiations commenced two years later with the issue of another Joint Statement
by 76 WTO members accounting for 90% of
global trade (including China, the US
and the EU). As of October 2023, the number of members engaged in the
negotiations has increased
to 90. Meanwhile, the negotiations cover a wide range
of topics, including data flows, privacy and consumer protection and
cybersecurity.
Since the negotiations started, WTO members have submitted dozens
of proposals, some containing specific digital trade rules. Nevertheless,
different members propose rules addressing distinct areas, despite some
consensus. For example, the US proposal emphasises free cross-border
In contrast, the rules
proposed by the EU prioritise personal data and privacy protection instead of
free cross-border data
They may conflict
with those highlighted by the US. Overall, it is doubtful that the negotiations
will ultimately achieve substantial
results, since the members involved have
significant digital divides, as well as divergences on numerous issues including
the meaning
of trade-related aspects of e-commerce and the scope of future
Meanwhile, the dispute settlement mechanism, assuming the WTO’s
judicial function, plays a small role in digital trade governance.
negotiating new rules, interpreting and amending existing WTO rules is difficult
due to the lack of consensus among members.
Consequently, the dispute settlement
mechanism has to handle some ‘impossible
by clarifying
existing rules. Due to potential disproportionate tasks to its function, the
dispute settlement mechanism has difficulty
satisfying every member, regardless
of how it handles its cases. In 2019, the WTO Appellate Body stopped functioning
due to the US
re-appointments.
As such, it
would be unreasonable to expect the WTO dispute settlement mechanism to respond
to digital trade challenges by performing
its function. Perhaps more worryingly,
since no provision can now be clarified at the highest level, flexible
exceptions in the WTO
Agreements could become excuses for digital protectionism.
For example, WTO members could invoke the privacy exception under Article
ⅩⅣ(c)(ⅱ) of the
to excuse disguised
restrictions on international digital trade, as the scope of the exception has
not been scrutinised in dispute
proceedings.
Fragmented Rules in Bilateral and Regional
International digital trade rules have flourished at the bilateral and
regional levels, despite failing legal adaptation under the
auspices of the
Over the past 20 years,
many countries and regions have incorporated digital trade provisions into their
trade agreements. As of
2022, 364 RTAs were in force and notified to the
Among these RTAs, 116
include at least one digital trade (or e-commerce) provision, representing over
32% of the total. Some RTAs
with digital provision(s) are well-known. For
example, the
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
US-Mexico-Canada Agreement
Notably, several jurisdictions have concluded ‘digital economy
agreements’, including the
Australia-Singapore Digital Economy
These agreements
delve into broader areas, such as
but cover largely the same
digital trade-related issues as existing trade
agreements.
On the other hand, international digital trade rules in RTAs are
fragmented.
Currently, the US,
the EU and its members as well as other advanced players are leading the
development of international digital
Meanwhile, some
emerging digital economies, notably China, are playing an increasingly
significant role in rule-making. However,
each of them tries to steer
international digital trade rules in its desired direction and infuse the rules
with its own interests.
Consequently, the systems they establish differ from
each other, with diverse digital trade rules. Specifically, the rules diverge
significantly in terms of coverage scope and digital trade barrier
definition.
Firstly, digital trade rules in the US-led RTAs mainly deal with digital
content or services with less attention to trade in
One example is the
signed by the
Trump Administration in 2018, which the US intends to use as a template for
trade agreements with the EU, Japan and
Chapter 19 of the
agreement, entitled ‘Digital Trade’, closely resembles the
‘Electronic Commerce’ chapter
Comprehensive and
Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership
Article 19.1 under the ‘Digital Trade’ chapter defines digital
products as products that have been ‘digitally encoded,
produced for
commercial sale or distribution’ and capable of being transmitted by
electronic means.
The definition
does not employ the terminology of ‘goods’ or
‘services’. Meanwhile, according to the annotation
of Article 19.1,
it does not suggest the parties’ views as to whether digital products are
goods or services. Nevertheless,
the defined ‘digital product’ has
significant characteristics that distinguish it from goods. It is argued that
‘digital good’ in this manner avoids the frequent
‘hard battle’ on service
liberalisation.
In contrast, digital trade rules in China’s RTAs focus more on goods
trade. Although some rules mention services, most are concerned
with ancillary
services, with the ultimate purpose of facilitating trade in
For example, in the
RCEP Agreement
, to which China is a party, rules for trade facilitation
are primarily concerned with paperless trading, electronic authentication
electronic signatures.
feature is also reflected in the bilateral free trade agreements concluded by
China prior to the
RCEP Agreement
, including the
China-Australia Free
Trade Agreement
distinguishes itself from previous RTAs by providing additional
rules on computer facilities location and electronic cross-border
information
transmission. However, the rules have flexible exceptions. For example, if one
party requires locating computer facilities
in its territory for market access,
and considers such a requirement necessary for protecting its ‘essential
security interests’,
the others are not able to dispute the
The stance on security
interests remains consistent regarding cross-border information transfer by
electronic means.
Furthermore,
in addition to providing a ‘legitimate public policy objective’
exception to localisation requirements and
restrictions on cross-border
information transfers, the
RCEP Agreement
also enables the implementing
party to decide the legitimacy of these public
As a result, the
RCEP Agreement
allows any party to decide when the exception should apply
and operate beyond their obligations whenever
Moreover, Chapter 12 of
RCEP Agreement
is entitled ‘Electronic Commerce’ and its
scope of application is limited to measures affecting electronic commerce
or maintained by contracting
Measures affecting the
supply of a service delivered electronically are subject to the rules in Chapter
8 ‘Trade in services’
and Chapter 10 ‘Investment’ as
well as any relevant
exceptions.
Furthermore, the EU is somewhere between China and the US in terms of what
matters should be governed by digital trade rules. This
is reflected in
Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Union and Japan
which entered into force on 1 February 2019. On the one hand, Chapter 8 of the
is headed ‘Trade in Services, Investment Liberalisation and
Electronic Commerce’.
parties use the expression ‘electronic commerce’ not ‘digital
trade’ and place it in parallel with services
trade and investment
liberalisation. Meanwhile, Chapter 2 is entitled ‘Trade in Goods’.
These title arrangements may
reflect the parties’ preferences.
On the other hand, the rules relating to e-commerce in Chapter 8 apply to
measures taken by the parties that affect trade conducted
through electronic
means. Thus, the rules in the e-commerce (or digital trade) chapter will apply
to most measures affecting the
supply of a service delivered electronically,
although they will yield to other rules in the agreement, such as those relating
goods trade, services trade or investment, if in
Overall, the EU’s concept of electronic commerce (or digital trade) may
be narrower than the US’s, but broader than China’s.
Secondly, digital trade rules in RTAs led by the US, China and the EU,
respectively, address different trade barriers. The US proposed
rules target not
only border measures, but also extensive behind-the-border measures. The
behind-the-border measures include discriminatory
treatment among digital
products in general, privacy or data protection regulations, data localisation
requirements, cross-border
data flow restrictions and forced technology transfer
and source code disclosure.
In contrast, digital trade rules in China’s RTAs identify trade
barriers primarily as several traditional domestic measures,
especially at the
border, such as high tariffs and cumbersome customs procedures. For example, the
China-Australia Free Trade Agreement
includes many provisions designed to
reduce or eliminate the impact of traditional trade barriers on
e-commerce.
Furthermore, the EU emphasises explicitly the importance of adopting or
maintaining measures to protect e-commerce users’ personal
data according
to domestic laws and
regulations.
Consequently, the
EU is less likely to regard regulations like the
General Data Protection
trade barriers.
Finally, numerous digital trade rules in the US-led RTAs reach far beyond the
existing WTO legal framework. For example, the ‘Digital
chapter of the
not only covers areas like electronic authentication
and signatures, but also provides detailed rules and imposes clear obligations
on issues such as personal information protection, internet openness,
cross-border data flows, location of computer facilities and
Therefore, if the WTO
wishes to incorporate US-led rules, it must realign its ‘regulatory
philosophy’ and redesign its
In contrast, China’s proposed digital trade rules do not add much new
to existing WTO rules. Instead, China aims to ‘clarify
and improve’
the trading rules under the multilateral system and apply them to the emerging
field of digital trade.
China’s proposal at the WTO’s negotiations on trade-related aspects
of e-commerce aligns with the digital trade provisions
found in several FTAs it
has previously signed, which is hortatory in nature and does not address data
Therefore, the Chinese
proposals are highly compatible with WTO rules.
Moreover, EU-led digital trade rules are less ambitious than the US’s,
but not as conservative as China’s. For example,
Article 8.73 of the
provides that a party ‘may not’ require persons of
the other party to transfer their source code of
In contrast, according
to Article 19.16 of the US-led
, ‘no party shall’
require a person of another party to transfer the source code of
Likewise, Article
19.12 of the
imposes obligations with respect to electronic
cross-border transfer of
information.
By comparison, the
does not include commitments to cross-border data flows. The EU
agreed to incorporate rules concerning cross-border data movement
following renegotiations with Japan under Article 8.81 of the
However, the
EU’s commitment came after the European Commission granted Japan an
‘adequacy decision’,
when Japan had reformed its domestic law to meet
Arguably, the EU is
cautious about committing to cross-border data flows.
Overall, the US, EU and China have established different digital trade
regimes through their leading RTAs. Consequently, international
digital trade
rules have fragmented into ‘discrete legal
with only a few
bridges connecting them.
Ⅲ The Reasons for the Fragmentation
No trade rule exists in a vacuum. Instead, trade rules often delineate the
unique domestic economies of the states or regions proposing
such rules and
their own regulatory frameworks.
Therefore, differences in domestic digital economies and regulatory frameworks
can be sources of fragmented digital trade rules.
Different Domestic Digital Economies
The level of digital economy development between most developed and
developing countries differs considerably, although they all consider
the digital economy as a strategic response to the ongoing technological and
industrial revolution. The digital economy
in developed countries reached $24.4
trillion in 2020, accounting for 74.7% of the global digital economy, 49.4%
higher than that
in developing
Meanwhile, the
digital economy accounted for 54.3% of developed countries’ GDP,
approximately twice as much as that of developing
In 2021, the digital
economy in developed countries grew to around $27.6 trillion, but its share of
the total global digital economy
fell to 72.5%, compared to 27.5% in developing
According to a 2023
report, in 2022, the digital economy represented 55.9% of GDP in developed
countries and 38.5% in developing
countries, based on a sample of 15 countries
on six continents.
These shares
are expected to increase to 58.3% and 46%, respectively, by
The gap between developed
and developing countries in terms of digital economy development remains
significant, despite a narrowing
tendency. Given developed countries’
unrivalled advantages over developing countries in infrastructure, digital
technology,
market size, etc., there is no reason to think the gap will close
A relatively underdeveloped digital economy may lead to greater hesitation by
most developing countries in accepting digital trade
liberalisation commitments.
First, commitments to digital trade rules can affect the achievement of domestic
regulatory objectives.
a conservative approach to commitments, developing countries may preserve more
policy space. As such, their governments
will be able to take multiple measures
to promote their domestic digital industry and reduce disadvantages in the
global digital
marketplace. Second, simply increasing the openness of the
digital economy may not change the situation where digital technology
resources are controlled by a small group of advanced players. Rather, it risks
exacerbating asymmetries in wealth and resource
distribution.
Third, developing
countries must consider not only how the digital economy can benefit them, but
also its potential impact on traditional
economies, which contribute a
substantial portion of their GDP.
On the other hand, even the advanced players differ in the composition and
nature of domestic digital economies. This may explain
why they propose
different digital trade rules. The following illustrates this point using the
US, China and the EU as examples.
Half of the world’s 10 largest internet companies by revenue are US
These companies are
Google, Netflix, Meta, PayPal and
Most of these companies
are digital content or service providers whose businesses focus on online
services. Therefore, it is not surprising
that the US proposed digital trade rules are centred on digital content or
services. Meanwhile,
these US companies are global players. Their global
operations require them to locate their computing facilities and data centres
strategic locations around the
Thus, their normal
operations depend upon the autonomy of facility locations and the free flow of
information.
Consequently, they
will lobby their government to negotiate digital trade rules that oppose data
localisation requirements and promote
the free flow of data. Moreover, most of
these US companies are exporters of digital products. This may explain why the
US strongly
opposes foreign digital services
The rest of the world’s top 10 internet companies are all Chinese,
including JD.com, Alibaba, Meituan, Tencent and ByteDance.
Three of these
companies, namely JD.com, Alibaba and Meituan, primarily supply physical goods
via the internet. This is possibly
the reason China advocates digital trade
rules focusing on digitally enabled goods trade. On the other hand, some of the
companies’ businesses may overlap with the US companies’.
One example is Tencent, which provides social networking services
and is often
referred to as China’s Meta. Similarly, Alibaba sells physical goods, as
does Amazon. However, the Chinese companies
are not exactly competing with their
US counterparts. Instead, they enjoy a much lower global presence than their US
counterparts
and their operations are almost entirely focused on the Chinese
market. For example, in 2019, Tencent’s overseas revenues
only accounted
for 4.43% of its total revenues.
While the share rose to 7.03% in
and 9.38% in 2022, it
remained below 10% in 2023, at
Similarly, Alibaba
generated more than 90% of its revenue from the Chinese market in
Moreover, ByteDance, the
privately held company behind the immensely popular video-sharing app TikTok,
generated over 80% of its
revenue in China in
China’s market is
large enough to support these homegrown firms’ development, whilst the
growing openness of digital
trade will result in more intense competition.
Therefore, the Chinese companies are less likely to lobby their government to
additional commitments to digital trade beyond the WTO framework.
Furthermore, they conduct their business and establish their facilities
in China. Therefore, they may be less interested in free cross-border data
By comparison, none of the top 10 global internet companies come from the EU.
This is possibly a result of the relatively open European
market. EU internet
firms compete directly with US internet firms and cannot thrive in a shielded
environment as Chinese firms can.
Theoretically, indiscriminately imposing high
data processing duties by the EU on both local and foreign firms may help the
gain competitive advantages, because the former have business models more
familiar with the local regulatory environment and do not
have to pay high
compliance costs for measures like data localisation requirements. This can be
an economic factor contributing to
the EU’s hesitancy in committing to
cross-border data flows. Meanwhile, the EU has a large digital market with
massive internet
users. The EU is more likely to be a consumer of digital
content or services than an
This explains why some
EU members, such as France, have conflicting views with the US on foreign
digital services taxes.
Diverse Domestic Regulatory Frameworks
Firstly, it is so common for a country or region transplanting rules from its
domestic regulatory or legal framework into trade agreements.
The same applies
to digital trade rules. For example, the US introduced the Fair Information
Practices Principles to the
which originated
in the US and underpins its privacy
Domestic regulatory and
legal regimes are often well developed before relevant international rules
Once a regime has been
established, continuous consolidation makes it stable and conducive to
policy objectives. In contrast, departing
from the previous path could incur
expensive reversal costs.
Secondly, the impact of international rules on domestic regulatory and legal
systems can affect a country or region’s willingness
to commit to the
The US, EU and China
have been compared to the ‘liberaliser’, ‘regulator’ and
‘mercantilist’
in the digital economy,
respectively.
The liberaliser’s governance of domestic digital trade depends largely
on industry self-governance rather than government
regulation.
international digital trade rules cover a wide range of matters, the US
regulatory framework would not be significantly affected.
Therefore, the US
supports more ambitious international digital trade rules.
By comparison, both the ‘regulator’ EU and the
‘mercantilist’ China emphasise government intervention in regulating
domestic digital trade, although to different
Even if digital
trade rules at the international level cover only a limited number of issues,
they may have a drastic impact on the
regulatory frameworks of the EU and China.
Consequently, China and the EU appear more conservative regarding digital trade
liberalisation.
Overall, different domestic regulatory frameworks may result in disagreements
between the US, China and the EU on various topics,
such as the scope of
international digital trade rules.
Specifically, the US offers a lax legal environment for the development of
its domestic digital economy. There are numerous examples
‘permissive legal
framework’.
example, the US has extended First Amendment freedom of speech to
cyberspace.
Likewise, the
Telecommunications Act of 1996
codifies the US policy of preserving a
vibrant and competitive free market for the ‘internet and other
interactive computer
exempts internet companies from liability arising from content posted by a third
party on their platforms.
Furthermore, the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act
provides internet
companies with safe harbours against copyright infringement
Unsurprisingly,
the US internet companies growing up in such a permissive legal environment will
expect to extend their domestic
‘legal privileges’ to the global
marketplace. This may explain why the US calls for a free and open internet and
deregulation
internationally.
In contrast, heavy government regulation has long been a feature of the
Chinese digital economy. Depending on the regulated object,
the regulation can
be divided into two categories: facility regulation and content regulation.
An example of the facility regulation is the
Interim Regulation on the
Management of International Networking of Computer Information
Interim Regulation
was enacted in 1996 and has been in force since,
albeit with minor amendments in 1997 and 2024. Considering that the internet was
introduced in China in 1994, it has been in place for quite some time. Article 6
Interim Regulation
provides that all international network access
should travel through an entrance provided by a specific government
It also prohibits the
erection or use of other gateways by any institution or
individual.
Moreover, it
declares the State Council’s monopoly on approving new internet networks
and punishes non-compliance with hefty
On the other hand, content regulation is represented by
Administrative Measure for Internet Information Services
Administrative
the US legislation, the
Administrative Measure
requires internet
information service provider to ensure the legitimacy of all contents, including
those generated by users.
Liability arises from the generation, replication and dissemination of various
contents, such as information that jeopardises national
security, breaches state
secrets or undermines state
The illegal
information listed is not only vaguely phrased but also
non-exhaustive.
This leaves
ample room for government intervention.
The regulations mentioned above are just the tip of the iceberg. In short,
the development of Chinese digital economy is under tight
restrictions. However,
the restrictions, in a sense, benefit local companies, some of which have grown
into the world-leading
They reserve the
large home market for domestic companies, shielding them from global competitors
who hardly adapt to the constrictive
legal framework. Moreover, most existing
restrictions may be justified by exceptions under the WTO legal
Therefore, there
is no reason to expect China to venture far beyond the WTO legal framework any
time soon and depart from the track
it has followed in the past.
Furthermore, EU regulations pursue multiple objectives. Ideally, digital
trade regulation should maximise benefits and adequately
safeguard digital trade
liberalisation. However, due to the instability and vulnerability of cyberspace,
regulatory objectives need
to encompass various matters, such as privacy
protection and national security, in addition to maximising benefits. Some form
international data-transfer restrictions can be necessary in the interest of
public policy, particularly to ensure
cybersecurity.
On the other
hand, the regulatory objectives of the EU are likely to be more diverse due to
its complex membership. Conciliating
EU members’ different political
aspirations and reaching a regulation like the
are challenging,
let alone harmonising EU members’ interests with
others’ and concluding trade agreements. Consequently,
embracing internal free movement of data, the EU is still far from completely
free data flow. Moreover, the
bearing EU values can generate the
‘Brussels Effect’
and is applicable
extraterritorially.
may be reluctant to include matters within its control in international digital
trade rules.
Ⅳ The Responses to the Fragmentation
As discussed above, international digital trade rules are fragmented.
Meanwhile, it is unrealistic to eliminate the fragmentation,
which symbolises
pluralism. Nevertheless, measures can be taken to mitigate the fragmentation,
such as integrating the rules into
WTO legal frameworks with complements by
Situating a Multilateral Digital Trade Agreement under
the WTO Framework
In the digital economy era, the WTO multilateral trading system remains the
optimal venue to govern digital trade-related issues.
As the world’s
largest intergovernmental trade organization and the most significant
multilateral trading mechanism, the WTO
has numerous advantages, some of which
are mentioned below.
To begin with, the WTO is capable of undertaking a wide range of measures to
promote the digital economy in developing countries and
to address their
concerns about development. For example, the WTO can provide trade finance and
technical assistance to developing
countries to support medium, small, and
micro-sized companies in the digital economy of developing countries. Similarly,
initiate more dialogue in the Trade and Development Commission to
facilitate information sharing. Such measures could generate political
More importantly, they could improve developing countries’ capacity and
expertise to undertake reforms, such as expanding
trade liberalisation
commitments or creating legal frameworks that are more in line with developed
countries’ standards on
issues such as data
protection.
Next, the multilateral forum is more sensible, from the perspective of the
digital economy’s demands for seamlessness and interoperability
even without a thorough consideration of the pros and cons of preferentialism
and multilateralism.
Moreover, the WTO enjoys unrivalled prestige with regard to dispute
settlement and rule-making in traditional trade, so does it in
of digital trade and e-commerce. In the pre-digital economy era, the WTO had an
undisputed voice in the governance of
traditional trade. According to path
dependency theory, the multilateral trading system deserves to be prioritised if
it is possible
to address issues related to digital
In fact, policy makers
are not capable of starting a fresh from the bottom and make new digital trade
rules on a clean slate due
to high reversal costs. Instead, they can only fix
the existing global trading regime, especially the WTO legal framework.
In short, the WTO remains a vital starting point for the development of a
digital trade regime, despite its current difficulty in
providing digital trade
rules. Accordingly, this paper proposes that a multilateral digital trade
agreement be situated within the
WTO legal framework to mitigate the
fragmentation of international digital trade rules.
On the other hand, situating a multilateral digital trade agreement under the
WTO umbrella can be difficult, despite the
possibilities.
multilateral negotiation of digital trade rules must discuss not only trade
liberalisation issues, such as the free flow of data,
but also a wide range of
matters, such as rights protection (e.g. privacy protection), national security,
and the public interest.
Furthermore, it has to harmonise rules under different
Given the difficulties of multilateral negotiations, this paper suggests
discarding excessively ambitious negotiating objectives.
Instead, the
negotiations should focus on the cross-border data flows that underpin digital
trade and seriously consider what matters
should be governed by
international digital trade rules.
Firstly, the future multilateral digital trade agreement should not apply to
every digital trade-related matter. According to John
H Jackson, regulating
cross-border economic behaviour is the fundamental subject of international
economic law.
Therefore, some
digital trade-related matters should be reserved for domestic regulation.
Furthermore, only domestic measures directly
affecting cross-border data flows
will be regulated by the international rules.
Secondly, even if a digital trade-related matter can be regulated by
international law, setting rules in trade agreements on the matter
necessarily optimal. Compared to domestic regulation, international regulation
can be auxiliary or secondary due to its limited
power and objectives. Countries
tend to prioritise domestic regulation when correcting market failures in
cross-border data flows,
either for sovereignty safeguards or specific policy
objectives. In contrast, international rules are often used as a backup to
bits and pieces left by inadequate domestic regulation.
Thirdly, this paper suggests the negotiating parties to realise that laying
down rules for digital trade in trade agreements is not
the only measure to
reconcile different domestic measures. While different jurisdictions may be able
to reach an agreement on the
regulation of cross-border data, they may find it
difficult to agree on the minimum standards for (personal) data protection.
Consequently,
as a more common practice, many jurisdictions harmonise their
domestic measures with others’ by reaching and maintaining
‘reciprocal
and mutually advantageous
arrangements’.
example, the European Commission granted Japan an adequacy decision allowing
EU-Japan free data movement, while the Japanese
Personal Information Protection
Commission issued an equivalent decision to the
Such a reciprocal
arrangement created the world’s largest area for free flow of data across
borders even before the EU and
Japan agreed to include commitments to
cross-border data transfer in their
Finally, this paper recommends that future multilateral digital trade
agreements adopt a restrained globalisation strategy rather
hyper-globalisation strategy. The restrained globalisation strategy places
international digital trade rules in a complementary
and ancillary position to
domestic regulations and does not attempt to govern every aspect of digital
trade. In fact, this strategy
has been adopted by multilateral trade regulation
represented by the WTO Agreements. It takes into account the heterogeneity of
economies across countries and regions and respects national
sovereignty. On the other hand, adopting this strategy implies that
matters into established multilateral, regional or bilateral
trade regimes in
the future. Moreover, since jurisdictions could use their familiar regimes,
coordination and cooperation costs could
be reduced and conflicts arising from
divergent political objectives could be mitigated.
Contrary to the hyper-globalisation envisioned by trade liberalism, the
strategy of restrained globalisation cannot eliminate digital
trade barriers.
However, the real question is whether free cross-border data flows are justified
If the answer is no,
the fluidity of data may not be a sufficient reason to exempt cross-border data
flows from domestic regulations.
Consequently, cross-border data movement will
likely be subject to domestic regulations in different jurisdictions, as with
economic activities.
Testing New Rules in Bilateral and Regional
Increasing rules-making at regional or bilateral venues does not mitigate
digital trade rules fragmentation. Instead, multiple and
overlapping RTAs can
increase rule fragmentation, as each RTA is signed by a handful of nations
rather than 164 WTO members. They
also exacerbate the asymmetries in technology
and wealth.
Consequently, the
digital economy will be more disparate between developing and developed
countries, resulting in increased divergences
concerning digital trade rules.
Furthermore, massive amounts of rules at the regional or bilateral level
complicate the international
digital trading system. This may result in greater
difficulty in harmonising different regional trading systems in the future and
higher cost of digital trade due to disparities in market access conditions.
Nevertheless, RTAs can complement the WTO legal framework and serve as a
‘metaphorical sandpit’ for testing new digital
trade rules and
arrangements.
As a matter of
fact, RTAs partners have made significant progress in addressing digital
trade-related issues when the WTO is yet
to do so comprehensively. RTAs partners
have created and utilised rules and arrangements to overcome deficiencies in WTO
to address specific issues raised by the WTO Work Programme on
Electronic Commerce.
have also discussed WTO-extra issues that have never been explored in the WTO
As an example, the
has achieved significant improvements over the WTO in matters
relating to data and privacy protection, data flows and data
localisation.
Furthermore,
RTAs have not only facilitated digital transactions, but also online business in
general, which will promote digital
Overall, RTAs provide
more explicit and detailed rules, developing a tailor-made regime for digital
trade. In the future, the growing
network of RTAs could provide new material for
multilateral negotiations on digital trade rules. Each jurisdiction should
contemplate
ways of testing discrete digital trade rules and arrangements in
RTAs and then attempt to multilateralise their
Ⅴ Conclusion
While the WTO is not yet well equipped to govern digital trade, digital trade
rules have rapidly increased in various frameworks,
particularly regional ones.
However, different groups of jurisdictions have established different digital
trade regimes through RTAs.
Specifically, the US, the EU and China, as well as
their respective allies, uphold various digital trade rules that differ in terms
of the scope of coverage, the definition of trade barriers and the relationship
with WTO rules. As a result, international digital
trade law is split into
discrete legal islands.
Different domestic digital economies and regulatory frameworks across
relatively underdeveloped digital economies of developing countries have led to
more conservative approaches to digital
trade liberalisation. Moreover, even
advanced players, including the US, China and the EU, have distinct digital
economies, prompting
them to advocate different digital trade rules. On the
other hand, the impact of existing international rules on domestic regulatory
frameworks often affects a country’s or region’s willingness to
accept commitments to liberalise digital trade. Meanwhile,
transplanting
domestic rules into trade agreements is common. Therefore, digital trade rules
usually reflect domestic regulatory
frameworks.
To mitigate the fragmentation, a multilateral digital trade agreement should
be established within the WTO legal framework. Multilateral
negotiations on
digital trade rules, however, are challenging, albeit possible. Negotiators
should focus on the cross-border flow
of data and consider the boundaries of
international digital trade rules. Moreover, RTAs can serve as a venue for
experimenting with
new digital trade rules. Rules under RTAs can complement
those in the WTO and should be multilateralised in the long run.
LLM, Melbourne Law School, the University of Melbourne. The
author wishes to thank Dr José-Miguel Bello y Villarino and Emeritus
Professor Stephen Graw for their valuable comments.
OECD, WTO and IMF,
on Measuring Digital Trade: Version 1
(Report, 2019) 20
<https://www.oecd.org/sdd/its/Handbook-on-Measuring-Digital-Trade-Version-1.pdf>.
Work Programme on Electronic
, WTO Doc WT/L/274 (25 September 1998, adopted 30 September 1998)
OECD et al,
Handbook on
Measuring Digital Trade: Second Edition
(Report, 2023) 13
<https://www.oecd.org/sdd/its/Handbook-on-Measuring-Digital-Trade.htm>.
Joint Statement on
Electronic Commerce — Communication from Canada
, WTO Doc INF/ECOM/29
(9 May 2019).
See, eg, Emmanuelle Ganne,
Can Blockchain Revolutionize International Trade?
(World Trade
Organization, 2018).
Javier López
González, Silvia Sorescu and Pinar Kaynak, ‘Of Bytes and Trade:
Quantifying the Impact of Digitalization
on Trade’, OECD iLibrary (OECD
Trade Policy Papers No 273, 5 May 2023) 7
<https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/trade/oecd-trade-policy-working-papers_18166873>.
Digital Economy
Report 2019
(Report, 2019) 65
<https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/der2019_en.pdf>.
OECD et al (n 3) 14.
UNCTAD, ‘International
Trade in Digitally-deliverable Services, Value, Shares and Growth, Annual’
(Web Page, 2023) <https://unctadstat.unctad.org/datacentre/>.
Patrick Leblond,
‘Uploading CPTPP and USMCA Provisions to the WTO’s Digital Trade
Negotiations Poses Challenges for National
Data Regulation: Example from
Canada’, in Mira Burri (ed),
Big Data and Global Trade Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2021) 301, 303.
Simon J Evenett and Johannes
Emergent Digital Fragmentation: The Perils of Unilateralism
Press, 2022) 17. Digital fragmentation implies the digital environment is
splintering or breaking up into loosely coupled islands
of connectivity: at
Felicity Deane et al,
‘Trade in the Digital Age: Agreements to Mitigate Fragmentation’
(2024) 14(1)
Asian Journal of International Law
Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization
, opened for signature 15 April
1994, 1867 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1995) annex 1B
General Agreement on Trade in Services
Ibid art Ⅰ.
— Schedule of Specific Commitments
, WTO Doc GATS/SC/6 (15 April
See, eg, Panel Report,
United States — Measures Affecting the Cross-Border Supply of Gambling and
Betting Services
, WTO Doc WT/DS285/R (10 November 2004); Panel Report,
China— Measures Affecting Trading Rights and Distribution of
Audiovisual Entertainment Products
, WTO Doc WT/DS363/R (12 August 2009).
OECD et al (n 3) 13.
Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization
, opened for signature 15 April
1994, 1867 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1995) annex 1A
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994
Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization
, opened for signature 15 April
1994, 1867 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1995) annex 1A
Agreement on Trade Facilitation
Susan Ariel Aaronson and
Patrick Leblond, ‘Another Digital Divide: The Rise of Data Realms and its
Implications for the WTO’
(2018) 21(2)
Journal of International
Economic Law
Mira Burri, ‘The
International Economic Law Framework for Digital Trade’ (2015) 135(2)
Zeitschrift für Schweizerisches Recht
Work Programme on
Electronic Commerce
, WTO Doc WT/L/274 (25 September 1998, adopted 30
September 1998).
Declaration on Global
Electronic Commerce
, WTO Doc WT/MIN(98)/DEC/2 (25 May 1998) (Ministerial
Declaration).
The moratorium was recently
extended at the 13
Ministerial Conference. However, this extension
faced strong opposition from several developing countries including Indonesia,
and South Africa. See
Work Programme on Electronic Commerce
— Communication from India and Indonesia
WT/MIN(24)/W/7/Rev.1 (23 February 2024);
Work Programme on Electronic
Commerce — Communication from South Africa
, WTO Doc WT/GC/W/911 (1
December 2023). Unless extended further, the current moratorium will end at the
next WTO Ministerial Conference
scheduled for 2026. See
Work Programme on
Electronic Commerce
, WTO Docs WT/MIN(24)/38 and WT/L/1193 (4 March 2024,
adopted 2 March 2024).
Joint Statement on
Electronic Commerce
, WTO Doc WT/MIN(17)/60 (13 December 2017).
Joint Statement
on Electronic Commerce — Communication from the United States
INF/ECOM/23 (26 April 2019).
Joint Statement on
Electronic Commerce — Communication from the European Union
INF/ECOM/22 (26 April 2019).
‘Impossible
cases’ are cases that start, proceed and/or end by being excessively
contentious, difficult or complex. See
Cherie O’Neal Taylor,
‘Impossible Cases: Lessons from the First Decade of WTO Dispute
Settlement’ (2007) 28
University of Pennsylvania Journal of
International Economic
309, 316-17.
Jean Galbraith,
‘United States Continues to Block New Appellate Body Members for the World
Trade Organization, Risking the
Collapse of the Appellate Process’ (2019)
American Journal of International Law
Under the privacy exception,
trade restrictions necessary to protect ‘the privacy of individuals in
relation to the processing
and dissemination of personal data’ are
permissible:
(n 13) art XIV(c)(ii).
Deane et al (n 12) 177.
Mira Burri, ‘The
Regulation of Data Flows Through Trade Agreements’ (2017) 48(1)
Georgetown Journal of International Law
WTO, ‘RTAs currently
Regional Trade Agreements Database
<https://rtais.wto.org/UI/charts.aspx>.
Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement
, signed 15 November 2020,
[2022] ATS 1
(entered into force 1 January 2022) (‘
RCEP Agreement
Agreement between the
United States of America, the United Mexican States and Canada
, [2020] CTS
2020/5 (entered into force 1 July 2020) (‘
Australia-Singapore
Digital Economy Agreement
, signed 6 August 2020,
[2020] ATS 13
(entered into
force 8 December 2020).
Ibid art 31.
OECD et al (n 3) 14.
Merit Janow and Petros
Mavroidis, ‘Digital Trade, E-commerce, the WTO and Regional
Frameworks’ (2019) 18(Supplement)
World Trade Review
Manfred Elsig and Sebastian
Klotz, ‘Data Flow-Related Provisions in Preferential Trade Agreements:
Trends and Patterns of Diffusion’,
in Mira Burri (ed),
Big Data and
Global Trade Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2021) 42, 53.
Henry Gao, ‘Digital or
Trade? The Contrasting Approaches of China and US to Digital Trade’ (2018)
Journal of International Economic Law
Jens Hillebrand Pohl,
‘International Data Transfers and Cybersecurity: Three Regulatory
Approaches and Their Implications’,
in Tomoko Ishikawa and Yarik Kryvoi
(eds), Public and Private Governance of Cybersecurity: Challenges and Potential
(Cambridge University
Press, 2023) 134, 151.
Comprehensive and
Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership
, signed 8 March 2018,
[2018] ATS 23
(entered into force 30 December 2018)
’). For a discussion of the differences between the
‘Digital Trade’ chapter of the
‘Electronic Commerce’ chapter of the
, see Leblond,
‘Uploading CPTPP and USMCA Provisions to the WTO’s Digital Trade
Negotiations Poses Challenges for National
Data Regulation’ (n 10)
Gao (n 42) 316.
RCEP Agreement
arts 12.5, 12.6.
See, eg, Free Trade
Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the
People’s Republic of China, signed
17 June 2015,
[2015] ATS 15
into force 20 December 2015) ch 12 (‘ChAFTA’).
RCEP Agreement
art 12.14.3(b).
Ibid art 12.15.3(b).
Ibid arts 12.14.3(a),
12.15.3(a).
Patrick Leblond,
‘Digital Trade: Is RCEP the WTO’s Future?’, Centre for
International Governance Innovation (Web
Page, 23 November 2020)
<https://www.cigionline.org/articles/digital-trade-rcep-wtos-future/>.
RCEP Agreement
Agreement between the
European Union and Japan for an Economic Partnership
, signed 17 July 2018,
[2018] OJ L 330 (entered into force 1 February 2019)
Ibid art 8.70.
Leblond, ‘Uploading
CPTPP and USMCA Provisions to the WTO’s Digital Trade Negotiations Poses
Challenges for National
Data Regulation’ (n 10) 304-13.
(n 50) arts
12.1, 12.5.
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of
The European Parliament and of The Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data and repealing Directive 95/46/EC [2016] OJ L 119/1
(n 36) arts
19.6, 19.8, 19.10, 19.12, 19.16.
Gao (n 42) 317.
Work Programme on
Electronic Commerce: Communication from the People’s Republic of China and
, WTO Doc JOB/GC/110/Rev.1 (16 November 2016).
Leblond, ‘Uploading
CPTPP and USMCA Provisions to the WTO’s Digital Trade Negotiations Poses
Challenges for National
Data Regulation’ (n 10) 313.
Ibid art 19.12.
‘EU and Japan conclude
landmark deal on cross-border data flows at High-Level Economic Dialogue’,
European Commission
(Press Release, 28 October 2023)
<https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_5378>.
‘European Commission
Adopts Adequacy Decision on Japan, Creating the World’s Largest Area of
Safe Data Flows’,
European Commission
(Press Release, January
Svetlana Yakovleva,
‘Personal Data Transfers in International Trade and EU Law: A Tale of Two
“Necessities”’
(2020) 21(6)
Journal of World Investment and
Some scholars use
‘discrete legal islands’ as a metaphor for the fragmentation of
international law. See, eg, Tamar Megiddo,
‘Beyond Fragmentation: on
International Law’s Integrationist Forces’ (2019) 44(1)
Journal of International Law
See, eg, Henry Nau,
‘Domestic Trade Politics and the Uruguay Round: An Overview’ in
Henry Nau (ed),
Domestic trade politics and the Uruguay Round
University Press, 1989) 1.
中国信息通信研究院 [China
Academy of Information and Communications Technology],
《2021年全球数字经济白皮书》[White
Paper on Global Digital
Economy 2021] (Report, August 2021)
http://www.caict.ac.cn/kxyj/qwfb/bps/202108/P020210913403798893557.pdf
中国信息通信研究院 [China
Academy of Information and Communications Technology],
《2022年全球数字经济白皮书》[White
Paper on Global Digital
Economy 2022] (Report, December 2021) 10
http://www.caict.ac.cn/english/research/whitepapers/202303/P020230316619916462600.pdf
The 15 sample countries are
the United States, China, Japan, Germany, Singapore, the United Kingdom, France,
India, Canada, South
Korea, Ireland, Australia, Italy, Brazil and South Africa.
See Tsinghua Institute for Global Industry, International Data Corporation
Inspur, The 2022-2023 Global Computing Index (Report, July 2023) 5
<https://www.ieisystem.com/global/file/2023-09-14/16946384123912c916ead8a3cb8ee62018a90521267362c.pdf>.
Janow and Mavroidis (n 40) s
Burri, ‘The Regulation
of Data Flows Through Trade Agreements’ (n 33) 444.
Anish Jangir, ‘List of
Largest Internet Companies by Revenue’,
(Web Page, 22
December 2022)
<https://list.sacnilk.com/article/List_Of_Largest_Internet_Companies_By_Revenue>.
Gao (n 42) 317.
‘USTR Announces Next
Steps of Section 301 Digital Services Taxes Investigations’,
the United States Trade Representative
(Press Release, 26 March 2021).
‘2020 Annual
(Report, 2020) 226
<https://www.tencent.net.cn/investors/financial-reports/>.
‘2023 Annual
(Report, 2023) 193
<https://www.tencent.net.cn/investors/financial-reports/>.
‘Fiscal Year 2023
Annual Report’,
(Report, 2023)
<https://www.alibabagroup.com/en-US/ir-financial-reports-financial-results>.
Eleanor Olcott and Ryan
McMorrow, ‘ByteDance Posts Record Profit Despite TikTok Losses’,
Financial Times (online, 9 April
<https://www.ft.com/content/b990b325-5af1-4713-b8d0-580b823cad3c>.
Katherine Karnosh,
‘The Application of International Tax Treaties to Digital Services
Taxes’ (2020) 21(2)
Chicago Journal of International Law
Robert Gellman, ‘Fair
Information Practices: A Basic History’,
(Unpublished
Manuscript, 6 April 2022) 3
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2415020>.
Janow and Mavroidis (n 40) s
Paul Pierson,
‘Increasing Returns, Path dependence and the Study of Politics’
(2000) 94(2)
American Political Science Review
Janow and Mavroidis (n 40)
Jonathan Hillman,
‘The United States, European Union and China Back Competing Rules’,
(Blog Post, 13 April 2018)
<https://www.csis.org/blogs/future-digital-trade-policy-and-role-us-and-uk/global-battle-digital-trade>.
Anupam Chander,
Electronic Silk Road: How the Web Binds the World Together in Commerce
University Press, 2013) 57.
47 USC § 230(b)(2)
Ibid § 230(c).
17 USC § 512
《中华人民共和国计算机信息网络国际联网管理暂行规定》[Interim
Regulation of the People’s Republic of China on the Management of
International Networking of Computer Information] (People’s
Republic of
China) State Council, 1 February 1996.
Ibid art 6.
Ibid arts 7, 14.
《中华人民共和国互联网信息服务管理办法》
[Administrative Measures for Internet Information Services] (People’s
Republic of China) State Council, 25 September 2000.
Ibid art 13.
Ibid art 15.
Gao (n 42) 320.
Susan Ariel Aaronson,
‘What Are We Talking about When We Talk about Digital
Protectionism?’ (2019) 18(4)
World Trade Review
Pohl (n 44) 154.
The ‘Brussels
effect’ refers to the phenomenon that standards originating in Brussels
regulate global markets: see Anu
Bradford, ‘The Brussels Effect’
(2012) 107(1)
Northwestern University Law Review
not only to businesses established in the EU but also to those based outside the
EU that offer goods and services to, or
monitor, individuals in the EU:
(n 63) art 3.
Andrew Mitchell and Neha
Mishra, ‘Data at the Docks: Modernizing International Trade Law for the
Digital Economy’
Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment and
Technology Law
Burri, ‘The
Regulation of Data Flows Through Trade Agreements’ (n 33) 444.
Pierson (n 98) 252.
See, eg, Neeraj Rajan
Sabitha, ‘Trade Rules for the Digital Economy: Charting New Waters at the
WTO’ (2019) 18 (Supplement)
World Trade Review
John H Jackson,
‘Global Economics and International Economic Law’
Journal of International Economic Law
Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization
, opened for signature 15 April
1994, 1867 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1995) Preamble para 3.
Yakovleva (n 73) 889.
Sydney Wolofsky,
‘What’s Your Privacy Worth on the Global Tech Market?’ (2020)
Fordham International Law Journal
Burri, ‘The
Regulation of Data Flows Through Trade Agreements’ (n 33) 444.
Deane et al (n 12)
Mira Burri and Rodrigo
Polanco, ‘Digital Trade Provisions in Preferential Trade Agreements:
Introducing a New Dataset’
(2020) 23(1)
Journal of International
Economic Law
Deane et al (n 12)
Burri and Polanco (n 131)
Burri, ‘The
Regulation of Data Flows Through Trade Agreements’ (n 33) 444.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
PDF format (506 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter