URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Freiberg, A --- "Psychiatry, psychology and non-adversarial justice" [2010] UMonashLRS 1
AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND ASSOCIATION OF PSYCHIATRY,
PSYCHOLOGY AND LAW
RG MYERS MEMORIAL LECTURE
25 OCTOBER 2010
PSYCHIATRY, PSYCHOLOGY AND NON-ADVERSARIAL JUSTICE: FROM
INTEGRATION TO TRANSFORMATION
ARIE FREIBERG*
INTRODUCTION
It is now thirty-two years since ANZAPPL, the Australian and New Zealand
Association of Psychiatry, Psychology and Law commenced its
extensive program of
conferences, workshops and lectures, twenty years since the first RG Myers
Memorial Lecture was presented in
Melbourne and sixteen years since the first
issue of the Journal
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
was published.
Bob Myers was a psychiatrist with a commitment to improving dialogue amongst
professions. He was a co-founder of ANZAPPL amongst whose
aims are the promotion
of ‘cooperation and communication among the disciplines of psychiatry,
psychology and law, as well as
the encouragement of research and lively
interchange among such
disciplines’.
Its constitution commits it to exploring the relationships between psychiatry,
psychology and law
to co-operation and communication, to the promotion of research and the
provision of more and better public and professional opinion
psychiatry, psychology and law.
Apparently, Bob Myers was not a shy or retiring person and indeed he
delivered the first of the eponymous lectures in 1990. He was
followed by many
distinguished speakers many of whom I have had the privilege of knowing
personally including Professors Paul Mullen,
Jim Ogloff, Ian Freckelton, Terry
Carney and the late Bruce Winick as well as Justices Marcia Neave and Michael
Kirby, to name but
a few. It is a privilege to continue in the tradition that
they have established.
This lecture focuses upon that aspect of Bob Myers’ vision that was
concerned with the relationship between disciplines and
professions. It is
primarily about the nature of inter-disciplinary studies and the contribution
that they have made to the development
of law and legal practice. It discusses
transitions from innovation to institutionalization in organizational
individual disciplines can merge or coalesce to form new fields of learning. It
will discuss, in particular, two of the new
perspectives that have emerged from
interdisciplinary studies, one of which is therapeutic jurisprudence the other
being non-adversarial
INTERDISCIPLINARITY
There are no accepted definitions of the terms
‘inter-disciplinary’, ‘multi-disciplinary’,
‘cross-disciplinary’
or ‘trans-disciplinary’ nor are
there any clear distinctions between them. All imply some level of synthesis
discipline can be regarded as a distinct body of knowledge or a branch of
It is, of course, more than that: it is about discourses, institutions, cultural
practices and shared
experiences
Haas has called ‘epistemic
communities’.
Disciplines, and disciplinary boundaries, have much to commend them. They bring
order to knowledge and an array of scientific or
other research methods to
produce or validate information. Where that body of knowledge, and the people
associated with it, have
‘professionalized’
a ‘discipline’ can bring a set of ethical standards, values and
controls over those unqualified to practise in those
designated domains of
knowledge or practice. On the other hand, intellectual disciplinary boundaries
may also be
claustrophobic,
solipsistic and conducive to stagnation, complacency and even hubris.
Professionalisation can lead to restrictive trade practices
and the distortion
of markets in services to the detriment of consumers.
The concept of ‘interdisciplinarity’ first emerged in the 1920s
to describe the method of academic inquiry that relates
to two or more branches
of learning.
Interdisciplinarity can also be the basis of creativity, the process that Arthur
Koestler described as the ‘bisociation’
that occurs when two or more
apparently incompatible frames of thought are brought together by an ingenious
Creativity,
according to Koestler, is not the creation of something from nothing, but the
recombination of existing components or
ideas. Creativity requires multiple
influences, disparities, divergent schemas and an openness of mind that allows
connections to
be made between different ideas, worldviews or, in the present
case, disciplines. Balkin has characterized the inter-disciplinary
enterprise as
‘quasi-Darwinian’: as the ‘inter-breeding’ of
disciplines that can lead to stronger, more vibrant
and healthy life forms or
intellectual forms which can flourish much better than those that become too
interdisciplinarity can also be threatening to existing regimes of knowledge and
therefore power because it challenges existing
structures, boundaries and
practices of the fields into which it
trespasses.
Psychiatry, psychology and law
The relationship between psychiatry, psychology and law is relatively new, at
least in relation to the history of law. Law is one
of the most ancient and
honourable of disciplines dating back to the Middle Ages. Psychology can be
dated back to the ancient Greeks,
but its modern scientific form is perhaps a
nineteenth century phenomenon. Psychiatry is only just over a century old. It
the disciplines that was involved in what Galanter and Edwards
identified as the emergence of the
in the 1960s:
law and society, law and psychology, law and economics, law and feminism, law
and literature, law and critical legal
These perspectives were partly the product of the 1960s anti-establishment
social movements but stood in the older tradition of the
American Realist
movement of the 1930s that adopted a more scientific approach to the law,
looking beyond what was written in the
statutes, the judgments and the texts to
how the law operated in practice. The Realists were
‘consequentialists’ rather
than formalists in that they were
interested in the effects of law on the community rather than just its internal
structure, logic
empiricists rather than philosophers or jurists and they were more interested in
the policy outcomes of their research
than in providing arid and sterile
critiques of doctrine.
One of the first interdisciplinary
reviews was the
highly influential
Law and Society Review
first published in 1966. It was
not until the 1970s that the behavioural sciences found their critical outlets,
at least in the form
of journals. The
International Journal of Law and
was first published 33 years ago in 1977 as was
Law and Human
Behavioral Sciences and the Law
is 28 years old (1982), the
Journal of Law and Medicine
is 17 years old
, Psychiatry, Psychology
is 16 years old (1994) and
Psychology, Public Policy and Law
is 15 years old (1995).
The first issue of the Australian
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
published in 1994, was devoted to the topic of forensic issues in substance
abuse. The articles published in that first volume dealt
with such matters as
sentencing drug and alcohol offenders, methadone maintenance and treatment,
mental disorder, intellectual disability
and the law, child witnesses and sexual
abuse and are as relevant today as they were then.
In subsequent volumes, the journal has published many articles with a policy
focus in relation to mental health laws. In his 2008
survey of the journal the
editor, Professor Ian Freckelton SC, identified an extensive range of topics
that had been covered including
psychiatric and psychological practice in the
correctional system, administrative law, criminal law, personal injury law and
commercial law. It has covered syndromes, cults, profiling, child abuse,
involuntary detention of people with psychiatric illnesses,
sex offender
monitoring and risk prediction instruments. Articles have been contributed by
criminologists, sociologists, historians,
librarians, anthropologists, forensic
nurses and, needless to say, psychiatrists, psychologists and lawyers. In recent
journal has published articles that provide ‘new perspectives
on psychiatry, psychology and law, such as those generated by
psychology and therapeutic
jurisprudence...’
The establishment and further development of the highly productive
collaboration between the PP&L disciplines has produced significant
in knowledge and practice in each of them far beyond that produced in the
decades before the development of interdisciplinarity.
This is evidenced not
only in the type, quantity and originality of the research produced, the
fruitful dialogue that takes place
at professional conferences and colloquia and
in the new subjects, courses and degrees that have been developed as a
consequence
of these disciplinary partnerships or associations.
However, it is my contention that interdisciplinarity alone, with all its
creative potential, may be insufficient to produce or catalyse
institutional change. Interdisciplinarity is a necessary, but not a sufficient
condition for major change. I suggest that what
is needed in addition is either
a coherent intellectual framework or theory or meta-narrative that will
fundamentally change the
way that the justice system is perceived and
My proposition is that the development of therapeutic jurisprudence since the
late 1980s and non-adversarial justice over the last
decade, have the potential
to transform the justice system in ways that the traditional alliance of
PP&L have not. My thesis
is that whereas psychiatry, psychology and law
tended to focus on bringing the perspectives of different disciplines to bear on
problem such as the treatment of offenders, therapeutic jurisprudence and
non-adversarial justice have, and can lead to, institutional
transformation: not
just making the courts work better but changing the justice system itself. I
will suggest that there is a difference
between the critical and informative
functions of interdisciplinarity, by which each discipline remains separate, but
the others, and the transformative function that sees a new
discipline emerge, new institutional forms or processes created and possibly
integrative theories articulated that provide solid foundations for their
development and evaluation.
The analogies I have in mind here are the development of the individual
disciplines of criminology and regulation from their constituent
disciplines.
Criminology emerged from its disparate sources of law, sociology, psychology,
psychiatry, philosophy, economics, history
and others. Though theories of and
research into crime long pre-dated the nineteenth century, it was only in 1885
that the word ‘criminology’
was coined in 1885 by Raffaele Garafolo
in his book of that name.
The discipline of regulation has emerged over the past two decades from the
separate disciplines of economics, law, politics, philosophy,
criminology,
sociology, history and
anthropology.
this field as well, the literature is growing rapidly and journals are emerging
that recognize regulation as a separate and independent
area of study: the
Regulation and Governance
was established as recently as 2006.
Courses of study have been developed that examine regulation as a discipline in
its own right,
though neither it nor criminology is recognized as a
‘profession’. However, recognition as a profession and recognition
as a discipline are distinct issues.
THERAPEUTIC JURISPRUDENCE AND PP&L
The nature and history of therapeutic jurisprudence has been
well-rehearsed.
It is an approach to the study of law as a therapeutic agent, focusing upon the
impact of the law on the emotional life and psychological
well-being of not only
offenders, but of all of the participants in a justice system: judicial
officers, victims, offenders, plaintiffs,
defendants and others. As was the
Realist movement before it, it is consequentialist: law is not merely about
doctrine and theory
but is to be regarded as a social force that produces
behaviours, some therapeutic, some anti-therapeutic. Though it grew from studies
in mental health law, for example in relation to civil and criminal commitment
of mentally disordered persons, the insanity defence,
fitness to stand trial and
the like, it developed from looking at the relationship between law
therapy to regarding law
therapy and therapy through
It expanded
from those areas of law to encompass all areas of law including criminal law,
juvenile justice, family law, torts law,
compensation, child protection,
appellate practice and others.
In the early days of therapeutic jurisprudence it was said by many judicial
officers that they had been practising therapeutic jurisprudence
for years, so
what was the big deal? In the same vein, many English literature students
discover that they have been speaking prose
all their life. But that does not
make them an author or an English literature scholar. A pragmatic incremental
approach to practice:
... is of limited use if it cannot provide the basis for further
development. What distinguishes the abstract theoretical approach
from pragmatic
incrementalism is that only the former can provide the framework for the study
of the relevant phenomena and act as
a guide or blueprint for the
As McGuire has observed, research from the social sciences provides an
... evidence-base that, conveyed through the theoretical framework of
therapeutic jurisprudence, may have a gradually increasing influence
procedures, roles, and rules with particular reference to criminal justice.
Studies are beginning to appear in which hypotheses
generated from the
convergence of these fields are being tested in court
Therapeutic jurisprudence has pursued four main areas of inquiry: (1) the
role of the law in producing psychological dysfunction;
(2) therapeutic aspects
of legal rules; (3) therapeutic aspects of legal procedures, and (4) therapeutic
aspects of judicial and
himself has wryly observed, ‘therapeutic jurisprudence started as a new
twist on mental health law and has now become
a mental health twist on law
and in virtually all legal
Winick suggested that therapeutic jurisprudence was not a just a general
inter-disciplinary approach: it was focused on a narrow set
of consequences: how
law affected the mental and physical health of people affected by
And it was not purely scientific and neutral about the effects of law: it was
normative in the sense that other things being equal,
positive therapeutic
effects were to be
Therapeutic jurisprudence is intensely inter-disciplinary: it draws on the
behavioural sciences such as cognitive psychology, psychiatry,
behavioural sciences, criminology, social work, nursing, neuropsychiatry and
psychotherapy and has done so from its earliest
albeit that its founders are primarily lawyers. The late Bruce Winick made this
point relatively early in the development of the
To understand how law functions, we must understand political science,
economics, anthropology, sociology and psychology, and we must
examine law with
the tools of these disciplines. Modern approaches to law have been
interdisciplinary and empirical in character.
We have seen the rise of law and
economics, law and society, law and psychology, and social science in law. With
these varying interdisciplinary
approaches we look beyond the façade of
law to penetrate its inner workings.
Therapeutic jurisprudence has been profoundly influential in theory and
practice, possibly more than the PP
L movement. If I am
correct in this perception, why has this been so given that the PP&L
movement has been pivotal in producing
a vast body of empirical research and
instrumental in promoting evidence-based practice. It has enhanced the
perspectives of all
of the professions that it embraces and, in effect, provided
the foundations for therapeutic jurisprudence. On the other hand, some
research and assistance to the courts has been impractical and possibly
Wexler has suggested that therapeutic jurisprudence has had a greater effect
than PP&L because it was more precisely focused and
grounded in the rules
and procedures of law, and the roles played within it, than the more generalized
and less focused approach
it developed a distinct conceptual framework, including the idea of psycho-legal
softspots, it provided researchers with
a clearer agenda for theorizing and more
and better defined avenues for practical
experimentation.
Unlike PP&L, therapeutic jurisprudence was an approach that could readily be
applied by judges, magistrates and lawyers. It had
practical relevance to the
work they did and its principles resonated with the day-to day issues and
problems that presented in courts
and practice. It suggested techniques to be
applied directed at their resolution and was also is flexible enough to allow
development by practitioners themselves. Thus the judiciary and legal
profession could contribute not only to its practical development
but also feed
into its theoretical development. It was thus a more heuristic approach than the
traditional
methodology.
inter-disciplinary approach was creative and heuristic in the Koestlerian sense
because, ‘by bringing under one conceptual
umbrella many legal areas that
previously had not been thought to be related ... it generate[s] questions that
otherwise might well
The number and kinds of questions that have been asked through a therapeutic
jurisprudence lens can be seen at web sites of the Australian
therapeutic
jurisprudence
clearinghouse
and the International Network on Therapeutic Jurisprudence that now contains
It was the marriage of the pragmatic drug court movement and many of the
broad tenets therapeutic jurisprudence theory in the late
1990s that transformed
the former from a few local experiments in the United States to an international
justice phenomenon. This
conjunction transformed court practices not only in
relation to drug courts but to all of the other problem-oriented courts such
mental health courts, family violence courts, alcohol courts, indigenous courts
and others that it
generated new theories about the nature of justice itself.
MENTAL HEALTH JURISDICTIONS
It may be instructive to look at the concept and role of a ‘mental
health court’ as a prism through which to see the difference
PP&L and a therapeutic jurisprudence/non-adversarial justice approach to the
intersection between mental health and
the law. There are broadly two different
models of mental health courts operating in Australia: the specialist court that
in Queensland and the mental health courts that operate in South
Australia, Tasmania and Victoria utilizing a problem-solving court
The Mental Health Court of Queensland, which functions at the Supreme Court
established to determine issues of fitness and/or criminal responsibility of
mentally disordered offenders who have been
charged with offences. The Mental
Health Court, which replaced the former Mental Health Tribunal in 2000, uses an
inquisitorial model
and is comprised of a senior judicial officer who is
assisted by two
psychiatrists.
Court also has appellate jurisdiction from the Mental Health Review
decide matters relating to a person’s mental condition and can investigate
the detention of patients in authorized mental
functions of the psychiatrists are generally to assist the court by advising it
in relation to clinical evidence and
quintessentially
Mental Health Act 1989
(Qld) reinforces the limited role
assigned to psychiatrists by expressly stating that their ‘functions are
limited to matters
within the psychiatrist’s professional
expertise’.
Mental health review tribunals, from which the Queensland Mental Health Court
emerged, have their roots in the rights based reforms
to mental health laws in
the 1980s and were more concerned with legal and human rights than on the
themselves.
Reflecting on the changes in the operation of such bodies, Weller notes that
they were founded on a multi-disciplinary model, a combination
of individual
disciplines rather than a fusion of them.
approach in the courts has traditionally
been to provide expert evidence regarding competence to stand trial, diminished
responsibility,
insanity or to treatment options. And whereas both a
rights-based and a non-adversarial justice approach promote the values of
and self-determination, a therapeutic jurisprudence approach places
equal emphasis on the active participation of the person and
the process and on
the need for the process not to do more harm.
In contrast to these tribunals, a different type of mental health courts,
based on the problem-solving court model, has evolved over
the past two
mental health courts generally operate at the summary court level and primarily
deal with low-level offending. The aim of such
courts is to divert offenders
into treatment prior to conviction. A mental health court has been defined
[A] specialized court docket for certain defendants with mental illnesses
that substitutes a problem-solving model for traditional
criminal court
processing. Participants are identified through mental health screening and
assessments and voluntarily participate
in a judicially supervised treatment
plan developed jointly by a team of court staff and mental health professionals.
reward adherence to the treatment plan or other court conditions,
nonadherence may be sanctioned, and success or graduation is defined
to predetermined criteria.
As King et al state:
The distinctive feature of these courts is that they attempt to intervene
early in the process. The courts have developed multi-disciplinary
provide for intensive treatment and supervision under the control of the judge
to whom the teams are accountable...
Mental health courts function as problem-oriented courts in that they attempt
to remedy some of the failures of existing community
and social services to deal
with difficult populations by providing them with access to treatment and other
services in a co-ordinated
and disciplined fashion. The courtroom process itself
is informal and adopts a therapeutic approach to the defendant. Its personnel
are specialised and remain with that jurisdiction for long
What is evident here is that the problem-solving/therapeutic
jurisprudence/non-adversarial justice approach has transformed the process
that the sum of the marriage between the various disciplines is greater than its
parts. The approach is not just about dealing
with an offender through multiple
disciplines, but re-conceptualising the problem itself as one that concerns not
just the offender,
but the system within which that person lives and
NON-ADVERSARIAL JUSTICE: INCLUDING AND BEYOND THERAPEUTIC JURISPRUDENCE
In May 2010 the Faculty of Law at Monash University and the Australasian
Institute of Judicial Administration held a conference entitled
Non-adversarial Justice: Implications for the Legal System and Society
Melbourne. It attracted over 80 papers and 330 delegates, representing nearly
140 organisations from 20 jurisdictions around the
What was remarkable about the conference was that it was on a theme whose
formal title has yet to be agreed but whose constituents,
or vectors as they
have been called, are better known: appropriate or alternative dispute
resolution (including mediation, negotiation,
conciliation and arbitration),
restorative justice, participatory justice, therapeutic jurisprudence,
preventive law, comprehensive
law, creative problem-solving, diversion, holistic
Briefly described, non-adversarial justice is an approach to justice, both
civil and criminal, that focuses on non-court dispute resolution,
including the
role of tribunals and public and private ombudsmen. It also includes processes
used by courts that may not involve
judicial determination, or court processes
that involve judicial officers both pre- and post-determination of guilt or
sentence in
exercising more control over process. Its basic premises are
prevention rather than post-conflict solutions, co-operation rather
conflict and problem-solving rather than dispute
resolution.
It is a broad inter-disciplinary approach that has in common with the vectors
described above a desire to broaden the scope of the
study of law by focusing
differing conceptual lenses upon the nature and operation of legal rules, legal
procedures, legal roles
and legal education. These rules may be criminal, civil,
or administrative, adversarial and inquisitorial.
Each of the fields of inquiry, or vectors, is extensive and has a rich
literature that touches, on and intersects with, PP&L.
In our book on
Non-adversarial
Michael King, Becky Batagol, Ross Hyams and I attempted to identify some of the
elements of a non-adversarial justice
system, not a court system:
non-adversarial justice is concerned not just
with the courts but with the justice system more broadly and sees that system as
of the community which it serves. It sees courts as only one forum, albeit
an important one, for resolving disputes;
solving, not dispute resolution:
this is a recognition of the fact that the
presenting legal dispute may only be symptomatic of more deep-seated social,
economic or
psychological problems and that some of these are better dealt with
outside the court system or using the court system as a focus
or conduit for
providing a range of services that deal with the underlying problem;
Process, not
this reflects an increased emphasis on procedural justice, on the
way that people are heard and dealt with by the justice system.
It emphasizes
voice, validation and
Partners, not
adversaries:
non-adversarialism builds on notions of co-operation rather
than conflict and encourages partnerships between public and private agencies,
between courts and the communities they serve and between different professions
– legal, medical and others;
Active, not
passive judges:
in a therapeutic context, judges may take an active role in
supervising and monitoring offenders on bail or special orders relating
mental health or family violence problems;
Interdisciplinarity:
non-adversarial justice, particularly those aspects that draw on therapeutic
jurisprudence, has drawn on the principles and practices
of the behavioural
sciences such as psychology, psychiatry, social work and others.
Comprehensiveness:
non-adversarialism seeks more holistic approach in the way that it views
people with legal problems, the legal problems themselves,
the processes used to
resolve problems, the skills required to solve the problems and the outcomes
sought from the dispute resolution
process. Creative problem-solving sees
problems in a multi-disciplinary and holistic framework that may require the
contribution
of many skills and professions.
Prevention:
non-adversarial justice prefers dispute prevention rather than dispute
resolution. Early intervention to anticipate or prevent harm
is regarded as a
better approach than post-harm responses.
None of the therapeutic
jurisprudence, comprehensive law or the non-adversarial justice approaches to
the law, the courts and legal
practice can yet claim to have developed a
coherent and embracive theory of what is law and what is an
‘alternative’
to law or of how the various ‘vectors’
relate to each other and to the
Nor have they identified or articulated a ‘foundational philosophy’
to underpin
As theories of law justice, they are still in their very early stages of
development. Yet even in these inchoate states, these approaches
have, in many
ways, changed the way that the justice system has operated. In an article
published in 2008, the founder of the comprehensive
law movement, Professor
Susan Daicoff queried whether therapeutic jurisprudence and the other vectors of
the comprehensive law movement
integrated into the legal profession generally or whether they should remain
separate and distinct approaches to law, lawyering and
adjudication? In other
words, should all lawyers and judges learn to practice therapeutic
jurisprudence, and apply it in appropriate
cases, or should it be a separate and
distinct discipline, practices by only specially-trained individuals in the
profession?
In the following discussion I will argue that, for Victoria at least, these
questions have been answered in favour of the integrative
NON-ADVERSARIAL JUSTICE: TRANSFORMING THE JUSTICE SYSTEM
It would be an almost impossible task, and certainly one beyond the scope of
this exercise to identify all of the intersections between
non-adversarial
justice and the behavioural sciences. However, papers delivered at the recent
conference reveal the difference between
the PP&L agenda and the
non-adversarial justice agenda.
The non-adversarial justice conference explored not only the broad contours
of therapeutic jurisprudence, restorative justice, appropriate
resolution and non-adversarial justice but their relationships with the courts,
especially problem-oriented courts, indigenous
courts and mental health courts.
Topics covered also included preventive and holistic approaches to law; court
processes in relation
to sexual assault; child witnesses; interagency
partnerships; court and community partnerships; judicial and legal professional
skills and training; legal education; compensation; emotions; apology;
victims; court management and notions of truth and
reconciliation.
The agenda is a broad one and yet to cohere but I would like to examine in some
more detail a few of the themes that reveal the transformative
nature of this
different approach.
In her important paper at the conference, Charlotte Stockwell, the Chief
Executive Officer of the Victorian Magistrates’ Court
argued that it was
insufficient to change individual court practices without changing court
management practices, institutional arrangements
and legal and other
professional
She observed that the justice system now had broader aims, not just to resolve
disputes, but to encourage social inclusion and reduce
offending and to increase
equity of access to justice across the state. She noted that therapeutic
jurisprudence principles were
now informing the reform of court services with a
view to increasing the amount of multi-disciplinary case management and
collaboration.
Before describing the Victorian government’s vision for the future, it
might be worth briefly recalling the extensive and rapid
changes that have
occurred over the past decade in this jurisdiction alone. In November 1998 the
CREDIT (Court Referral and Evaluation
for Drug Intervention and Treatment) began
in the Magistrates’ Court). In 2002 the first problem-oriented court, the
drug court,
was established in
that year the first Koori court was established in
Shepparton.
In 2004, the Attorney-General of Victoria, Rob Hulls, published a
“Justice Statement” that committed to working with the
Magistrates’ Court in developing a policy framework for expanding
problem-solving
In 2005 the Department of Justice created a Courts and Programs Development Unit
to drive innovation in the courts, including problem-oriented
courts and court
support units, as well as to provide research and evaluation support to the
courts portfolio in the Department of
Justice. The 2004 Justice Statement
declared that Victoria
spectrum of responses from the intensive, differentiated court approach to
support services provided to mainstream court
identify common
methodologies while retaining the flexibility to provide services specific to a
particular type of problem, for example,
identify the
most effective interventions and the point at which they should be made;
establish proper
accountability frameworks that clearly identify the goals for the programs and
who is responsible for their achievement;
identify the
degree of legislative support required for problem-solving approaches; and
implementation strategy that provides appropriate training for those involved in
these initiatives and a change program
that integrates them into the mainstream
operation of the Magistrates’ Court.
The Justice Statement
articulated a number of principles that should guide the development of the
framework, including:
co-operative
practices: co-operation with service providers, with the courts in imposing
sentences, with police, corrections and human
services agencies;
necessary intervention: applying the principle of parsimony, using appropriate
(or alternative or diversionary) options or
interventions; and
procedures: emphasising procedural justice and the importance of fair and
participatory processes, built on foundations
of therapeutic
jurisprudence.
In June 2005 the Family Violence Division of the
Magistrates’ Court was established at Ballarat and
Heidelberg.
2006 Court Integrated Services Program
established to assist in ensuring that accused persons receive support and
services to promote a safer community. In 2006 the
legislation for a
Neighbourhood Justice Centre was
commenced operation in February 2007.
In 2008, building on the previous framework, the Attorney-General issued a
second Justice
that contained a number of non-adversarial initiatives including adopting a
problem-oriented approach that recognises the links between
crime, social
disadvantage and poverty. The Justice Statement proposed to expand the various
programs and courts, often established
on a pilot basis, into a more integrated
would be done by stronger central coordination of services, by the more
efficient pooling of information and resources, by developing
specialist staff,
by managing offenders in a more holistic manner, and by ensuring consistent
approaches.
Crucially, the Justice Statement promotes the view that problem-solving
approaches should be integrated in the mainstream Magistrates’
system, so that they are not regarded as either marginal or temporary.
The Next Generation Court project, which was established in 2009 continues
the momentum and is looking to enhance or create court
processes that aim to
address the underlying causes of offending and victimization using
problem-oriented approaches through collaborative
court support programs for
Multi-disciplinary
case management CISP/NJC type court support programs;
Justice services
officers employed to convene problem-solving meetings and to provide an
interface between the court and client services;
education and training on tools for courts to act in a therapeutic,
non-adversarial, problem oriented way for judiciary,
court staff and the legal
profession;
Integrating
community corrections into a court support model to allow for improved pre and
post sentence judicial monitoring and
complex cases list for mental health and drug and alcohol cases at major court
describes the next generation court as one that:
Undertakes a
triage process to determine appropriate list or specialist court for court user
or diversion;
information to address underlying problems leading to re-offending;
collaborative and less adversarial and adopting a team approach between policy,
legal aid, court staff, community agencies
and services;
Provides a hub
for intervention; and
Monitors and
reviews the progress of offenders in appropriate cases.
addition to the specialist lists in Victoria is the mental health court, the
Assessment and Referral Court (‘ARC’)
list established in 2010. That
court is described by the Magistrates’ Court as a specialist court list
developed by the Department
of Justice and the Magistrates’ Court of
Victoria to meet the needs of accused persons who have a mental illness and/or a
impairment. The ARC list is located at Melbourne Magistrates’
Court and works collaboratively with CISP, which provides case
management to
participants. Case management may include psychological assessment, referral to
welfare, health, mental health, disability,
and/or housing services and/or drug
and alcohol
Lest it be thought that these changes have been confined to summary offences,
they have also been evident in the Family Court through
the Less Adversarial
Trial legislation introduced in 2004 that involves active judicial management of
court processes, evidence and
findings, primacy afforded to the needs and
interests of the child, increasing use of primary dispute resolution that
involves mediation,
conciliation and arbitration and family group conferences
that attempt to resolve problems between the
CHANGING PHILOSOPHIES
The transformation is not only practical, but it is now recognized as an
underpinning philosophy that informs the way that some courts
and the justice
system operate. For example, the legislation setting up the Neighbourhood
Justice Centre states specifically that
in assigning a magistrate to the
Neighbourhood Justice Division, the Chief Magistrate must ‘have regard to
the magistrate’s
knowledge of, or experience in the application of, the
principles of therapeutic jurisprudence and restorative
The recently advertised position description for the Chief Magistrate of the
Northern Territory stated that beyond the minimum requirements
position, such as legal experience etc,
Applicants must have an understanding of the principles of restorative
justice and therapeutic jurisprudence, and an aptitude for
the application of
principles.
The most recent review by the Victorian Law Reform Commission of the child
protection system required the Commission to have regard
to, inter alia,
‘the themes and principles of the Attorney-General’s Justice
Statement (2004) and Justice Statement 2
(2008), particularly the focus on
Appropriate Dispute Resolution and measures to reduce the adversarial nature of
the justice
non-adversarial justice approach has changed not just the possible answers but
the way that we frame the problems themselves.
JUDICIAL EDUCATION AND INFORMATION
Underpinning these philosophical, practical and cultural changes are also
changes to judicial education and the information that is
provided to judicial
officers (and others) with regard to the meaning of therapeutic jurisprudence
and the evidence base for their
court practices. The Australasian Institute of
Judicial Administration has developed a comprehensive and well-used clearing
on therapeutic
jurisprudence
my erstwhile colleague, prolific author and now a magistrate in Kununurra in
Western Australia, Dr Michael King, has authored,
or been involved in, two
important bench
Solution-focused Judges’ Bench
Bench Book for Children Giving Evidence in Australian
former is an extensive (253 page) guide for judges which covers such topics as
problem solving court, substance abuse, mental
health, family violence, judicial
communication skills, judicial listening skills and processes and strategies for
achieving behavioural
change. In relation to the use of behavioural science
research, King
This bench book often cites psychological research or observations made by
theorists from the behavioural sciences. The object is
not to turn judicial
officers into counsellors or psychologists. Rather, the citation of such
literature is done on the basis that
areas of interest to judging in a
therapeutic or solution-focused manner – such as communication, motivation
and behavioural
change – are shared by psychology and other behavioural
sciences. Other areas of human life also have this interest –
leadership, business, community service organisations and coaching. Indeed, the
judicial role in a problem-solving court
program has been seen to be very
similar to that of a coach.
Research and practices in the behavioural sciences and in other areas where
behavioural science findings are applied may assist judicial
officers and
lawyers in the performance of their work. Indeed, noted humanistic psychologist
Carl Rogers observed that what is true
in a relationship between therapist and
client may also apply in human experience broadly.
The latter bench book is intended to inform judicial officers of
developmental factors that affect how children give evidence, how
courts should
receive such evidence and effect of child abuse on victims, among many other
What is important about this work is the transference of the basic ideas from
the behavioural sciences beyond the individual committed
judicial officer,
beyond the problem-oriented or solution-focused courts, to the operation of the
mainstream courts themselves and
it is this broad transformational element that
I believe is the greatest contribution of non-adversarial justice to changing
justice system and probably why it has been more effective in doing so than
‘law and...’
Drawing from King’s bench book work and from many of the other
therapeutic jurisprudence, restorative justice and other streams
non-adversarial justice literature, here are some of the intrinsic or embedded
elements of the new justice. It can seek to:
promote positive
behavioural change and the well-being of participants, not only of offenders but
of victims, judicial officers, legal
and other professional staff (King p
strengths-based approach that sees participants as being sources of strategies
to address their own problems and that seeks
to ‘engage people’s
strengths and address their weaknesses’ (King p 2);
promote and
support participants’ internal commitment to change for the better. It
sees the promotion of behavioural change
in the context of a broad concept of
rehabilitation, one that is more than the absence of offending, but also the
ability to live
a constructive, happy and law-abiding life in the community
(King p1 and Chapter 7);
understanding of the ‘cognitive, affective, motivational and
environmental factors’ (p 182) that affect the
behavioural change process,
whether it be in relation to substance abuse, violence or other unwanted
behaviours (King Chapter 7)
promote better
legal communication skills, ‘not only in comprehending what is said and in
explaining decisions, but also in
empathetic listening and other aspects of
communication (King p 7 and Chapters 5 and 6);
understanding of the importance of the relationship between judicial officers
and offenders in promoting behaviour change
and therapeutic outcomes (King p
procedural justice by giving participants voice, validation and respect (King p
None of these elements requires a psychiatrist or psychologist
to be called as an expert witness or to sit with or on the bench. This
is no longer expert, but mainstream: a normal way of doing business.
Innovation springs from many sources: from dissatisfaction with existing
philosophical
technological changes and from the creativity that comes from the juxtaposition
or fusing of disparate conceptual systems.
What are the consequences of the
‘beyond the law and’
approach? For the courts it means more than requiring or encouraging judicial
officers to be aware of the learnings of the behavioural
sciences, or bringing
behavioural scientists into the courtroom when the limits of legal knowledge
have been reached. Rather it requires
them to move beyond ‘the pure
intellectual analysis of the law and dispassionate assessment of the
reconfiguring court processes such as
the taking of evidence, problem solving (particularly addressing underlying
issues) interpersonal judicial and lawyer skills, motivation
and behavioural
Even court architecture itself can reflect the new philosophies of
non-adversarial justice and therapeutic jurisprudence in the way
that courtrooms
are configured to promote respect for
communication between the participants, as occurs in many problem-solving
courts. Neighbourhood justice or community courts
are not just stand alone court
houses but a part of a complex of services including housing, financial advice,
counseling and other
support services, some of which are available to community
members whether or not they are referred to by the court
For law schools preparing legal practitioners, policy-makers and legislators
of the future it means crafting curricula that encourage
qualification in two or
more disciplines (preferably simultaneously in order to encourage diversity of
thought, teaching approaches
and learning styles), embedding non-adversarialism
in both content and the manner of teaching (collaboration, group work,
assessment),
problem-solving and preventative rather than dispute settlement
approaches to conflict, creativity in crafting solutions to problems
broader range of skills including emotional intelligence, interviewing skills,
listening skills and clinical
Wexler has argued that the next challenge of therapeutic jurisprudence is the
creation of a new body of ‘practical interdisciplinary
scholarship’.
We are not yet at the stage when therapeutic jurisprudence and non-adversarial
justice are complete
should they be accepted uncritically and be immune to empirical testing and
critical analysis.
However, together they may have assisted in the development of a transformative
approach to an understanding of the justice system.
It is too early to determine the outcome of these changes: the process of
iterative experimentation is still nascent, but the contours
are emerging, at
least in Victoria in the next generation of court models. What is needed at the
moment is a commitment to the flexibility
and creativity that comes from keeping
an open mind and a willingness to challenge the traditional and to experiment
with the new.
This lecture honours the memory of Bob Myers, a pioneer and iconoclast. In
August of this year Professor Bruce Winick, a co-founder
of therapeutic
jurisprudence with Professor David Wexler died. He was a creative intellectual
and a superb and prolific scholar who
possessed a warm and generous spirit. He
would have been a soul mate of Bob Myers. In 1997 he wrote:
It is the task of scholarship to advance knowledge even if it might challenge
deeply held values. If the assumptions on which a society’s
erroneous in some way that scholarship can demonstrate, then those values are in
need of reexamination.... All scholarship
must be welcome in the marketplace of
ideas, and all of our beliefs must perpetually be tested in the competition of
that marketplace.
The quest for truth can sometimes make us question basic
assumptions. Although it may be uncomfortable and sometimes even painful
this, we must be brave enough to open our eyes to knowledge and to dare to see
the world clearly, as it is, rather than as
we might wish it to
The emergent power and influence of the new approaches that I have outlined
and possibly trans-disciplinary bodies of knowledge requires
an open-mindedness
in the constituent disciplines and a readiness to accept the possibility that
some should not only cohabit, but
that they should breed in order to create new,
vigorous and challenging intellectual/juridical life
that Bob Myers, for one, would have been delighted by such a prospect.
* Dean, Faculty of Law, Monash University. My thanks to Ian Freckelton,
David Wexler, Michael King and Liz Richardson for comments
on earlier drafts of
this paper.
(1994) 1 Psychiatry, Psychology and
Hereinafter
MC Dorf and JA
Fagan, ‘Problem-Solving Courts: From Innovation to
Institutionalization’
(2003) 40 American Criminal Law Review
‘The Taxonomy of Interdisciplinary Legal Research: Finding the Way out of
the Desert’
(2009) 7 Journal of Commonwealth Law and Legal Education
‘Interdisciplinarity and the Discipline of Law’
(2004) 31(2) Journal
of Law and Society 163
described an epistemic community as a ‘network of professionals with
recognized expertise and competence in a particular
domain and an authoritative
claim to policy relevant knowledge within that domain or issue area. Although an
epistemic community
may consist of professionals from a variety of disciplines
and backgrounds, they have (1) a shared set of normative and principled
which provide a value-based rationale for the social action of community
members; (2) shared causal beliefs, which are derived
from their analysis of
practices leading or contributing to a central set of problems in their domain
and which then serve as the
basis for elucidating the multiple linkages between
possible policy actions and desired outcomes; (3) shared notions of validity-
that is, intersubjective, internally defined criteria for weighing and
validating knowledge in the domain of their expertise; and
(4) a common policy
enterprise-that is, a set of common practices associated with a set of problems
to which their professional competence
is directed, presumably out of the
conviction that human welfare will be enhanced as a consequence’; PM Haas,
Communities and International Policy Coordination’ (1992)
46(1) International Organization 1, 3.
The Australian
Council of Professions defines a profession as ‘a disciplined group of
individuals who adhere to high ethical
standards and uphold themselves to, and
are accepted by, the public as possessing special knowledge and skills in a
widely recognised
organised body of learning derived from education and training
at a high level, and who are prepared to exercise this knowledge and
skills in the interest of others.’
www.accc.gov.au/content/index.phtml/itemId/277772
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Act_of_Creation
A Koestler,
The Act of Creation
(Dell: New York, 1967)
‘Interdisciplinarity as Colonization’
(1996) 53 Washington and Lee
Law Review 949
and MA Edwards, ‘Introduction: The Path of the Law ANDS’
Wisconsin Law Review 375-387.
Galanter and
Edwards (Note
) 377. Consequentialism
is not used here in the Benthamite utilitarian sense that the moral worth of an
action is determined by its
outcome, but to distinguish it from doctrinal
I Freckelton,
‘Psychiatry, Psychology and Law and ANZAPPL’
(2008) 15(1)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law 1
, 6; see, for example, A Birgden, ‘
Sex Offenders Monitoring Act 2005
(Vic): A Therapeutic Jurisprudence
(2007) 14(1) Psychiatry, Psychology and Law 78-94
; B Winick,
‘A Therapeutic Jurisprudence Approach to Dealing with Coercion in the
Mental Health System’
(2008) 15(1) Psychiatry, Psychology and Law 25-39
BA Arrigo, ‘The Ethics of Therapeutic Jurisprudence: A Critical and
Theoretical Enquiry of Law, Psychology and Crime’
(2004) 11(1) Psychiatry,
Psychology and Law 23-43
; I Freckelton, ‘Mental Health Review Tribunal
Decision-making: A Therapeutic Jurisprudence Lens’
(2003) 10(1)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law 44-62.
Baldwin, C Scott and R Hood,
A Reader on Regulation
(Oxford University
Press: Oxford 1998) 35.
Wexler, ‘The Development of Therapeutic Jurisprudence: From Theory to
Practice’ (1999) 68 Revista Juridica University
de Puerto Rico 691-705; D
From Theory to Practice and Back Again in Therapeutic Jurisprudence:
Now Comes the Hard Part
(Arizona Legal Studies, Discussion paper No.10-12,
2010). For a summary of the critiques of therapeutic jurisprudence and a
to them see I Freckelton, ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence
Misunderstood and Misrepresented: The Price and Risks of Influence’
(2007-2008) 30 Thomas Jefferson Law Review 575-598.
The following summary draws
from these publications; see also M King, A Freiberg, B Batagol and R Hyams,
Non-adversarial Justice
(The Federation Press: Sydney 2009) Chapter
Wexler 1999 (Note
A Freiberg,
‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence in Australia: Paradigm Shift or Pragmatic
Incrementalism?’
(2003) 20(2) Law in Context
‘Maintaining Change: Converging Legal and Psychological Initiatives in a
Therapeutic Jurisprudence Framework’
(2003) 4(2) Western Criminology
Review 108.
‘An Introduction to Therapeutic Jurisprudence’ in D Wexler, and BJ
Winick, (eds),
Essays in Therapeutic Jurisprudence
(Carolina Academic
Press: Durham 2000) 19; see also King et al, (Note
Wexler 2010
‘The Jurisprudence of Therapeutic Jurisprudence’ (1997) 3(1
Psychology, Public Policy, and Law 184-206.
respect it was similar to feminist jurisprudence or critical race theory which
sought to advance the interests of women
or minorities: Winick (Note
Winick (Note
) 187; Wexler (Note
) 2010: no page; McGuire, J. (Note
Winick (Note
Attorney-General for the State of New South Wales v John Fairfax Publications
[1999] NSWSC 318
(expert evidence relating to memory of publications
likely to prejudice jurors rejected in favour of ‘practical reality).
communication dated 15 August 2010.
process of ‘iterative experimentation’ whereby courts can
experiment, review, evaluate and alter their practices
see MC Dorf, and CF
Sabel, ‘Drug Treatment Courts and Emergent Experimentalist
Government’
(2000) 53 Vanderbilt Law Review 831-883.
‘heuristic’ describes systems of learning, discovery or
understanding, or ways of solving problems by trial
and error or by
experimentation. It also describes a process of stimulating interest in order to
further discover knowledge or to
experiment. Winick and Wexler maintained from
the beginning of their work in therapeutic jurisprudence that they were not
a rigid theoretical framework but a flexible tool to explore the effect
of law and legal processes on participants. Further, it was
their view that the
strong interdisciplinary focus of therapeutic jurisprudence that was most
conducive to the generation of research
questions and constructive answers, see
M McMahon, and D Wexler, ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence: Developments and
Applications
in Australia and New Zealand’
(2003) 20(2) Law in Context
Winick (Note
www.aija.org.au/research/australasian-therapeutic-jurisprudence-clearinghouse.html
The topic headings include civil and administrative law, corrections, court
administration, court diversion programs, death-related
issues, family breakdown
and child welfare, family violence, indigenous issues, judging, legal and
judicial education, legal practice,
problem-solving courts and victims.
www.law.arizona.edu/depts/upr-intj/
See PF Hora,
WG Schma and JTA Rosenthal, ‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence and the Drug
Treatment Court Movement: Revolutionizing
the Criminal Justice System’s
Response to Drug Abuse and Crime in America’
(1999) 74 Notre Dame Law
Review 439-537
; see also Dorf and Fagan (Note
Health Act 2000
(Qld), s 381(1).
Mental Health
(Qld), s 381.
Health Court has similar powers to the former Mental Health Tribunal which also
operated with a Supreme Court judge and
assisting psychiatrists. The
Health Act 2000
(Qld), which established the Mental Health Court, amongst other
things clarified the role of assisting psychiatrists to ensure openness
accountability of decision-making.
Mental Health
(Qld), s 383.
Mental Health
(Qld), s 389.
Non-adversarial Justice and Mental Health Review Tribunals: A
Reflexive Turn
, Unpublished Paper
Mental health courts or lists operate in South Australia, Victoria, and
Tasmania; see generally E Richardson and B McSherry, ‘Diversion
Under – Programs for Offenders with Mental Illnesses in Australia’
(2010) 33 International Journal of Law and Psychiatry 249-257.
They are very
diverse in their operation and in their legal foundations. The Victorian mental
health court, known as the Assessment
and Referral Court List, is discussed
State Governments Justice Center (2008) 4.
) 7; S Daicoff, ‘Law as a Healing
Profession: The Comprehensive Law Movement’ (2006) 6 Pepperdine Dispute
Resolution Journal
) Chapter 1.
adopting the term ‘non-adversarial justice’ it became apparent that
this was too narrow, too focused upon the
common law system and perhaps too
oppositional a term. I have argued that these approaches are equally relevant to
inquisitorial
systems: see A Freiberg, ‘Post-Adversarial and
Post-Inquisitorial Justice: Transcending Traditional Penological
(2010) 8(2)
European Journal of Criminology
also Daicoff (Note
particularly the work of Tyler and colleagues dating back to the early 1990s: T
Why People Obey the Law
(Yale University Press: New Haven CT
relationship between therapeutic jurisprudence and comprehensive law, see S
Daicoff, ‘Growing Pains: The Integration
vs. Specialization Question for
Therapeutic Jurisprudence and Other Comprehensive Law Approaches’
(2007-2008) 30 Thomas Jefferson Law Review 551-574.
Dewhurst has
correctly identified these weaknesses and suggested that a comprehensive and
internally consistent super-system of
norms that can be used to evaluate the
adversarial system and the evolving vectors can be developed from an
Aristotelian natural
law virtue theory. This would assist in providing a
definition of justice and law. He proposes that the Comprehensive
Movement would better be termed the Comprehensive
Movement: D
Dewhurst, ‘Justice Foundations for the Comprehensive Law Movement’
(2010) International Journal of Law and
doi:10.1016/j.ijlp.2010.09.016 (in press).
Daicoff (Note
Some of the
papers from that conference will published in a Special Issue of the Monash
University Law Review in 2011.
C Stockwell,
Managing the Transition from the Adversarial to the Non-Adversarial Court: A
Court Administrator’s Perspective
, Unpublished Paper 2010.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic), ss 18X to 18XS. The first drug court
in Australia was established in New South Wales in 1998 (Drug Court Act 1998
Youth Drug Court was established in 2000; see S Turner,
South Wales Youth Drug and Alcohol Court Program: Interagency Partnerships in
, Unpublished Paper, 2010.
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Attorney-General, Victoria, Justice Statement (Melbourne: Department of Justice
2004) 61. Some of the material in the following
paragraphs is drawn from King et
General (Note
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic), s 4H. The first of such jurisdictions
was established in South Australia in 1997, see King et al (Note
The CISP was
established in 2006 and operates in three Victorian Magistrates Courts. It
provides a multi-disciplinary approach to
the assessment and referral to
treatment of clients for drug and alcohol treatment, acquired brain injury
services, accommodation
services, and disability and mental health services for
periods of up to four months. It is not linked to a particular court or list.
aims to provide pre-sentence, short-term support for accused people with health
and social needs:
www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au/wps/wcm/connect/Magistrates+Court/Home/Court+Support+Services/MAGISTRATES+-+Court+Integrated+Services+Program
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Attorney-General, Victoria,
Attorney-General’s Justice Statement 2:
The Next Chapter
(Department of Justice: Melbourne 2008).
Attorney-General, (Note 62) 34.
Attorney-General, (Note 62) 34.
http://165.142.249.4/CA256EBD007FC352/page/New+Initiatives-Next+Generation+Courts?OpenDocument&1=05-New+Initiatives~&2=0-Next+Generation+Courts~&3=~
(Note 54) 9.
http://www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au/wps/wcm/connect/justlib/magtrates+court/home/court+support+services/magistrates+-+assessment+and+referral+court+list
, Division 12A; King et al (Note
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
In July 2010,
Ms Hilary Hannam was appointed as Chief Magistrate of the Northern Territory. Ms
Hannam had been a magistrate in New
South Wales for ten years and had presided
in the New South Wales Youth Drug and Alcohol Court. In 2002 she was awarded a
Fellowship to undertake research into therapeutic courts and has
presented papers on therapeutic jurisprudence and specialist courts.
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Protection Applications in the Children’s Court:
Final Report 19
(VLRC, Melbourne: 2010). The Commission was guided by a
number of principles including that processes should actively encourage early
resolution by agreement whenever appropriate, should actively encourage
inter-professional collaboration and that courts should be
inquisitorial and
problem-oriented decision-makers (p 16).
A benchbook
is a book providing an overview of
legal procedure
. These books are used by
judges while hearing cases as guides to assist in the disposition of a
: Wikipedia,
ttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benchbook.
http://www.aija.org.au/Solution%20Focused%20BB/SFJ%20BB.pdf
http://www.aija.org.au/Child%20Witness%20Bch%20Bk/Child%20Witness%20BB%202009.pdf
Fagan (Note 3) 1501.
description of some the philosophical shifts that have paved the way for the
emergence of comprehensive or non-adversarial
approaches to law see Daicoff
) 38ff. These include
globalization, post-modernism, post-enlightenment values, neo-realism,
neo-humanism and others.
See designs
of indigenous courts, King et al (Note
) Chapter 16.
Wexler (Note
Therapeutic
jurisprudence regards itself as a framework for asking questions rather than a
coherent body of knowledge that explains
observed phenomena, which can predict
future behaviour and which is verifiable; see also the discussion of Dewhurst
Freckelton’s salutary cautionary article (Note
). See also Daicoff (Note
) 571 who suggests that it is vital that
these new approaches be evaluated, for example, the efficacy of drug courts,
rates of compliance
with court orders when procedural justice concepts are used
and satisfaction data when comprehensive approaches are utilized.
Winick (Note
24) 198-199 (footnotes omitted).
) 173. David Wexler has made the same
point in relation to the cross-fertilisation between theory and practice: Wexler
) fn 41. As Ridley colourfully
puts it: ‘Trade is to culture as sex is to biology. Exchange makes
cultural change collective
and cumulative... The rate of cultural and economic
progress depends on the rate at which ideas are having sex.’: Matt Ridley,
Humans: Why they Triumphed
, The Wall Street Journal, May 22, 2010,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703691804575254533386933138.html
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (291 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter