URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:29:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Purtell, Mylinda --- "Empowering Workers: The Impact of Worker Assist Tasmania on the Legal Landscape" [2024] PrecedentAULA 16; (2024) 181 Precedent 19
Empowering workers: The impact of Worker Assist Tasmania on the legal
By Mylinda Purtell
Since 2011, Worker Assist Tasmania has provided free, independent legal
advice to injured workers, removing the barriers that prevent
many from engaging
in the workers’ compensation scheme.
‘In Tasmania, more than 7,000 injuries occur annually, and almost 50%
of the population is functionally illiterate. According
to the National Return
to Work survey, almost half of all Tasmanian workers needed help navigating the
claims process, 45% suffered
from one or more comorbidities, and 10% were likely
to suffer from a mental
Our community legal service empowers individuals to navigate the complexities
of the claims process and offers comprehensive support
throughout. We triage
claims, exploring available options and managing expectations, and refer clients
to law firms when the matter
becomes complex.
Our service operates independently from government bodies, legal practices,
unions and employers. Serving as a free entry point into
the claims process,
Worker Assist Tasmania offers claimants a valuable means to initiate a claim or
to assess the progress of an
existing one. This unique positioning grants us a
distinctive perspective on how the workers’ compensation system impacts
individuals
at every stage of the claims process. It also enables us to compile
insightful observational, statistical and predictive information
that holds the
potential to reshape the system for the better.
The service, funded by the WorkCover Board of Tasmania, is designed to
benefit injured workers but has had a broader impact, optimising
the existing
system, raising awareness of systemic problems and improving access to and the
efficacy of justice.
MITIGATING DISTRESS AND CONFUSION
Whether facing physical injuries or psychological injuries (or both),
claimants often grapple with heightened emotions and a sense
of overwhelm.
Navigating an unfamiliar, expensive and intimidating legal system can be
incredibly daunting. Even seasoned lawyers
feel the strain.
We assist individuals to strategically channel their time and energy to
extract the best outcomes from the system they find themselves
in. We provide a
compassionate space for listening and sharing. Our goal is to make clients feel
heard, emotionally prepared and
supported as they navigate the complexities of
their unique situations.
We also serve as a lifeline for the family members and partners of injured
workers, helping to maintain the significant relationships
that are essential to
recovery, which can break down after life-changing injuries. Family members can
turn to us to evaluate the
fairness and legality of employer or insurer
requests, to seek guidance on their injured loved ones' entitlements, and for
and practical steps.
REDUCING NOISE
One significant disruptor to any operating system is the presence of 'noise'
– information or actions that lack relevance or
effectiveness.
Self-representation, for instance, frequently hinders legal proceedings,
introducing confusion and impeding the achievement
of optimal outcomes. Pursuing
claims with minimal chances of success or submitting incomplete or inaccurate
documentation can similarly
disrupt the system, preventing it from functioning
at its best.
A pivotal aspect of Worker Assist Tasmania's advice is to ensure individuals
are well-informed about the reality of their situation.
We provide an honest
appraisal of their options and guide them in gathering essential materials to
maximise the effectiveness of
their interactions with lawyers, general
practitioners (GPs) and insurers. This approach aims to reduce noise in the
system, fostering
clarity and efficiency in legal proceedings and insurance
ENHANCING CASE QUALITY AND CLIENTELE FOR LEGAL FIRMS
A fundamental aspect of our approach is our decision not to take on cases
directly. Many community legal services struggle to meet
the needs of their
client base: lawyers get tied up in cases and the pressure and workload become
overwhelming.
Instead, we triage
claims, educate the community, destigmatise the claims process through in-house
training sessions and highlight
workers' experience to those in the scheme, such
as insurers, to facilitate meaningful changes to processes and procedures.
We empower individuals with better knowledge and correct documentation, and
ensure they’re equipped with a coherent narrative
of their experiences,
thereby improving the quality of their case. Additionally, we guide individuals
without valid claims to understand
that pursuing a workers' compensation claim
may not be right for them. This approach means we reach clients earlier in their
process, decrease issues early on and provide referrals to law firms at
the appropriate time. Ultimately, this leads to increased
success rates of
claims and reduced costs.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS FOR EMPLOYERS
The advisory services of Worker Assist Tasmania play a pivotal role in
preventing the lodgement of exaggerated or ambitious claims.
Cases that progress
and resolve sooner incur lower costs for all parties involved. The swift
recovery of individuals from injury
or their prompt return to work translates
into a reduced financial burden on employers.
Our advisory services have expanded to include valuable employer support to
broaden our impact. This evolving aspect of our services
ensures employers
understand their rights and responsibilities, eliminating unnecessary delays
caused by avoidance or uncertainty-driven
obstruction. Our efforts focus on
facilitating a smoother claims process and enhancing understanding of the legal
landscape, fostering
a more efficient and cooperative working environment.
Worker Assist Tasmania can eliminate disputes through direct communication
with the employer where there is uncertainty or confusion.
We regularly reach
out to employers who have an injured worker currently on a total incapacity
certificate and unaware that this
time is to be classified as workers’
compensation on their payslips and not annual leave or sick leave. Additionally,
may not realise that they are still obligated to provide workers with
payslips during this time. Our efforts go beyond providing
information: we also
offer examples of how workers can successfully return to work and be a valued
member of the organisation or
BETTER OUTCOMES FOR INSURERS AND MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS
The often-overlooked cost to insurers from prolonged or back-and-forth
claims, especially concerning the correct paperwork or medical
advice, is a
significant challenge within the workers' compensation domain. Worker Assist
Tasmania alleviates this challenge by ensuring
clients have access to accurate
information and educating GPs on their vital role within the system through the
provision of workshops,
posters and pamphlets.
We also reach out to our clients' GPs who have questions, uncertainties, or
who may have inadvertently provided incorrect advice to
a worker regarding the
legal aspects of their claim. Our one-on-one support allows GPs to seek
clarification on completing certificates
or return-to-work plans. This support
can be provided over the phone, via email or during the worker's
consultation.
In 2023, we forged a partnership with a medical provider who integrated our
services into their patient consultations. This collaboration
led to regular
check-ins on various aspects of clients' claims, significantly enhancing case
management. As a result, we observed
expedited return-to-work outcomes,
decreased costs to the system, and a more informed medical practice.
By enhancing the understanding of GPs, we contribute to a more streamlined
and efficient claims process. This, in turn, results in
a more positive
experience for those processing claims, reducing burnout and turnover. Our
proactive approach aids individuals in
roles driven by a desire to help and
challenges those who may be hindering or obstructing the claims process. By
fostering a cooperative
and informed environment, we contribute to better
outcomes for insurers and a more sustainable and effective workers' compensation
RAISING AWARENESS OF SYSTEMIC PROBLEMS
serves as the vital canary in the coal mine within the
workers' compensation
system. With a unique perspective derived directly from individuals living the
experience, we provide invaluable
insights that inform and enhance the system.
Our role extends beyond immediate assistance, as the questions we receive
serve as a predictive lens into emerging trends and the
evolving nature of
claims. For instance, we noted a 30% increase in calls related to sexual
harassment after Grace Tame won Australian
of the Year and campaigned to prevent
sexual abuse to children and others. This led us to deliver sexual harassment
training and
collaborate with other community legal centres such as the
Women’s Legal Service and the Hobart Community Legal Service.
Similarly, when we noticed an increase in the diversity of our workforce in
Tasmania, we pioneered the inclusion of free interpreting
services. This small
investment has reduced language barrier issues and recovered valid entitlements
for Tasmanian workers.
We work with diverse people with differing needs and experiences. In 2023
alone, we spoke to 3,590 clients and 2,590 returned to us
multiple times during
their claims. This provides us with a unique insight into parts of the process
that are working so badly they
compound injury rather than speeding recovery. If
the information we gather is used to improve the system, then the feedback loop
is complete, and people's lived experiences can improve the system they have
been through.
There are many other areas where a service like ours, providing free,
accessible legal advice from specialist lawyers in person, could
improve access
to and the efficacy of justice in our society. Imagine what this could achieve
in criminal law, family law or even
small claims. We could improve outcomes for
everyone involved.
Ten years ago, we were just a couple of lawyers on the phone; we now ensure
that the functionality of Tasmania’s worker's compensation
constantly improved, offering crucial information, real-life insights, and
guidance for effecting meaningful changes. By
connecting with insurers,
employers, GPs, legislators and injured people, we are uniquely positioned to
measure, predict and advise.
Mylinda Purtell
is the Principal Solicitor of Worker Assist Tasmania.
With a deep commitment to justice and advocacy, Mylinda leads the team in their
mission to empower workers and ensure their rights are protected. Her expertise
in workers' compensation law, coupled with a compassionate
approach, has earned
her a reputation as a trusted advisor and advocate for injured workers.
Mylinda's leadership is characterised
by a strong dedication to client-centred
services and a drive to improve access to justice for all. PHONE: (03) 6216 7677
EMAIL Mylinda@workerassist.org.au.
Worker Assist Tasmania
is an organisation dedicated to providing vital
support to workers navigating the complexities of the workers' compensation
To see updates on the work that we are doing in the area, check out our
Facebook page: https://www.facebook.com/WorkerAssistTasmania.
WorkerAssist Tasmania,
Annual Report: Reflection
See for example N Bucci,
‘Saying no has an enormous impact’: overwhelmed community legal
centres forced to turn away
The Guardian
(6 November
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2022/nov/06/saying-no-has-an-enormous-impact-overwhelmed-community-legal-centres-forced-to-turn-away-clients>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (20 KB)
PDF format (3.21 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter