URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bollen, Rhys --- "The Slow Journey Towards a Global Regulator" [2008] MqJlBLaw 11; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 255
The Slow Journey Towards A Global Regulator
Introduction
Current International Financial System
Recent Market Turmoil
What is Needed for Stability?
Current State of International Financial Regulation
Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
The Financial Stability Forum
What is a Global Financial Regulator?
Form and structure
Why we Should have Some Sort of Global Regulator?
RISKS OF A GLOBAL REGULATOR
Accountability
Lack of competition
Sovereignty and Adoption Issues
Sovereignty issues
National interest
How we might move towards a Global Regulator
Possible model
How to achieve adoption?
Prudential regulation
Conduct and market regulator
Summary and Conclusion
Slow Journey Towards A Global Regulator
Introduction
“Internationally, global capital markets would
ideally have global regulatory norms – or at least more co-operation
authorities.”
Much has been written in recent years about the international
financial system. Financial services are highly internationalised, perhaps
than most industries. This may be more in spite of the international system than
because of it.
While today’s financial markets are globally interconnected, for the
most part they are regulated and supervised at a national
The international financial
system “is wholly different from that which the Bretton Woods institutions
were designed to support”.
good times, this is not a great concern for most participants. However, in times
of financial stress, these weaknesses come to
It takes a serious crisis for
participants to seriously consider wholesale reform to the system. Let us hope
that the current crisis
results in some practical improvements and that the
passion for reform does not wane before the changes are made. Fundamental reform
at the international level, involving significant decisions about granting power
to an international body, is only likely during
or soon after a major
Accordingly to
The Economist
, there are few new financial reform ideas
under the sun. Further, to be “taken seriously, such ideas must pass two
tests. They
must be an improvement on the status quo, and they must stand a
chance of being implemented. Most radical blueprints fail on both
This paper will
discuss the international financial system and its recent difficulties, current
international regulatory measures,
how a global regulator might be established
and some of the issues involved.
International Financial System
Financial services have been a global activity since
ancient times. International finance was largely trade-based in those times.
the last 400 years, international financial services have expanded to include
investment, lending and insurance.
Towards the end of WWII, the allies realised that a new financial system
would be required in the post-war period. Two of the then
most respected
economists, White and Keynes, met together as part of a broader conference on
the post-war financial system. This
resulted in the creation of the
International Monetary Fund and World Bank, and recommended an International
Trade Organisation.
In the last two decades, the internationalisation of the financial system has
grown exponentially.
Since the late
1970s, most countries have floated their currency and removed their capital
controls, resulting in much more open
financial sectors and allowing for massive
international capital flows.
The financial services industry is a global
phenomenon.
Difficulties in one
country affect financial markets on the other side of the globe.
“Contagion-related spillovers from national,
regional and global crises
are the downside of financial
globalization.”
country’s exchange rates, interest rates and capital flows are beyond the
complete control of their national government,
which poses some interesting
political and sovereignty
“Just as no man is
an island, no investor today is only a domestic investor. … The
internationalization of the world’s
securities markets is a
Countries do not
have the freedom to choose whether the international financial system will
affect them; they do, however, have some
choices about the terms on which they
participate in the global system.
There are many benefits from the globalisation of the financial sector. For
example, it provides access to deeper and more liquid
capital markets for
businesses and investors, and a resulting reduction in the cost of
Empirical research
confirms “that capital market integration is associated with a lower cost
of equity capital”.
Market Turmoil
Economic activity is by its nature cyclical. Markets
‘overshoot’, resulting in periods of high growth, increasing asset
and commodity prices and falling unemployment; followed by periods of low
growth, decreasing asset and commodity prices and increasing
unemployment.
The movement of funds from one investment opportunity to another, into and
out of countries, can have a highly destabilising effect
on asset and commodity
prices, exchange rates and interest rates (and therefore production, employment
and living standards).
years, international finance appears to have exacerbated international financial
instability, particularly for emerging
Recent years have seen a number of significant crises in the international
financial system. These include the Asian financial crisis
in the late 1990s,
defaults by Brazil and Russia in 1999, and the collapse of hedge fund Long-Term
Capital Management also in 1999.
In the last twelve months the international financial system has suffered from a
‘credit crunch’, as lending and liquidity
has contracted worldwide
following problems in the US sub-prime market. The issue has spread to most
fields of lending, including
the bond market and inter-bank
“Financial crises occur with monotonous regularity, and are followed
just as regularly by demands for a new
architecture.”
In the last
60 years “there have been numerous calls for new institutions, new rules
or a ‘Bretton Woods
The calls rise
during and at the end of each crisis, but appetites for change diminish when
things return to normal.
does not take away from the fact that the international financial system is
unstable and practical steps can be taken to improve
is Needed for Stability?
The international financial system does not have some
of the protections built into most national systems. Almost all nations have
set of rules covering the financial sector, bankruptcy regime, lender of last
resort and financial regulator. These are all missing
to some extent in the
international system.
the event of a rapid development of financial markets, the same regulatory tasks
required in national markets will be needed
internationally.”
sovereign bankruptcy regime and global lender of last resort have been discussed
elsewhere, but are beyond the scope of this
Most countries have a set of rules governing participation in the financial
These cover who may
offer financial services, what disclosures must be made to investors, how firms
must be run and an independent
dispute resolution system.
The rules governing the international financial system are currently
incomplete. A number of international standards have been agreed
regulators that guide their general approach and encourage
consistency.
Further, regional
groupings such as the EU have established detailed rules governing many aspects
of financial services.
Most countries have one or more specialist government bodies supervising the
financial sector. They administer sector-specific rules
and oversee the
institutions, particularly those with systemically important holdings of
deposits and other funds.
regulators require institutions to maintain a capital buffer,
and closely monitor their financial safety and soundness. This is in
recognition
of the political importance of minimising failure in these systemically
important institutions and maximising the stability
of the banking
A broader range of financial institutions are supervised through a less
intensive licensing and disclosure regime in most countries.
This includes a
fundraising regime covering issues of securities to the public, and supervision
of financial markets (eg stock exchanges)
and professional financial services
firms (eg stockbrokers). This is often known as a conduct of business or market
regulation regime.
Currently there is no international prudential or market regulator. There are
a number of standard setters at this level, and some
coordinated action at least
in regional groupings.
State of International Financial Regulation
A number of international governing bodies are
involved in the international financial system, but none yet resemble an
international
section describes the status quo for the international regulatory
organisations.
The Bretton Woods institutions have evolved as the international financial
system has developed over the last 60
For example, the IMF has
moved from exchange rate monitor, to adviser to emerging markets and
“providing more money more quickly
to countries hit by capital-market
Bank for International
Settlements (BIS)
Central banks have taken on a regulatory role in
many jurisdictions, so it was not surprising that “BIS should drift into
activities”.
serves “a kind of regulatory/supervisory function by providing a forum for
the world’s central banks in their efforts
to effectuate, first, the goals
of Bretton Woods and later in their bank management
functions”.
“BIS, CBS and various related committees (such as the Joint Forum on
Financial Conglomerates) … form a kind of amorphous
international
conglomerate of bank regulators. When BIS and/or the other groups are mentioned
as a potential world financial authority,
it is really this body that is being
referenced.”
A number of important standard-setting and coordination
committees are hosted by BIS. They include the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision and the Committee on the Global Financial System. BIS also provides
a secretariat function for the Financial Stability
Forum and the International
Association of Insurance Supervisors. These committees are a combination of
standard-setting and coordination
committees; two forms of global regulation
referred to below.
The Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision
The Committee is a forum for regular cooperation on
banking supervisory matters. It is heavily involved in standard setting and is
best known for international standards on capital adequacy (the
), the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision and the
Principles for the supervision of banks' foreign establishments
The first Basel Accord was introduced in 1988 to strengthen the capital
position of internationally active banks following the Herstatt
Bank collapse,
which revealed “that banks were woefully under-capitalised … in
America, Europe and
As a result, the
US regulators in particular wanted to ensure their banks substantially improved
their capital position, but in a
way that did not unduly disadvantage them
vis-à-vis their major competitors. The Accord required banks in member
countries to
hold adequate capital (based on fairly simplistic
The Accord has been recently revised and is now a more comprehensive minimum
standard for capital adequacy. Basel II aligns regulatory
capital requirements
more closely to the broad range of risks that banks
It also pays greater
attention to market transparency and cooperation between national
regulators.
Even thought the Committee has only 12 member countries, the Accord has been
adopted by over 100 countries, including many emerging
markets. It has been
described as one of the most successful regulatory harmonisation projects ever,
at least in the commercial
There is also talk of
“an insurance Basel before long”, in recognition of the success of
the Basel Accord.
The Committee has also focussed on “broad supervisory standards and
guidelines”.
It developed
best practice supervisory rules that national regulators could implement in a
locally appropriate way. The Concordat
established the widely accepted home-host
providing that
“[h]ost authorities are responsible for the operation of foreign banking
establishments within their territories
as individual institutions, while parent
authorities are responsible for them as part of larger banking
The Financial
Stability Forum
The Forum was formed in April 1999 to promote
“international financial stability through information exchange and
international
co-operation in financial supervision and
surveillance”.
up of national authorities (central banks, prudential regulators, government
representatives) international organisations
(eg IMF) and international
regulatory institutions (eg Basel
Committee).
Its role is to
“co-ordinate the efforts of these various bodies in order to promote
international financial stability, improve
the functioning of markets, and
reduce systemic risk”.
The International Organization of Securities
Commissions (IOSCO) is the key “international standard setter for
securities markets”
and its members together regulate more than 90% of the
world's securities markets. Its primary standard, “Objectives and
Securities Regulation
”, covers responsibilities of
regulators (including effective enforcement and cooperation) and minimum
standards for issuers,
collective investment schemes, market intermediaries and
secondary markets.
IOSCO provides a system of assessment of member state adoption of these
principles (the “Principles Assessment Methodology”)
and has also
adopted a multilateral memorandum of understanding to facilitate cross-border
enforcement and exchange of information
regulators.
Further, IOSCO
provides comprehensive technical assistance to its members, in particular those
that regulate emerging markets.
There have been calls for Basel-style international minimum standards for
securities firms. “For firms operating in the securities
business, there
are no internationally agreed minimum capital standards, although most national
regulators impose rules of their
Efforts to negotiate
standards along the lines of the Basel Accord through IOSCO have not been
successful yet.
Siew argues that momentum is building for harmonised securities regulation
internationally, referring to IOSCO’s:
“core set of non-financial statement disclosure requirements known as the
International Disclosure Standards (IDS), which would
allow issuers to rely on a
single disclosure document as an ‘international passport’ to capital
raising and listing in
more than one jurisdiction at a time. The IDS was in turn
to be implemented by the membership through domestic legislation, and it
garnered support from some key national regulators, including the US SEC which
has adopted it in relation to foreign issuers
as part of US federal securities
The IMF ‘oversees’ the international
monetary system and ‘monitors’ the economic policies of its 185
surveillance role, IMF “provides an expert assessment of economic and
financial developments” and “advises
on risks to stability and
growth and if policy adjustments are
warranted”.
surveillance program in this context, the Financial Sector Assessment
“aims to increase the effectiveness of efforts to promote the soundness of
financial systems in member countries. Supported
by experts from a range of
national agencies and standard-setting bodies, work under the program seeks to
identify the strengths
and vulnerabilities of a country's financial system; to
determine how key sources of risk are being managed; to ascertain the sector's
developmental and technical assistance needs; and to help prioritize policy
responses. Detailed assessments of observance of relevant
financial sector
standards and codes … are a key component of the FSAP.”
The IMF is a direct creation of national governments, rather
than national regulators.
The US SEC is already the “de facto global
regulator” for some areas of fundraising, such as the global oil
The US is by far the
largest capital market, giving it huge market power and the ability to impose
its own unique regulatory
requirements.
reported to have said “[f]oreign issuers should understand that the
provision of information is the only requirement
that must be fulfilled to trade
here. Our market is open to all; information is the
Attempts by the US SEC to “set itself up as a global regulator”
are resisted overseas, particularly in other highly developed
markets such as
For “all the
huffing from national regulators, however, international companies are likely to
accept the [US] rules with good
grace. It is, after all, their own choice to
raise money in American capital
is a Global Financial Regulator?
There are a number of possible types and forms of
international regulation. They vary in terms of the level of intervention in
affairs and impact on national sovereignty.
At the simplest level are international
standard-setting bodies. These have been established in many fields, including
post, telecommunications,
airlines, shipping, international payments and
meteorology. National regulators often group together with their foreign peers
discuss standards, swap knowledge and otherwise cooperate (a process known as
‘neofunctionalism’).
International standards are less likely to offend national sovereignty, and
have been developed for many financial services. Some
believe they provide the
best balance between sovereignty and global regulation. The downside is that
“[i]nternationally agreed
standards are often too vague to mean much.
… Even the most specific standards can be evaded in spirit, if not in
be effective, standards must be closely aligned with
incentives.”
Basic rules have been set dealing with interactions between regulators (eg
memoranda of understanding about cooperation, information
sharing and joint
activities).
Attempts have also
been made to harmonise rules on topics of shared interest, but with mixed
success. The rules governing (for example)
issuing of securities to the public
are generally set at a national level. However, international standard-setting
for bank capital
requirements has been very successful.
Functional cooperation usually involves some agreed standards. For example,
international telecommunications is only possible with
agreement about
interconnection methods and phone number protocols.
At the next level is international
coordination
of activities. As
discussed above, regulators coordinate their work through organisations such as
IOSCO and BIS. This is in recognition
that many transactions are international
and national regulators must necessarily cooperate to achieve their national
Increasingly national regulators are formalising these coordination
arrangements. For example, ‘colleges’ have been formed
regulators dealing with internationally active financial institutions. These are
working groups comprising regulators from
the jurisdictions in which the
financial institution operates.
“The FSA, for example, is able to regulate only Citigroup's British
activities, but it will have a much better chance of doing
it well if it knows
enough about the health of the firm
worldwide.”
Going beyond
groups, regulators have begun to develop agreed coordination
approaches on a forward-looking basis. The key example is the home-host
under the Basel Concordat and implemented in the
The challenge is how to ensure consistent and robust implementation of
international standards by national regulators. A combination
of surveillance
(by an international regulator or by peer regulators) and incentives is
For example, the IMF and
World Bank sometimes tie funding to a country to “its standards of
disclosure and the safety of its
An even more
effective incentive is mutual recognition and market access. The US Federal
Reserve will not let a bank open a branch
in the US unless its home regulatory
regime is sufficiently robust.
“Similarly, British financial regulators carry out more frequent and
detailed inspections of the British subsidiaries of banks
from countries whose
supervisory standards are considered
This creates
incentives for domestic regulators (and their governments) to ensure robust
domestic regulation (otherwise their internationally
active firms cannot trade
freely overseas).
A third form of global regulator is a body supervising and coordinating
national regulators.
combination of the above concepts – it presupposes international standards
and agreed cooperative approaches. A form
of federal approach, it involves a
central body supervising and possibly directing national regulators. Examples
here include the
US Federal Reserve banking system, the EU’s coordination
committees for banking and
securities,
and the Basle Accord
Implementation Group.
its informal approach, the Basle Committee has already developed methods of
ensuring its members apply the regulations it
promulgates.
Siew argues that it is of “utmost importance that an institutional
mechanism” be established to not only produce unified
standards, but to
“(i) monitor the implementation and enforcement of those standards by
national regulators, (ii) resolve disputes
as to interpretation, and (iii) make
changes and adapt the regulations to changing economic and market
conditions”.
‘weak-form’ global regulator might be labelled a “Global
Coordinator”;
argues that this is the most achievable and, on a cost/benefit basis, the
preferable form of international regulator at
this stage.
A fourth form of global regulator, the most complex and involved, would be an
international body that directly regulates participants
in the financial system
(eg an international-level prudential or market regulator). The benefits of such
a global regulator (a ‘strong-form’
global regulator), which would
have “all regulatory and supervisory powers concentrated at the world
level, are increasingly
perceived”.
We do not have
an example of such a regulator as yet.
What form would an international financial regulator
take? This of course is affected by its role and
The Basel Committee, ISOCO, CESR, IMF and ECB are described as international
regulatory organisations today by some
commentators.
However, they each
follow quite different models. The Basel Committee, IOSCO and IMF were
introduced above.
The Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) is a regional
committee of regulators, created by the European central government
bureaucracy.
CESR’s role
is to improve co-ordination among securities regulators, ensure consistent
implementation, supervision and enforcement
of EU securities law, and advise the
EU Commission on law reform
It has its own
secretariat and formally reports to the European Commission. Some have argued
that CESR may lead to an “EU-wide
SEC”. At this stage, the EU member
states do not appear to be ready for an EU-level financial
The European Central Bank (ECB) follows a federal central banking model,
similar to the US Federal Reserve
Since 1 January 1999 the
ECB has been responsible for conducting monetary policy for the euro area. The
ECB has separate legal personality
under public international law. The European
System of Central Banks (ESCB) comprises the ECB and the central banks of
EU Member States.
This federal model was chosen instead of a single EU central bank for a number
of reasons. The ECSB builds on the experience of the
national central banks,
including their “institutional set-up, infrastructure, expertise and
excellent operational
capabilities”.
Further, it
gives financial institutions a local point of presence, rather than having to
refer to a Frankfurt-based organisation
for day-to-day
The rationale for a
federal central banking system in the US is presumably similar.
Why we Should have
Some Sort of Global Regulator?
An international regulator offers a number of
advantages over the status quo. A global regulator, even in its mildest form,
greater harmonisation.
The many and varied existing rules increase overall compliance
While these are borne
predominantly by internationally active firms, it affects most countries.
Divergent rules increase the cost
of offering services internationally, thus
decreasing cross-border activity and reducing the range of services available in
country. Complying with a new set of rules decreases the attractiveness of
offering services in a new country, reducing the total
number of firms that will
offer services into each country. These increased compliance costs and reduced
economies of scale are a
loss of welfare shared by all
A uniform set of
disclosure rules, for example, should lower the cost of capital to firms
A global regulator minimises the risk of a ‘race to the bottom’.
It is well documented that regulators tend to reduce
their requirements to
attract global firms into a local
Many commentators fear a
‘race to the bottom’ with all jurisdictions offering lower and lower
levels of regulation to
entice internationally active firms to operate there. A
global regulator would provide a strong bulwark against such tendencies.
benefits all, as a race to the bottom is likely to result in sub-optimal
regulatory settings.
A lack of consistent and robust regulation is generally accepted as one of
the causes of the current financial
instability.
A global regulator,
however imperfect, is reasonably likely to result in a better regulated
international financial system and lower
volatility.
“maximize financial stability between the developed and the emerging
markets in such a way as to maximize world
productivity”.
emerging markets).
Global firms need a global regulator; much like national firms need a
national regulator.
“financial businesses are becoming increasingly interrelated and
cross-border, their regulation and supervision should also
be carried out on a
unified and global
pointedly asked:
“Who regulates Citigroup, the world's largest and most diverse financial
institution? With its operations in over 100 countries,
selling just about every
financial product that has ever been invented, probably every financial
regulator in the world feels that
Citi is, to some degree, his problem. …
in a sense nobody truly regulates Citi: it is a global firm in a world of
and sometimes sectoral watchdogs. The same is true of AIG, General
Electric Capital, UBS, Deutsche Bank and many
The need for a single “international bank regulator is
increasingly
acknowledged”.
OF A GLOBAL REGULATOR
Accountability
One basic issue is how to ensure that a global
regulator is politically accountable. National regulators are accountable to a
responsible
minister, government department or parliament. This is an important
measure in ensuring that the regulator serves the public interest,
decisions are subject to adequate checks and
The normal way to create accountability is to ensure that an agency is
subject to judicial oversight, that its senior management are
appointed and its
budget is set through the political system, and that it is accountable to an
elected government. Some of these
are not possible at this stage for an
international regulator, but others are. For example, there is no reason in
principle why its
decisions cannot be subject to independent judicial review.
Another possible measure is to adopt a federal model, possibly with a
membership-based governing body. The international regulator
could be governed
by an assembly of national finance ministers or regulators. This could provide
the international regulator will
an accountability mechanism, at least at a
policy level. Obviously, each national regulator would have to be subject to the
regulator in relation to its local affairs. But together with other
national regulators it could influence the overall policy of
the federal
A federal-style international regulator is most likely to develop at a
regional level to start with. For example, a federal financial
regulator for the European Union has been under discussion for many years. In
that context there is an appropriate range
of accountability measures, including
European-level responsible ‘ministers’, courts and a parliament.
Lack of competition
Competitive forces help keep a regulator
accountable, dynamic and
A variety of
regimes allows countries to compete for financial firms and investors, thus
encouraging creative competition for the
regime that produces the best business
and investor outcomes at the lowest cost. Full harmonisation and a single
regulator would
necessarily reduce the potential for regulatory competition to
improve the rules.
view, without this “rivalry from market regulators elsewhere, [a global
regulator] would also be likely to turn out
a bad steward of the
The competition theory has been strongly criticised, however. One criticism,
the ‘race to the bottom’ argument, has been
discussed earlier.
Another is that the assumptions underlying the competition theory are unlikely
to ever be satisfied in
A related risk for a global regulator is that the regime it administers will
tend towards a ‘mediocre’ lowest-common-denominator
model. That is,
to achieve global agreement on standards and processes, the necessary
compromises might lead to a poor
Sovereignty
and Adoption Issues
The most difficult issue is not so much whether an
international regulator would be beneficial, but whether in the practical
of world politics national governments are likely to subscribe to
The key issue is
incentives. Do the benefits of subscribing to an international regulatory system
exceed the costs? What incentives
would be needed to encourage national
governments to subscribe to an international regulatory system?
Agreement on international financial regulatory reform is possible, but the
low prospect of unanimous agreement to transfer power
to an international
organisation suggests that such a “change would have to be reached
gradually and over the course of
argues that the journey towards a global regulator is likely to be slow and
through incremental steps.
Designing the ideal financial system involves three competing goals –
“continuing national sovereignty; financial markets
that are regulated,
supervised and cushioned; and the benefits of global capital
These goals
form the “‘impossible trinity’ that underlies the instability
of today’s global
architecture”.
According to
The Economist
“coherent reform proposal must favour two parts of the trinity at the
expense of the third. … Those who wish to maintain
sovereignty and yet
allow capital markets to integrate must accept an entirely free market at the
global level. Those who want capital-market
integration and global regulation
must forfeit national
sovereignty.”
Most politicians will baulk at trading-off any one of the three
completely – hence, the most likely and achievable plan is one
three are achieved in part, but none are abandoned completely.
Sovereignty
At its simplest, sovereignty is the ability of a
body politic to independently determine its own laws and policies. Sovereignty
what “endows a government with the power to regulate the affairs of a
well-defined territory and its resident population without
interferences from
organisations or individuals external to the
Any form of regional or global regulator involves a transfer of sovereignty
to some extent. For example, EU Member States transferred
some of their domestic
sovereignty to the EU as part of Economic and Monetary
However, as the
‘owners’ of the EU, the citizens of the EU member states arguably
merely transferred sovereignty from
one body politic of which they are part to
another. This transfer of sovereignty was not a loss of absolute sovereignty,
but a change
of relative sovereignty between the member states and the central
EU institutions.
“Through this approach, a country relinquishes national sovereignty over
money in return for a share in the supranational
sovereignty.”
of sovereignty by member states in the progress towards international regulation
can be balanced by the gains to their citizens
in terms of the greater
international economic power of the regional block, and greater economic
performance and stability.
The key issue is whether the ‘cost’ of this transfer of
sovereignty is made up for by the benefits to the government and
concerned. Traditionally, nations such as the US have been reluctant to give up
sovereignty to international institutions,
in part on the basis that the
expected benefits do not exceed the perceived
Is signing up to a given proposal for international
regulation likely to be in the national interest of a given country? This
depends both on the proposal and on the country in question. The
interests of a large developed country (eg the US) may be different
interests of a small developing
Traditional international relations theory assumes that nation states act in
the international realm according to their perceived
interests – of the
country, ruling class, and general
Some types of
international cooperation easily meet the national interest test: as discussed
earlier, functional cooperation in areas
such as post and telecommunications is
well-accepted. In other areas, whether a given proposal is attractive depends in
part on the
likely behaviour of other states.
Good regulation, or at least the perception of good regulation, can reduce
the cost of capital for firms. Demonstrating that a country
has adopted robust
regulatory standards can itself be difficult and costly. One way to achieve this
is to adopt internationally prominent
and independently verifiable standards of
good regulation. This allows a country to reliably signal that it has robust
Some international standards and rules are clearly beneficial as and of
themselves, regardless of how many other countries also subscribe.
For example,
numerous academic studies have shown that robust disclosure and fundraising
standards lower the cost of capital for
Regardless of
whether neighbouring countries also subscribe to a robust set of rules, any
given country has a strong incentive to
we might move towards a Global
This section suggests a possible model for
regulation of the international financial system. It looks at the issue in a
ways – the types of rules and functions needed, types of body
that could be used and their connection with national systems.
A global regulator clearly needs a set of rules to enforce. While in theory
they could enforce a myriad of local rules, the most effective
approach would be
for them to supervise some international standards. While the rules need not be
exhaustive, they need to cover
basic authorisation, operational and conduct
issues for the regulated institutions and markets. For example, most
“commentators agree that the ideal response to the globalisation of the
securities markets would be the development of international
standards for
accounting, auditing and disclosure by issuers. Under such a model, a common
prospectus would be developed that would
set forth agreed-upon international
standards for all world-class companies. Similarly, if there were international
standards concerning
capital adequacy, customer protection, principles of
business conduct and insurance of customer accounts, financial institutions
could freely establish worldwide, and be governed by such international
regulations.”
At this stage, the starting rules would probably be a
combination of the Basel banking rules (the Accord and Concordat), and a
and robust set of securities rules (building on the IOSCO principles
and multilateral MOU).
Fontecchio also suggests that the Global Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS)
might be an avenue to achieve greater
harmonisation.
A suggested model for international regulation in the short term is:
• two separate agencies – a prudential regulator and a market
regulator (ie a ‘twin peaks’
• carrying on the functions of standard setting, and coordinating and
supervising the national regulators (ie a ‘Global
Coordinator’);
• (to start with) regionally-based on federal
How to achieve
Another key issue in the literature is adoption
– how do you get the countries of the world to subscribe to such a
change to the regulation of the financial system? While most
commentators agree that the architecture of the financial system needs
overhauled, there is no consensus about what changes should be made and great
scepticism about how to get nations to sign-up.
Many, including
The Economist
, argue that the majority of nations have
to join to make the reforms
bang’ approach is necessarily difficult. It assumes that a critical mass
is needed before any of these changes
would be viable. Is this a classic
gridlock situation like many international problems – is it worth
subscribing only if you
are confident most other participants will subscribe?
Like international climate change, critics argue there is not much point signing
up to a reformed international system unless most other (or at least the major)
players also subscribe. This creates massive inertia
and leaves many concluding
that reform is unlikely.
This paper argues a contrasting position: incremental change
possible and should be pursued. While for many international issues broad
collective action is necessary, some aspects of international
regulation can be advanced incrementally. The nature of the regulatory problems
and the incentives mean that small groups
of countries can advance harmonisation
and co-regulation measures on a step-by-step
Each country benefits
from the co-regulation, so do not have to wait for a large number of
subscribers. (Obviously a small number
is needed to share the set-up costs.) And
each additional subscriber increases the benefits to existing subscribers and
the overall attractiveness of the system to newcomers – thereby
increasing the potential growth and adoption of the system.
For example, although the Basel Accord has no legal force (sometimes called
‘soft law’), domestic regulators and banks
cannot in practice ignore
the Accord (even in non-member countries). Ignoring the Accord risks
“being regarded by major international banks and their financial
authorities, including the BIS itself, as ‘unattractive’
with whom to do business. And they know that in this global economy, they can
not afford to develop their activities in isolation.
Therefore, BIS’s
recommendations are regularly adopted not only by the central banks which are
members of the Bank, but also,
interestingly, in almost all non-member central
This is true for wealthy western countries as well as developing
It is also true
for other standards, such as the anti-money laundering
The Basel Accord was based at its core on a compromise position between the
UK and US. This was enough to motivate the G10 + 2 to
And since then the vast
majority of countries have adopted the Basel Accord. There was no need for most
countries to subscribe before
the Accord was viable. The Accord was attractive
of itself – the incentive set encouraged nation-states to subscribe.
rules became a global standard not because they were issued by
CBS’s initiative, but because an internationally accepted standard
adopted them because they were inherently sound (and allow domestic regulators
to demonstrate robust regulation to an international
audience). The Chinese
banking regulator reportedly said they are planning to draft regulatory rules
and operational guidelines in
line with the requirements of the Basle Accord as
they “have long been studying ways to improve the existing capital
supervision
Felsenfeld and Bilali explain, “when a country accepts a CBS opinion, it
is not surrendering its sovereignty; it is exercising
Why was this so? Sound prudential regulation is rewarding for the domestic
regulator and government – politically and economically.
regulators have a strong incentive to maintain a sound prudential regime. This
tends to lower the risk that its citizens
will experience economic and financial
loss from banking problems. Pattison explains, “self-interest and other
factors explain
why more than 100 countries have agreed to accept these [Basel]
standards”.
It also lowers the cost of capital for domestic businesses. A well regulated
banking sector is more likely to earn the confidence
of foreign lenders, who
will (all other things being equal) be willing to lend to domestic banks at a
lower interest rate which can
be on-lent to domestic businesses at a competitive
rate, thus encouraging local economic activity. There is a strong positive
to ensure local banks are soundly
Regulation based on an international standard increases this effect. For the
international lender, a major issue is how easily they
can verify that banks in
a given country are well regulated. This is partly a perception issue, as
perfect information is unlikely
to be available. The cost of assessing a
bank’s soundness is reduced if you know that bank is regulated according
to the international
standard. This means the cost of lending to that bank is
lower; therefore the interest rate offered to that bank is likely to be
This is a further incentive to regulate soundly and according to the
international benchmark.
“BIS relies on market conditions to discipline banks and protect
consumers. In the end, national bank regulators have little
choice but to
implement the recommendations in part or in whole as “global
standard” rules. Implementation of the BIS’s
recommendation should
not be seen as a legal burden, but rather as a necessary requirement to reduce
risks and failures in the business
of banking. National financial authorities
should be especially attentive in developing countries, which need to increase
their cooperation
in implementing the standards provided by the
In the securities regulation field, a number of mechanisms
encourage bilateral or multilateral harmonisation and cooperation. In
fundraising,
each country has an incentive to facilitate its issuers raising
funds offshore, and may be willing to allow foreign issuers to raise
locally if adequate investor protection can be satisfied (as it allows local
investors greater
opportunities).
This tends to
encourage mutual recognition approaches, where similarly regulated countries
permit foreign issuers to raise funds
locally on a reciprocal
Mutual recognition allows two countries to assess each other’s regimes,
and allow each other’s firms to enter the local
market and raise capital.
These arrangements generally pass the national interest test, as provided the
regulatory regimes are substantially
equivalent, each country’s investors
get access to greater investment opportunities and their firms get access to
broader capital
This can be adopted on a regional scale, as has been demonstrated in the EU.
There the securities and banking regimes rely on a combination
standards and mutual recognition. Minimum regulatory standards are imposed by
directive which each member state is obliged
to adopt. Each member state is
obliged to:
“recognise disclosure documents which fulfil the minimum standards and
which are approved by the regulatory authority of another
member state.
Accordingly, the EU Plan embraces, to a certain extent, both the concepts of
commonality and reciprocity, crucial ingredients
of an appropriate harmonisation
Similar approaches have been taken in the US/Canada and
Australia/New Zealand
This has led to some collective standards on fundraising disclosure,
particularly in the accounting field. A key aspect of fundraising
disclosure is
robust financial accounting, and this is obviously affected by the quality of
the accounting rules. In an effort to
reduce costs for internationally active
businesses and facilitate international fundraising, national accounting
standard setters
have collaborated on International Accounting Standards (IAS).
It may also lead towards a passporting approach, where issuers are
able to raise
funds in the jurisdictions of all participating countries provided it has
complied with the disclosure laws of one
This is a hybrid of
mutual recognition and minimum standards, and has been implemented in the EU in
a number of financial services
fields. The IOSCO ‘International Disclosure
Standards’ could conceivably be used this way in the
Prudential regulation is the aspect of global
financial regulation with the greatest early prospects. Each country benefits
prudential regulation, and from regulation according to a prominent
international standard. Further, prudential regulation is an
activity subject to
clear economies of scale. For these reasons, there is a realistic possibility
that an international prudential
regulator could be established on an
incremental basis.
Prudential regulation can be established on a user-pays
The industry can be
levied for the ‘service’ of prudential regulation, giving the
international prudential regulator
a viable financial base.
Prudential regulation is increasingly seen as independent of the day-to-day
business of government and carried on by an independent
regulator. Admittedly
there would be some loss of sovereignty involved in delegating to an
international regulator, but this should
be partly ‘repaid’ by a
greater ability to signal robust regulation (ie by an even more independent,
better resourced
regulator).
Prudential regulation is also the area where the internationally agreed
standards, both on substantive and coordination issues, have
already been
established in detail. Together, this means that the loss of sovereignty
involved for the national government is reduced.
As discussed, a federal model is probably a realistic solution to minimise
sovereignty issues – at least as a preliminary measure.
“A two-tier system of supervisory responsibilities has taken over the
supervision of international financial institutions.
National authorities rule
at the local level; supranational institutions are finding their places
globally. A division of competence
between national and supranational
supervisory entities will be honed and pruned until the supranational authority
will be a formal,
Regional prudential regulation is a possible first step. For
The Economist
reports that “American and British officials
are keen to install a transatlantic
In this author’s view, an international prudential regulator is
achievable. The current closest model is the
It is conceivable that,
combined with elements of IMF and secondees from national regulators, the BIS
could evolve into an international
financial regulator. As discussed above, this
need not happen in one step or even rapidly; nations could gradually adopt the
international
prudential regulator as their regulator, either for all of their
banks, or just their internationally active ones. “As [the
BIS] continues
to mature and as its edicts are increasingly accepted throughout the world, it
will continue to approach its rightful
place as the world’s bank
regulator.”
and market regulator
Market and conduct regulation has reasonable
prospects of viable international regulation. In the early stages, regional
is probably most likely, rather than moving straight to a global
As with prudential regulation, numerous academic studies demonstrate that
each country benefits from sound market regulation, and
from regulation
according to a prominent international standard. Like prudential regulation,
market regulation is subject to clear
economies of scale and can be established
on a user-pays model.
Market and conduct regulation is also increasingly carried on by an
independent regulator, rather than a ministerial government
department.
Admittedly there
would be some loss of sovereignty involved in delegating to an international
regulator, but this should be partly
‘repaid’ by a greater ability
to signal robust
regulation.
Unfortunately, international standards are less developed in the area of
market and conduct regulation. While the IOSCO principles
are broad in scope,
they are not detailed enough to readily allow for implementation by an
international regulator. Much detail is
still left to national regulators at
International financial market regulation is most likely in one of two ways.
One is fundraising, where disclosure requirements are
somewhat more detailed at
the IOSCO level, together with the IAS. The other is regional regulatory models,
where small groups of
countries with similar political and regulatory history
band together to set up regional securities rules and a regional
As with an international prudential regulator, a federal model is probably a
realistic solution to minimise sovereignty issues in
market regulation. This has
been a successful model in the EU, as discussed
Unlike the situation with prudential regulation, there is not such a
well-developed starting body that might naturally evolve into
an international
market regulator. The most likely candidate at this stage is IOSCO. Siew
suggests a ‘Global Coordinator’
be adopted in the financial market
regulation field “as the equivalent of the World Trade Organisation. The
IOSCO, with its
wide membership of national regulators, is well poised to
transform itself to adopt such a
However, IOSCO would need to change drastically before it could evolve into
an international regulator. In the short to medium term,
it is more likely that
IOSCO will continue to coordinate international standards and cooperation, but
that moves toward supranational
market regulation will develop at a regional
level. For example, CESR, the US/Canada and Australia/NZ systems could more
realistically
evolve into regional supranational regulators in the foreseeable
and Conclusion
Much has been written in recent years about the
international financial system, its weaknesses and how it should be reformed.
the UN and other international bodies, it tends to take a serious crisis
before the establishment or reform of such vital institutions
is agreed to
(sometimes known as a ‘San Francisco moment’, after the unique
post-WWII climate in which the UN was established).
The Bretton Woods
institutions were established in such a unique
We hope that the
current financial market crisis results in some practical improvements to the
This paper discussed the international financial system, current
international regulatory measures, how a global regulator might be
established
and some of the issues involved. It set out some suggested gradual steps towards
global financial regulation and analysed
the process by which they might be
achieved in the light of the political issues involved. Some suggest that this
is natural evolution
“proceed to hard law and a single law of international bank regulation. It
need not be given mandatory direction; it need not
be subjected to theory. There
will continue to be new needs. They will be given new solutions. International
bank regulation will
in this manner continue to approach, finally to reach, the
goal of a single mandatory supervisory
structure.”
However, even a regional supranational regulator may be beyond
the political appetite at present. The current financial market crisis
probably not sufficiently severe, and the supporting inter-governmental
frameworks not sufficiently developed to support it. In
the words of
“Eventually, more dramatic change is bound to come. … in a couple of
decades the global financial architecture will look
substantially different from
today, not because a more enlightened set of politicians has designed a Bretton
Woods II, but because
the system has naturally evolved along a different route:
regional integration. By 2020, … there will be global regulatory
standards, supervision—and, more importantly, crisis-management—will
increasingly take place at the regional level. The
IMF will still be there, but
mainly for countries that have remained outside regional blocks. An implausible
idea? Not compared with
some of the other blueprints
Rhys Bollen LLM
(Cambridge), Grad Dip Comm Law (University of Sydney), BBus LLB (Hons) (UTS).
This article is based on a paper originally
prepared for Professor Ross
Buckley’s UNSW LLM course “International Financial System –
policy and regulation”.
The views in this article, including any errors or
omissions, are the author’s only. This article is based on the law as at
The Economist,
“Barbarians at the vault”, 17 May 2008, p15 (Asia edition).
John Fontecchio, “The
General Agreement on Trade in Services: Is it the answer to creating a
harmonised global securities
North Carolina Journal of
International Law and Commercial Regulation
, at 119-120.
The Economist, “Time for
a redesign?”, 28 January 1999
[http://www.economist.com/surveys/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_TRPRRS, viewed
30 April 2008] Ross Buckley, “The institutional
weaknesses in the
international financial system” (http://ssrn.com/abstract=975015, accessed
15 April 2008), at 3.
The Economist, “Time for
a redesign?”
The Economist, “A wealth
of blueprints”, 28 January 1999
[http://www.economist.com/surveys/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_TRPJDV, viewed
30 April 2008].
Dilip Das “Globalization
in the World of Finance: An Analytical History”
Global Economy Journal
Volume 6, Issue 1 2006 Article 2 (
http://www.bepress.com/gej/vol6/iss1/2
Ross Buckley, “How the
International Financial System, to its Detriment, Differs from National Systems,
and What We Can Do
Hong Kong Law Journal
Mervyn King, “Through
the looking glass: reform of the international institutions” (2007)
Australian Business Review
123, at 123; David Zaring “International law by
other means: the twilight existence of international financial regulatory
organisations”
Texas International Law Journal
282-3; Guan Siew, “Regulatory Challenges in the Development of a Global
Securities Market – Harmonisation of Mandatory
Disclosure Rules”
Singapore Journal of Legal Studies
, at 173; Uri Gieger,
“The case for the harmonisation of securities disclosure rules in the
global market”
[1997] Columbia Business Law Review 241
, at 243; Ken Henry,
“Mutual Recognition of Financial Services Regulation: Opportunities and
Challenges for Australia-Address
to the ASIC Summer School” 18-20 February
2008, Melbourne
[http://www.treasury.gov.au/contentitem.asp?NavId=008&Content
ID=1346, viewed 30 April 2008]; Fontecchio, at 115.
Buckley, “How the
International Financial System, to its Detriment, Differs from National Systems,
and What We Can Do About
It”, at 322.
Nicolas Veron,
“Strengthening Europe’s Capital Markets”
[http://www.princeton.edu/~smeunier/VeronCapitalMarkets.pdf , viewed 30 April
2008], at 4.
Das, at 12; Garri Hendell,
“International harmonisation efforts in securities and banking
regulation”
American Society of International Law
Proceedings
, at 398-399.
Carl Felsenfeld and Genci
Bilali, “The role of the Bank for International Settlements in Shaping the
World Financial System”
Fordham Law School Occasional Papers
no 1, at 97; Dilip Das, at 8-9.
Gieger, at 247; IMF
Surveillance Factsheet - October 2007
[http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/surv.htm, viewed 4 May 2008].
Veron, at 4; Gieger, at
258; Luzi Hail and Christian Leuz, “International Differences in the Cost
of Equity Capital: Do Legal
Institutions and
Securities Regulation
Wharton Financial Institutions Centre
[http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=437603, viewed 30 April
2008], at 25; Henry speech.
Hail and Leuz, at 25.
The Economist, “A
wealth of blueprints”; Ken Henry speech; Ross Buckley, “The
institutional weaknesses in the
international financial system”, at 4.
IMF, “Global
Financial Stability Report – Market Developments and Issues”,
September 2003 [http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/GFSR/2003/02/index.htm,
viewed 4 May 2008].
Buckley, “The
institutional weaknesses in the international financial system”, at 4.
Henry speech.
The Economist,
“Bankers' trust”, 24 April 2008
[http://www.economist.com/finance/displaystory.cfm?story_id=11088888, viewed
4 May 2008]; The Economist, “Too soon to relax”,
[http://www.economist.com/opinion/displaystory.cfm?story_id=11293916, viewed
30 April 2008].
The Economist, “Time
for a redesign?”, 28 January 1999
[http://www.economist.com/surveys/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_TRPRRS, viewed
30 April 2008].
The Economist, “Time
for a redesign?”; Felsenfeld and Bilali, at 134.
The Economist, “Will
it fly?” Apr 3rd 2008.
http://www.economist.com/finance/displaystory.cfm?story_id=10970799
Nicolas Veron, at 1.
Buckley, “The
institutional weaknesses in the international financial system”, at 3; The
Economist, “A wealth
of blueprints”; Buckley, “How the
International Financial System, to its Detriment, Differs from National Systems,
What We Can Do About It”, at 321.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
Buckley, “How the
International Financial System, to its Detriment, Differs from National Systems,
and What We Can Do About
It”, at 323, 332.
Buckley, “The
institutional weaknesses in the international financial system”, at 3;
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at 109.
See ‘Current state of
international financial regulation’ below; Hendell, at 410.
eg pension schemes and
Financial System Inquiry,
http://fsi.treasury.gov.au/
viewed 30 April 2008).
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
109; see below under ‘Current state of international financial
regulation’.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
King, at 124-125.
The Economist, “Time
for a redesign?”
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
BIS “About the Basel
Committee” [http://www.bis.org/bcbs/index.htm, viewed 3 May 2008]
The Economist,
“Stronger foundations”, 18 January 2001
[http://www.economist.com/finance/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_QSRRGT, viewed
30 April 2008]; The Economist, “Sweeter Basle”,
18 January 2001,
[http://www.economist.com/opinion/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_QSRVVG, viewed
30 April 2008]; Felsenfeld and Bilali, at 8-9; Rhys
Bollen, “The legal
nature of international payments”
Das, at 14; Governor
Laurence Meyer, “Issues and Trends in Bank Regulatory Policy and Financial
Modernization Legislation”,
at the Bank Administration Institute, Finance
and Accounting Management Conference, Washington, DC, June 9, 1998;
Griffith-Jones
and Spratt, “Will the proposed new Basel Capital Accord
have a net negative effect on developing countries?” Institute
Development Studies, University of Sussex (
http://www.ids.ac.uk/ids/global/finance/intfin.html
Cem Karacadag and Michael Taylor, “Toward a New Global Banking Standard:
The Basel Committee's Proposals” IMF Finance
and Development, December
2000, Volume 37, Number 4; US FRB, “Capital Standards for Banks: The
Evolving Basel Accord”
Federal Reserve Bulletin September 2003, 395;
Susanne Lütz, “Beyond the Basle Accord: Banking Regulation in a
Multilevel Governance”, International Studies Association 41st
Annual Convention, Los Angeles, March 14-18, 2000; Phong Ngo,
“International Prudential Regulation, Regulatory Risk and the Cost of Bank
Capital”, The Australian National University
Working Papers in Economics
ad Econometrics, 23 May 2006, at 1-2; Felsenfeld and Bilali, at 49-50.
L. Jacobo Rodríguez,
“International Banking Regulation - Where’s the Market Discipline in
Basel II?” Policy
Analysis no 455 (15 October 2002),, at 1; Felsenfeld and
Bilali, at 10.
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbsca.htm.
Rodríguez, at 1; John
Pattison, “International Financial Cooperation and the Number of
Adherents: The Basel Committee
and Capital Regulation (2006)
Open Economies
Volume 17, Numbers 4-5 / December, 2006; Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
42; Penelope Hawkins, “Financial liberalisation and global
governance:
Role of international entities - South Africa and Basel II” FEASibility
(Pty) Ltd, March 2007
[http://www.ibase.org.br/userimages/FLGG%20-%20Penelope%20Hawkins.pdf, viewed
20 April 2008], at 15.
The Economist, “The
regulator who isn't there”, 16 May 2002
[http://www.economist.com/surveys/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_TTTJJTT,
30 April 2008].
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
50; Zaring, at 281; Richard Parlour, “The regulation of global trading and
investment”
Journal of International Banking Law
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
50; Zaring, at 291.
FSF “Financial
Stability Forum” [http://www.fsforum.org/home/home.html, viewed 3 May
2008]; The Economist, “The
regulator who isn't there”; Carl
Felsenfeld and Genci Bilali, at 40.
FSF “Who we
are” [http://www.fsforum.org/about/who_we_are.html, viewed 3 May
FSF “Financial
Stability Forum”.
IOSCO, “IOSCO
Historical Background”
[http://www.iosco.org/about/index.cfm?section=history, viewed 3 May
The Economist,
“Regulators’ arbitrage”, 3 May 2001
[http://www.economist.com/surveys/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_VJQPVN, viewed
30 April 2008].
The Economist,
“Regulators’ arbitrage”; Zaring, at 296; Fontecchio, at 122;
Parlour, at 14.
Siew, at 186; The
Economist, “The regulator who isn't there”\
IMF Surveillance Factsheet
- October 2007
[http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/surv.htm, viewed 4 May 2008].
IMF Surveillance Factsheet
- October 2007.
IMF, “Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)” 22 April 2008
[http://www.imf.org/external/np/fsap/fsap.asp, viewed 4 May 2008]; Das, at
The Economist,
“Questions of Oil”, The World in 2008
[http://www.economist.com/theworldin/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_VTVGSVV,
viewed 30 April 2008].
Gieger, at 281-282.
Hendell, at 398-399.
The Economist, “In
[http://www.economist.com/business/displaystory.cfm?story_id=E1_TNRQNGT,
viewed 30 April 2008]; Felsenfeld and Bilali, at 113-114.
The Economist, “In
Zaring, at 287.
The Economist, “A
stitch in time”.
Zaring, at 282-283.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
111; Uri Gieger, at 299, 307.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
107; The Economist, “The next crisis” 17 May 2008, p25 (Asia
The Economist, “The
regulator who isn't there”.
The Economist, “The
next crisis”.
The Economist, “A
stitch in time”.
The Economist, “A
stitch in time”.
Hendell, at 412.
The Economist, “A
stitch in time”.
This also ensures
internationally active financial services firms actively lobby their home
regulators and governments to implement
robust and internationally standardised
regulatory regimes.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
95; David Zaring, at 290.
The Committee of European
Banking Supervisors (CEBS) and the Committee of European Securities Regulators
US FRB, “Capital
Standards for Banks: The Evolving Basel Accord” Federal Reserve Bulletin
September 2003, 395,
[http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2003/03bulletin.htm,
April 2008], at 402.
Zaring, at 290.
Siew, at 188-189.
Gieger, at 299; The
Economist, “A wealth of blueprints”.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
Zaring, at 285.
CESR, “CESR in
[http://www.cesr-eu.org/index.php?page=cesrinshort&mac=0&id=, viewed 4
Veron, at 4.
Veron, at 4.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,, at
ECB, “ECB, ESCB and
the Eurosystem”
[http://www.ecb.int/ecb/orga/escb/html/index.en.html, viewed 4 May 2008].
ECB, “The Eurosystem
– organisation”.
ECB, “The Eurosystem
– organisation”; Felsenfeld and Bilali, at 133.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
John Fontecchio, at
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
117; Gieger, at 302.
Gieger, at 307; Veron, at
6; Siew, at 183.
Hendell, at 398, 401.
Siew, at 179-180; Zaring,
at 283; Gieger, at 290; Ngo, at 4, 27; Veron, at 5.
Fontecchio, at 117.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
123; Das, at 13.
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at
Buckley “The
institutional weaknesses in the international financial system”, at 3.
Clive Briault,
“Revisiting the Rationale for a Single National Financial Services
Regulator”, Financial Services Authority
Financial Services Authority
Occasional Paper No. 16 (2002)
[http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=427583, viewed 20
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
at 110, 121; Buckley, “The institutional weaknesses in the international
financial system”, at
16-17; Siew, at 173-174; Lütz speech; Buckley,
“How the International Financial System, to its Detriment, Differs from
National Systems, and What We Can Do About It”, at 331.
The Economist,
“The regulator who isn't there”.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
at 118; Gieger, at 299; Zaring, at 327; The Economist, “A wealth of
blueprints”.
The Economist,
“The regulator who isn't there”.
Siew, at 174;
Rodríguez, at 17-18; Gieger, at 268-269; American Enterprise Institute
“The Advantage of Competitive Federalism
Securities Regulation
Press release, December 17, 2002.
The Economist,
“Coming together” 16 March 2008
[www.economist.com/opinion/PrinterFriendly.cfm?storyid+5630519, viewed 30
April 2008]; The Economist, “The regulator who isn't
Siew, at 179-180.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
at 118; Gieger, at 299.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
at 120; The Economist, “A wealth of blueprints”.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
The Economist,
“Time for a redesign?”
The Economist,
“Time for a redesign?”
The Economist,
“Time for a redesign?”
Daniel Drezner “On
the balance between international law democratic sovereignty”
Chicago Journal of International Law
Roger Geobel,
“European Economic and Monetary Union: will the EMU ever fly?”
Columbia Journal of European Law
Daniel Drezner, at
Robert Mundell,
“Monetary Union and the Problem of Sovereignty” (2002) 579
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science
123, at 141.
Buckley “The
institutional weaknesses in the international financial system”, at 16-17;
Zaring, at 327; Gieger, at 299;
Felsenfeld and Bilali, at 113-114; Hendell, at
411; The Economist, “Repairs begin at home” 31 January 2008,
[http://www.economist.com/research/articlesBySubject/displaystory.cfm?subjectid=348936&story_id=10608407,
viewed 20 May 2008].
Fontecchio, at 131.
Fontecchio, at 131.
Hendell, at 408.
Gieger, at 271; American
Enterprise Institute; Hail and Leuz, at 3; Christian Leuz “The benefits of
transparency: Disclosure
regulation and cost of capital” From the
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business
[http://www.chicagogsb.edu/capideas/Jul06/1.aspx,
viewed 20 April 2008]; Zhihong
Chen, Dan Dhaliwal, Hong Xie, “Regulation Fair Disclosure and the Cost of
Equity Capital”
November 2006
[http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=930724, viewed 20 April
2008], at 1-2.
Hendell, at 411.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
at 129; Zaring, at 303.
Fontecchio, at 116.
Clive Brialt, (1999),
“The Rationale for a Single National financial Services Regulator”
Financial Services Authority,
Occasional Paper Series, No. 2, May, at 24.
ie, along the lines of
the ESCB or US Federal Reserve System.
The Economist,
“Repairs begin at home”.
Buckley, “The
institutional weaknesses in the international financial system”, at 16-17;
Buckley, “How the International
Financial System, to its Detriment,
Differs from National Systems, and What We Can Do About It”, at 332.
Eg the UNIDROIT
Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment (Cape Town, 2001)
[http://www.unidroit.org/english/conventions/mobile-equipment/main.htm,
20 April 2008].
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
www.fatf.org.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
at 131-132; Lütz speech.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Pattison; Felsenfeld and
Bilali, at 68.
Siew, at 271; Felsenfeld
and Bilali, at 68.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Hendell, at 398-399.
Siew, at 183; Gieger, at
298-299; Henry speech; Zaring, at 175; Hendell, at 412.
Henry speech; Hendell,
Siew, at 185.
Gieger, at 268; Henry
speech; Veron, at 7-9; Fontecchio, at 129-130.
Zaring, at 177; Hendell,
at 398-399.
Zaring, at 186; American
Enterprise Institute press release.
Eg the UK Financial
Services Authority (
www.fsa.gov.uk
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (www.apra.gov.au).
Hendell, at 408.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
The Economist,
“The next crisis”.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
Siew, at 183; Gieger, at
307; eg the UK Financial Services Authority.
Objectives and
Principles of
Securities Regulation
, Principle 2.
Hendell, at 408.
Hendell, at 412.
Siew, at 185.
Siew, at 188-189; Cf
Fontecchio, at 123.
Siew, at 184; Gieger, at
268; Henry speech; Fontecchio, at 129-130.
The Economist, “A
wealth of blueprints”.
Felsenfeld and Bilali,
The Economist,
“Time for a redesign?”.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (260 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter