URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AdminRw/2010/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:44:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dreyfus, Mark --- "Whistleblower Protection for The Commonwealth Public Sector" [2010] AdminRw 4; (2010) 59 Admin Review 14
Whistleblower protection for the Commonwealth public sector
Whistleblowing
Who should be covered?
What should be protected?
What protections should be available?
Third party disclosures
Organisational culture
Whistleblower protection for
the Commonwealth public sector
Mark Dreyfus QC,
When the Rudd Government was elected in November 2007 it had already
committed itself to high standards of integrity, transparency,
responsiveness
and accountability. Since the election a range of measures have been introduced
with the intention of ensuring high
standards of accountability and integrity
within government.
As part of these reforms, in July 2008 the Attorney-General—on behalf
of the then Cabinet Secretary, Senator the Hon. John Faulkner—asked
House of Representatives Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee to inquire
into and report on whistleblowing protections
in the Australian Government
public sector. As chair of the committee, I oversaw the inquiry and presented
the resultant report to
the House of Representatives in February 2010. In this
contribution to
Admin Review
I take the opportunity to provide an
overview of the committee’s recommendations and offer some observations on
an agenda of accountability and transparency in government.
Protection of public interest disclosures is part of an array of integrity
reforms that are being carried out by the Government. It
is useful to outline
some of the reforms so far.
• For the first time integrity and governance functions have been brought
together under a single minister, the Cabinet Secretary
and Special Minister of
State. This includes the agencies of the Commonwealth Ombudsman, the Privacy
Commissioner, the Australian
Public Service Commissioner, the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security, the Auditor-General and the National Archives of
• The Government has introduced the
Evidence Amendment (Journalists’
Privilege) Bill 2009
, which amends the professional confidential relationship
provisions in the
Evidence Act 1995
by inserting an objects clause
stating that the object of Division 1A is to achieve a balance between the
public interest in the
administration of justice and the public interest in the
media communicating facts and opinions to the public and, for that purpose,
having access to sources of facts.
• The Government has introduced legislation containing the first stage of
reforms to the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
, including the abolition
of conclusive certificates.
• On 29 March 2009 the Government released an exposure draft of its FOI
reform legislation. This represents the most substantial
overhaul of the federal
freedom of information regime since the Act’s inception. The structural
reforms proposed in the draft
legislation—including the appointment of an
Information Commissioner and an FOI Commissioner—will bring about a major
change in FOI administration and are directed at creating a
‘pro-disclosure’ culture.
• In April 2009 the Special Minister of State wrote to all agency heads to
advise them that the starting point for considering
FOI requests should be a
presumption in favour of giving access to documents.
• The Government has strengthened the Standards of Ministerial Ethics and
introduced for the first time a Ministerial Staff
Code of Conduct, and on
July 2008 a Lobbying Code of Conduct came into force.
• The Government has established the Public Service Ethics Advisory
Service to work with all Australian Public Service agencies
to increase ethical
awareness and improve decision‑making capabilities.
• In the case of electoral and party fundraising, the Government has
proposed measures aimed at lowering disclosure levels
and thus increasing
transparency, although these measures are yet to be passed by the
The purpose of each of these reforms is to increase
openness, accountability and transparency in the Commonwealth Government.
Openness, accountability and transparency in government are important for at
least two reasons. First, application of these principles
confidence in our system of government—public confidence in people’s
elected representatives as well
as public confidence in the Public Service.
Second, these principles lead to better outcomes in public policy and
administration.
Whistleblowing
Protecting whistleblowing—or public interest disclosures—is part
of this broader integrity framework and should be an
essential feature of any
modern democracy.
The Whistle While They Work project defined whistleblowing as
‘disclosure by organisation members (former or current) of illegal,
immoral or illegitimate practices under the control of their employers, to
persons or organisations that may be able to effect action’.
the Commonwealth is the only Australian jurisdiction that does not have
legislation dedicated to facilitating public interest
disclosures and protecting
those who make them.
The House of Representatives Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee was
asked to consider and report on a preferred model for
legislation designed to
protect public interest disclosures within the Australian Government public
sector. The committee sought
submissions from Commonwealth and state and
territory agencies, non-government organisations, relevant professional
associations,
media bodies, unions, academics, and whistleblowers themselves. It
also held 11 public hearings, in Melbourne, Canberra, Sydney and
Brisbane. The
hearings included two roundtable discussions, one with public administration
experts, lawyers and academics, held on
9 September 2008, and the other with
representatives of media-related organisations, held on 27 October 2008.
The committee’s primary recommendation was that the Australian
Government introduce legislation to provide whistleblower protections
Australian Government public sector and that it do so as a matter of
As a starting point, the committee recommended a number of principles it felt
should guide legislation aimed at protecting whistleblowers:
• It is in the public interest that accountability and integrity in public
administration are promoted by identifying and responding
to wrongdoing in the
public sector.
• People working in the public sector have a right to express concerns
• People have a responsibility to raise those concerns in good faith.
• Governments have a right to consider policy and administration in
• Government and the public sector have a responsibility to be receptive
to concerns that are raised.
Who should be covered?
Limited protections against victimisation and discrimination are provided to
Australian Public Service employees who report breaches
of the APS Code of
Conduct under current whistleblower provisions
Service Act 1999
). It is of note, however, that only two-thirds of the
232 000 Commonwealth public sector employees are in the APS and covered by
these whistleblower provisions. Employees of organisations subject to the
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997
are at present excluded.
Among these organisations are the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the
Australian National University.
Former employees, contractors, consultants and
the staff of members of parliament are also excluded.
The committee recommended that the categories of people who could make
protected disclosures be expanded to include Commonwealth public
employees who are currently excluded. It also recommended that a person who has
an ‘insider’s knowledge’
of official misconduct be deemed a
public official for the purposes of the legislation. This could include a
volunteer or an employee
of a state government entity who has inside information
What should be protected?
Evidence presented to the inquiry revealed strong support for the types of
disclosures outlined in the inquiry’s terms of reference.
The committee
recommended that, with one exception, all those disclosures be protected. The
exception was for ‘official misconduct
involving a significant public
interest matter’: the committee refrained from recommending this because
significance or seriousness
might not be something that is immediately obvious,
and making a report conditional on significance or seriousness could set too
high a threshold and discourage people from coming forward.
In keeping with the evidence received, the committee considered that
grievances about internal staffing are not matters that concern
‘public interest’ and should be dealt with through separate
mechanisms such as existing workplace personnel processes.
What protections should be available?
The committee recommended that the legislation provide for protection against
detrimental action—including victimisation, discrimination,
discipline or
an employment sanction—and immunity from civil and criminal liability.
Unfair treatment of whistleblowers is a workplace matter that should be dealt
with through existing industrial relations law. Some
limited protections are
provided in the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
and, since 1 July 2009,
Fair Work Act 2009
Industrial relations law might provide better protections for whistleblowers
than a unique scheme. This is why the committee recommended
that the right to
make a public interest disclosure be recognised as a workplace right, and
infringements of that right ought to
be dealt with by the relevant workplace
authority, which is now the Fair Work Ombudsman.
Compensation and the existing rights of whistleblowers are to remain within
the types of compensation and rehabilitation provisions
available to employees
generally; mediation and dispute settlement would also be within the scope of
provisions available to employees
If a person does not come within the jurisdiction of the industrial courts or
tribunals—for example, a member of the Defence
Force—the Workplace
Ombudsman may still investigate and issue an evidentiary certificate that
adverse action has occurred.
The committee came to the view that the main condition that should apply when
determining whether a disclosure is protected is the
honest and reasonable
belief of the whistleblower. It also came to the view that decision makers
should have discretion to protect
a person who materially fails to comply with
the procedures for making a disclosure if that person has nonetheless acted in
faith in the spirit of the legislation.
The proposed public interest disclosure scheme aims to minimise the
disincentives for people to make disclosures. As a result, penalties
sanctions should not apply to those who do not follow the prescribed procedure
or knowingly or recklessly make false allegations.
Removal of protection in
these circumstances is sufficient.
The committee also considered the merits of adopting a US-style reward system
for whistleblowers, such as the ‘
’ provisions in the
False Claims Act. On balance, it concluded that such a reward system would not
contribute to the objects
and purposes of the legislation. In the
committee’s view, it is appropriate to provide for compensation to restore
to the position they would have been in were it not for adverse
treatment arising from making a disclosure. The legislation should
any existing legal rights in relation to damages.
Research shows that the vast majority of disclosures made are made
internally. Legislation should encourage the making of disclosures
agencies because of the agencies’ proximity to the subject of the
disclosure and ability to effect action. The Committee
recommended, however,
that the new legislation provide avenues for making disclosures to specified
external agencies, such as the
Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Public Service
Commissioner, in cases where people consider on reasonable grounds that their
would not be handled properly within their own agency.
The success of the new legislation depends on the extent to which people
within the public sector have confidence in the system, and
positive obligations
on agencies are an important source of confidence. The legislation should
include strong positive obligations
on agencies receiving, acting on and
reporting disclosures.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman has a reputation for and skills and experience in
handling investigations into serious and sensitive public
interest–type
matters and, in the committee’s view, is therefore the most suitable
agency to oversee the administration
of the legislation. The committee
recommended that the Ombudsman have new statutory responsibilities under the
scheme, including
monitoring the system, providing training and education, and
reporting to parliament on the system’s operation. The committee
proposed that the Ombudsman be able to publish reports on matters in the public
interest that are raised under this scheme.
Third party disclosures
Since the committee’s report was tabled in Parliament in February 2010
much of the public discussion about the proposed reforms
has centred on the role
disclosures to third parties should play in the framework and what protections
should be extended to those
making such disclosures.
When determining the appropriateness of protecting disclosures made to third
parties—particularly the media—the primary
consideration must be how
such disclosures could serve the public interest. If a form of disclosure cannot
promote accountability
and integrity in public administration or otherwise serve
the public interest, the disclosure does not warrant protection. Affording
protection for disclosures made to the media in specific circumstances could act
as a safety valve when particularly serious matters
take too long to resolve
inside the system and in the case of matters that pose an immediate threat of
serious harm to public health
The committee recommended that members of parliament be recognised as
authorised recipients of public interest disclosures. This would
complement the
limited protections already afforded those who provide information to
parliamentarians under the
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
.The Standing
Orders of each House should be amended to ensure that members act responsibly in
relation to the disclosures to which
they become party.
Disclosures should also be protected when they are made during the course of
seeking assistance from legal advisors, professional
associations and
People are much more likely to make disclosures within their own agency or
through other prescribed channels. The proposed scheme
recognises that people
can sometimes have good reasons to turn to third parties for advice or to make a
disclosure.
An important principle for the new public interest disclosure legislation the
committee recommended is that government has a right
to consider policy in
confidence. The committee therefore recommended that protection not apply if it
is established that a person
has ‘leaked’ confidential information.
Whistleblowing is distinct from leaking, whereby a person covertly provides
information
directly to the media with the intention of embarrassing government.
Under the committee’s proposals unauthorised disclosures
of this nature
might not be eligible for protection.
Leaking breaches the trust between the Public Service and the executive.
There could also be unintended consequences—among them
implicating people in charges of misconduct, putting incomplete or erroneous
information into the public arena, and incorrectly
anticipating that government
has determined it will follow a particular course of action.
The media lacks a structured and rigorous system for investigating and
assessing the risks of publishing a disclosure. It is not in
the public interest
that internal investigations be undermined or that workplace confidentiality be
breached. In recent times we
have seen Australian media organisations do the
• publish the details of a forged email that the journalist in question
had not seen and that had simply been read to him on
• break a news embargo by announcing the Deputy Prime Minister’s
visit to Iraq before she had arrived there—an
action that could have had
serious security ramifications
• report on a high-level security operation that involved the raiding of
19 houses and the arresting of several people on terrorism-related
before the operation had been completed. Early release of this report could have
endangered the lives of those involved in
the operation.
media seems to have even more trouble identifying the public interest, as
exemplified by the controversy that erupted in July
2009 in relation to media
organisations engaging in large‑scale hacking into the mobile phones of
celebrities, politicians
and political advisers.
A free and independent media with access to information is a crucial part of
a modern democracy. There are countless examples of wonderful
work done by the
media in exposing corruption and maladministration. But the media is not, and
cannot be, a formal part of the official
public integrity framework. We do need
to find a role for the media in the public interest disclosure regime, but that
role is likely
to be a limited one.
Organisational culture
Missing from much of the discussion of whistleblower protection has been the
need to build a pro-disclosure workplace culture. This
was a strong theme in the
evidence the committee received, but it has attracted almost no public comment
since the tabling of the
Whistleblower protections are needed only when systems have failed to take
public interest disclosures seriously, when systems have
failed to deal with
such disclosures, and when employees making disclosures have suffered
repercussions as a result of making the
disclosure.
It is obviously preferable for employees to have disclosures treated
appropriately and sensitively at the time they make the disclosure,
rather than
having to take remedial action to return themselves to the position they were in
before making the disclosure.
Many who participated in the inquiry noted that there is in the public sector
a strong culture that militates against those who question
work practices.
Organisational culture is as important as legislation in producing the desired
outcome of facilitating public interest
disclosures and supporting those who
The committee recognised that legislation alone is insufficient to bring
administration. There
is also an important role for leadership and education in promoting a more
supportive environment, one in which
people feel at ease when expressing their
doubts about workplace practices.
A crucial recommendation of the committee is that the Commonwealth Ombudsman
be given responsibility for providing assistance to agencies
implementing the
public interest disclosure system. The committee felt this should occur by
promoting awareness among employees through
educational activities and through
an anonymous and confidential advice line.
Legislation to protect whistleblowers in the Commonwealth public sector is
long overdue. I look forward to legislation based on the
report of the House of
Representatives Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee being introduced into
the parliament soon.
Following is the edited text of
a paper presented by the Chair of the House of Representatives Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Committee,
Mark Dreyfus QC, MP,
at the National
Administrative Law Forum, ‘Administrative Law Reform’, Canberra, 6
August 2009.
Freedom of Information
(Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Act 2009
force on 7 October 2009.
The Government announced its
response to the report on 17 March 2010. The response envisages a scheme which
ensures there are processes
in place, and protections offered, to support
appropriate reporting of wrongdoing in the Commonwealth public sector:
www.smos.gov.au/publications/2010/pms_20100317.html
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (51.1 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter