URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:03:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gill-Leslie, Robyn --- "What Do We Do with All This Dying?': South African Time, Space, and Place in Forensic Evidence" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 17; (2025) 14(2) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 96
Social Movements as Triggers of Transgenerational Transmission of Trauma
and Memory in Chile
Karla Henríquez
Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium
Nicolás Alberto Pinochet Mendoza
Université Paris 8, Vincennes Saint-Denis, France
Geoffrey Pleyers
Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique/Université catholique de
Louvain, Belgium
Fedra Sonia Cuestas
Universidad de Los Lagos, Chile
Activism; gender; memory; social movements;
Introduction
Chilean dictatorship, led by Pinochet from 1973 to 1990, was among the most
violent regimes in Latin America. It claimed 40,000
direct victims, including
tortured, executed or disappeared political prisoners (Comisión Nacional
sobre Prisión Política
y Tortura, 2011). Fifty years after the
coup and the start of the violent repression, demands for justice and memory
continue. Since
the end of the dictatorship in 1990, public policies, civil
society organisations, and social movements have sought justice for victims
political violence and the recognition of the crimes that have been committed.
Civil society organisations have played a leading
role in the visibilisation and
public recognition of the systematic human rights violation, torture, and state
violence by the dictatorial
regime. They have also implemented multiple
initiatives to transmit the memory of state violence and human rights abuses to
generations. Their impacts and the challenges they face have been the
focus of scholarly literature in Chile (Jara et al., 2018;
Lira, 2020), South
America (Espinoza et al., 2024; Jelin, 2021; Tamayo, 2022), and worldwide (e.g.,
Hepworth, 2019; Hirschberger,
2018; Maystorovich Chulio, 2022).
In Chile, most research has focused on the progress and limitations of
institutional efforts to acknowledge the state’s responsibility
rights abuses, disappearance, torture, and murders of opponents to the
dictatorship (for a synthesis, see Cubillos-Vega,
2023). In this article, we
argue that the transgenerational transmission of memory and the re-elaboration
of traumas resulting from
state violence are not solely carried out by civil
society organisations in countries that experienced a dictatorship several
ago. Using Chile as a case study, we illustrate that social movements,
whose claims and demands do not focus on human rights abuses
or the memory of
the dictatorship, also play a crucial role in this process. Our approach
integrates individual, social, and collective
dimensions of the
intergenerational transmission of memory by combining insights from social
psychology, psychoanalysis, and social
movement studies. We show how these
movements produce spaces and situations where conscious and unconscious trauma
originating in
state political violence are unveiled, transmitted to the next
generation, and, in some cases, re-elaborated. Street protests and
mobilisations on different issues (education, feminism, opposition to the social
and economic model) have stirred up individual
and family histories. By doing
so, these movements have shown how deeply the lives and subjectivities of many
Chileans and the whole
of Chilean society remained deeply marked by the
dictatorship, including those who grew up after it ended.
Materials and Methodology
Our research drew on qualitative methodologies, combining different sources
of data for an inductive analysis (Taylor et al., 2015).
To elaborate on the
results, we selected sources of information compiled by the Memory and
Resistance research project. First, we
selected seven qualitative interviews
with political party militants and activists who participated in the student
movements (2006
and 2011) or the feminist movement (2018), and a focus group
with six young activists who participated in the 2019 social uprising.
sources were selected because the informants spontaneously related personal
experiences that went beyond their motivations
for participating in the social
uprising. Based on content analysis, we isolated three ways of dealing with this
unveiled memory
and activists’ recent experiences in social protests: the
transgenerational transmission of trauma, clashes between different
socialisations, and processes of subjectivation.
A second set of information sources included official documents, NGO reports,
press releases, and interviews with victims of sexual
political violence
published in the media. We aimed to reconstruct some sections of our informants'
life stories to avoid opening
up memories of traumatic experiences that could
cause secondary damage. These secondary sources of information allowed us to
the ways activists experienced processes of subjectivation.
Subjectivation is understood as the way individuals seek to produce themselves
as the subjects and authors of their personal lives (Bajoit, 2013; Pleyers,
Social Movements and Traces of the Dictatorship
Social movements challenge the interpretation of core values in a society and
seek to transform it (Touraine, 1985). They also transform
the actors who take
part in them (Melucci, 2003), both during the phases of intense protest and when
activists enter an individual
and reflexive phase where they process their
experiences. While most research in social movement studies focuses on political
and outcomes, strategic interactions, and the way claims are framed,
we have paid particular attention to the actors’ subjectivity
2003; Pleyers, 2025; Scribano, 2011) and subjectivation processes. In the field
of social movement studies, the relationship
with memory studies has focused on
highlighting an urban memory that is expressed through social interactions,
collective actions,
and the identity of social movements (Badilla, 2020).
Social movements, collective memory, and activism are related (López
et al., 2024). According to Kubal and Becerra (2014),
social movements play a
crucial role in forming collective memory. They are often
fraught with political and moral importance, they
sustain collective
challenges to political and cultural authority, and they rely on memory to
provide the legitimacy and identity
that comes from continuity with the past.
Unveiling Traces of the Dictatorship
Since the start of the century, Chile has witnessed a series of major mass
protests. These have included the 2001 and 2006 protests
by secondary school
los pingüinos
) and the 2011 mass student mobilisation for
fair higher education and the end of profits in the sector. The country saw a
mass movement
against private pension funds, peaking in 2017 (Miranda, 2021); a
feminist outbreak in 2018; and the “Chilean uprising”
(Henríquez & Pleyers, 2023), bringing millions of citizens in the
street between 18 October 2019 and the COVID-19 lockdown.
The 2011, 2017, and
2019 movements successively broke the records for the largest national protests
since the fall of the dictatorship.
None of these movements focused on the dictatorship, memory, or human rights
abuses. However, the dictatorship remained present in
the background and, as we
will show, these movements have played a significant role in the
intergenerational transmission of the
memory of this violence. They did so in a
collective and visible way; for example, by painting social opponents to the
dictatorship
on the walls of the cities during the uprising. They also
transmitted memory by interpreting the state repression and police violence
suffered as an echo or a resonance of the state violence during the
dictatorship. A less visible, but crucial, mechanism was
also at play in a more
intimate space. The new generation’s political activism and the risk they
faced when confronted with
police violence echoed violences faced by living or
disappeared members of their families, opening spaces for unveiling personal
family stories that had remained untold for decades. While their main claims did
not focus on the dictatorship, human rights
abuses, or memory, these movements
created spaces and social devices where the trauma could be unveiled,
articulated, and processed.
When young activists recounted their experiences as activists in social
movements, they also mentioned experiences in their intimate
lives, their family
relationships, and how tensions arose with some family members when they
participated in protests. A university
student and militant in a political party
recalled the conversations with his mother when she learned he was going out at
paint the movement claims on the walls of the city:
My mum wasn’t as drawn to politics as my
dad and my dad’s side of the family. So for example, what I saw in my mum
more from a stance of fear, you know? Like, ‘What are you getting
yourself into? At what time are you getting back?’
When I'd come back from
painting, for example, you go out to do it at night, so you’d come back
all painted up, and they’d
be like, ‘Hey, this and this could happen
to you. They could take you to prison!’. I remember the first time I was
my mum scolded me hard. But I think it’s always a fear that my
mum might have from a logic that always gets you the same thing:
the people of
the dictatorship and blah, blah, blah, blah. (Young man involved in the student
movement, interviewed in 2015)
Even though the social movements in which the activists and militants
interviewed participated took place years after the end of the
dictatorship, the
experiences of repression suffered by opponents of the dictatorship remained
encapsulated in their collective memory.
The relationship between the police,
who repressed and tortured, and the opponents remained in the memory of the
parents and grandparents
of young people who grew up in democracy and who
participated in the protests. Faced with the possibility of young people being
adults reacted by reliving the fear that their loved ones would suffer
the same experience as opponents during the dictatorship.
This resonates with the experiences of other activists and underlines the
importance of social movements as spaces for the re-articulation
of trauma and
the construction of collective memory. This phenomenon can be understood as a
contextual precipitant of some repetitions,
such as involuntary memories, which
tend to manifest themselves in new generations.
The transgenerational transmission of trauma may manifest through behavioural
and unconscious transmission. This highlights the role
of maternal and paternal
experiences in the upbringing and education of their offspring. This affects
their predisposition to the
content of traumatic histories, as illustrated in
the case cited on fear. Although these movements did not prioritise demands
to memory, they revealed how the lives of Chileans continue to be marked
by the legacy of the dictatorship. In Chile, the 2011 student
contributed to an alternative memory of Pinochet’s dictatorship (Badilla,
2019) and claimed in its slogans that the
protesters defined themselves as a
“generation without fear”. The young activists articulated the
movement's identity
based on the memory of the past and defined themselves as
heirs of a system in conflict that the return to democracy failed to resolve
(Sandoval & Carvallo, 2019). They left behind the fear of demonstrating that
paralysed previous generations who lived through
the dictatorship. Moreover,
they grounded their identity in the resignification of a memory that confronted
the fears that prevented
their parents and grandparents from protesting and from
relating to institutional political issues, even after democracy was
reinstated.
Collective Memory and Trauma
A Collective and Historical Approach to Trauma
Psychologists and psychiatrists have played a crucial role in accompanying
victims of state violence and torture, as well as families
of disappeared and
murdered opponents, to deal with their grief and trauma (Instituto
Latinoamericano de Salud Mental y Derechos
Humanos, 2025). In the past decade,
practices and research have increasingly pointed to the psychosocial effects of
state violence
on individuals of a generation raised after the dictatorship
(Cabrera, 2023; Faúndez, Cornejo & Brackelaire, 2014). Psychoanalysts
have studied symptomatology resulting from the transmission of trauma between
generations (Lira, 2013) and the effects of political
violence on the
construction of the identity of children of direct victims of the dictatorship.
We refer to memory as a method of political articulation of the limits of
state violence, and the exercise of understanding the causes
that provoked the
trauma with which the victims are burdened (Smelser, 2004). Trauma is an
emotional response to a terrible event
that deeply shapes individual
subjectivity and personality (Davoine & Gaudillière, 2004; LaCapra,
2014; Tisseron et al.,
2012). Longer-term reactions include unpredictable
emotions, flashbacks, strained relationships, and even physical symptoms like
headaches or nausea. Research on memory and trauma allows us to overcome
approaches that consider this experience as pathological
and blame the victims
for being unable to overcome their suffering.
Strongly influenced by studies in psychoanalysis, “trauma
studies” have developed an approach to understanding trauma
collective and historical perspective. This contributes to avoiding the
repetition of mass violence, as wounded and diseased
memory leads society to
replace memory with repetition. Scholars such as Feldman (2006; 2023), LaCapra
(2014), and Friedländer
(1992) developed this perspective, asserting that
some psychological and psychoanalytical mechanisms, including trauma, operate
at individual and societal levels regarding repressed history. Indeed,
as Salazar (2006) showed, a significant part of Chile’s
political history
is built on cycles and scenarios of socio-political violence and bloody
repression.
This emerged as a crucial element of the way activists lived their
participation in recent social movements in Chile as a personal
experience, and
why they unveiled unexpected resonance with individual, familial, and societal
trauma. The participants in the 2019
social uprising in Chile who we interviewed
recalled it in different ways. An English teacher who took part in the protests
his work justified the confrontation with the police to “protect
peaceful protesters”. He directly connected the police
repression of the
2019 protest and state violence in the history of Chile:
Four days later, I participated in another
demonstration, without violence. There I suffered a severe aggression ... I
looked to my
left and I saw people running. Some were running to the left,
others to the right, and the carabineros [military police] were in
the middle.
The carabineros shot us in the face. I have scars here [He shows the vertex of
his left eye]. By a hair’s breadth,
I didn’t lose my eye. This
changed me. At that moment, I realised that violence was needed in this
revolution. ... It again
showed that nothing could be achieved peacefully. I
tried the peaceful way, and I was attacked again. What was at matter was
the others, which were me before. ... Finally, after 40 years on this
earth, I found my purpose. (Individual Interview, activist
of the Front-line,
Taking a collective and historical approach to understanding trauma allows
for the identification of more complex social and political
experiences, which
often stem from historical conflicts and traumas (Davoine &
Gaudillière, 2004). Paul Ricoeur (2000)
explored the relationship between
individual memory and collective history, as well as the possibility of
reconciling memory with
forgetting in the construction of both personal and
collective identity. LaCapra (2014) focused on understanding trauma and
violence through a combination of analytical approaches that allowed
consideration of the broader social and political dynamics as
well as individual
and subjective experiences. Both Ricoeur and LaCapra noted that narrating and
writing about trauma allowed exploration
of the complex relationships between
the experiences of the subjective and social dimensions of a community’s
memory, to heal
the traumatic wounds of the past.
Transgenerational Consequences
Trauma caused by political violence has a psychosocial impact that affects
both individuals and groups and their relationships with
one another
(Faúndez et al., 2014). Trauma means injury and psychic trauma refers to
a particular injury that a difficult
experience inflicts on a particular person.
Psychosocial trauma goes beyond this, defined as the non-uniform effects
produced by
the injury or damage across people. The degree and nature of the
damage depends on each individual's experience. It is conditioned
social background, individual personality characteristics, experience, and
degree of participation in the event that caused
(Martín-Baró, 1989). Transgenerational transmission of
psychosocial trauma refers to the process by which
the psychic effects of a
trauma experienced by a previous generation are transmitted to the next
generations (Cabrera, 2023). According
to this perspective, when trauma is not
worked through in one generation, it is “encrypted” and transmitted
to the next
generation through an unconscious process in which traumatic
elements are internalised, commonly in the form of a symptom (Abraham
Torok, 1989). Hence, the transgenerational transmission of psychosocial trauma
raises complex questions of pathological propagation
between the individual and the collective and about what is
considered normal and pathological in institutional
regulations. More
importantly, it is itself a product of the state political violence, as an
indirect consequence.
The transgenerational transmission of psychosocial trauma is an emerging area
of research. Faúndez, Cornejo and Brackelaire
(2013, 2014) conducted
research with children and grandchildren of tortured and political prisoners.
They showed how young people
with no experience of the dictatorship took their
parents’ and grandparents’ traumatic experiences of torture as a
of their own individual identity, even though some had limited knowledge of
their relatives’ suffering. They analysed the crucial
role of the
preservation of memory in the elaboration of familial and personal trauma. These
studies shed light on a long-neglected
issue: the consequences of politically
motivated violence experienced during the dictatorship on children and
grandchildren of the
victims. Young people we interviewed recurrently connected
their parents’ or grandparents’ experience of the dictatorship
their motivation to participate in movements and protests, even if the
protest’s main claim was not connected to state violence
dictatorship. This was made clear by a 25-year-old, who considered the story of
his grandfather as part of his own claim
during the 2019 social uprising:
It happened to me that my mother, who was the daughter of a person who was
detained [during the dictatorship], had a lot of respect
for the armed wing of
society. She always tried to instil in me that you must be respectful and that
not all police officers are
bad. To a certain extent, until before the 18th [of
October 2019, the beginning of the uprising], I shared that idea. But I feel
that, since the 18th onwards, there was such a big social catharsis. All the
social groups urged us to take a stand and say that
we don’t agree with
injustice, and we want to do something about it. At that time, all the armed
institutions remained silent.
(Focus group, 2020, 25-year-old who participated
in the social uprising)
Ximena Faúndez and Ximena Goecke (2015) showed gender differences in
the way families of people who were detained and tortured
dictatorship spoke about the experiences of torture. They identified that when
grandchildren spoke about their grandparents
who suffered political violence,
they tended to focus on the story of the men. Even though both grandparents were
detained, male
grandchildren spoke almost exclusively about the experience of
the grandfather, which is consistent with the lack of visibility of
literature about this period. Despite this, children of surviving political
detainees are committed to the transmission
of memory, based on the experience
of their parents. These children and grandchildren of victims of the
dictatorship transmit the
memory of state violence during the dictatorship among
their peers and to their own children when they are adults, fostering an
in Chilean society (Palma et al., 2021).
Faúndez et al. (2013) found that grandchildren of political detainees
positioned themselves as heirs of a traumatic family
legacy when they
reconstructed their family history. They took this trauma as their own, to the
point that it often became a defining
part of their identity. They were
confronted with feelings of injustice and suffering experienced by their
relatives. In many cases,
they had heard only partial stories from their
relatives, which corresponded to traces on which they reconstructed a painful
They felt personally committed to this painful past, which required them
to take a stance in present days and to project themselves
into the future as
heirs of that history (Faúndez et al., 2014).
In his study, José Cabrera (2023) showed that grandchildren generated
narratives of memory about the traumatic experiences
of their grandparents.
Recognising the loss of those lives allowed them to elaborate on trauma, despite
uncertainty due to information
gaps, silences, and untold stories about their
grandparents’ experiences.
Social movements offering a setting that fosters a reflexive reconstruction
of memory play a crucial role in easing these processes.
A young woman we
interviewed came from a family that supported Pinochet’s military coup. In
her interview, she explained how
she was confronted with the discrepancy between
the story she was told by her family and the one she heard from friends about
crimes under the dictatorship. She became a leader of the student
federation at the time of the 2011 mass protests that called for
change in the
higher education system that was very profitable for private sector
universities. During one of the seminars she organised
during the protests, she
shared one of these eye-opening experiences:
I went to Carmela Carvajal, a secondary school with pupils from all over
Santiago. There, I became aware of other realities that I
didn’t know
Communist Party didn’t exist
anymore, that it had ended during the
Pinochet era, that Pinochet had closed the Communist Party, and that we were all
right-wing.
And I realised that no, it was not the case. I came to know other
realities. One of my friends’ father had been arrested and
detained in
Villa Grimaldi [a torture centre during the dictatorship]. Another friend had
the same with his mother, who was in the
Valech Report [on human rights abuses
during the dictatorship] and things like that. I started to realise everything
that had happened.
When I told my mum, she would tell me: ‘No,
that’s a lie, that’s stuff that people made up but Pinochet never
that’. I had that dilemma until I was 15 years old. (Individual
interview, 2015)
Transgenerational Transmission of Psychosocial Trauma
Research and recent theories about the transgenerational transmission of
trauma have highlighted how traumatic events encoded in family
profoundly influence the lives, identities, and subjectivities of descendants of
direct victims. The damages done by torture,
disappearance, and illegal
detention of political prisoners do not stop with their generation. A legacy of
suffering and trauma is
inherited in multiple ways across generations as these
events trigger psychic responses of future generations. Social activism can
trigger the generation of an intergenerational narrative, which allows to
elaborate on a traumatic memory that was repressed and
created damages for
successive generations.
In a 2015 interview, a student activist shared the problems he faced in his
family when he attended the 2011 student movement protests.
It triggered a
conflict with his grandparents, who strongly opposed his participation in the
protests. This did not make sense to
him until, following an escalation of the
tensions, his grandparents told him a family story that had been silenced: one
sons had suffered torture during the dictatorship. The student
immediately associated the revelation of this suffering and trauma
experience in the ongoing movement:
In 2011 [during the student movement protests], I started to find out about
my family’s history. I realised that it really comes
from a left-wing
tradition since 1910. I had no idea that my great-great-grandfather had been a
socialist party militant. It raised
a kind of personal awareness, but also a
family awareness. ... It made me feel a million things. I started to dig into my
history. I discovered that I had uncles who had been arrested. One of my
uncles was in the national stadium [where the military regime
gathered and
tortured supporters of the Allende government during the coup
d’état] and was tortured ... . The thing
is that after the coup and
up to the 1990s, this was suspended. It was ‘sterilised’. And also
my grandparents, who were
the ones who raised me, didn’t give me that
political training either. They remained always very neutral, perhaps as a
measure. So, when I started to get involved in politics, my
grandfather got upset. Afterwards, he accepted it and recognised it,
were also mobilised in this re-politicisation. (Individual interview 2015)
This quote points to the persistence of untold memories and their involuntary
irruption in the context of social protests. It invites
analysis of contemporary
social protests as spaces where memories of repressive periods arise in
personal, family, and collective
stories. Historical trauma emerges as a psychic
mark of tragic events, revealing a historicity that underlies the present.
Considering the transgenerational transmission of told and untold memories
and trauma through an analytical framework unveils a crucial
dimension of social
movements, their history, and their connections to previous waves of movements.
The connection between today’s
movements and the events that took place
before and during the dictatorship goes beyond ideological continuity and the
transnational identities forged by the interviewees. Other forms of
continuity are revealed in the untold stories and the conscious
or unconscious
transmission of trauma in families. Ideological continuity acts as a signifier
of the unsaid between generations.
In this context, the signifier presents a
double characteristic. On one hand, it is configured syntagmatically. It
acquires weight
and importance from other signifiers explicitly present in
current discourse. On the other hand, it operates in an associative manner,
establishing horizontal connections with elements from the past, which, although
not present in the immediate discourse, are invoked
through associations based
on similarities and differences. This dual character of the signifier manifests
itself in discourses which,
by contrasting and opposing each other, allow for
the emergence of new nominations. This process influences the construction of
at the intersection of family memory and an activist’s
contemporary experience. A concrete example of such was offered by an
activist who took part in the frontline of the protest that confronted the
police forces during the 2019 social uprising:
There was also a change in my mind. I grew up with my father who is a sailor.
He had a different idea of the dictatorship. Hence,
I knew what it was and
everything. I was aware of the deaths but I never felt empathy. But then, when
it all started [the 2019 uprising],
I listened to the songs by Grupo Congreso
that they played in the streets. I listened to the lyrics and I said,
violence and repression of protesters by the police] is what
happened before but louder!’ Then I felt guilty for having ignored
those people who had lost their members of their family. When the curfew was
instated, I would go out to the streets and hide.
We would go and be in the
shadows with other people so that nothing would happen to us. The police were
violent. So, you imagine
we were hiding well because if they caught you, they
would have shot at you. (Individual interview, 2020)
Addressing the transmission of encrypted and silenced content between
generations reveals an unconscious dimension in the dynamics
of activism. The
analytical framework we propose enriches the understanding of transgenerational
transmission of trauma and its relationship
to activism. Combining insights from
psychoanalysis and sociology unveils the link between the representation of
institutions and
affects, which is crucial in understanding how signifiers
emerge in the political narratives of descendants of direct victims of
violence and dictatorships. Acknowledging this dimension implies understanding
that affect plays a crucial role in the process
of activism and social
movements. In this sense, a rhetorical figure such as “catacresis”
(Laclau, 2005), which establishes
a figurative reference to name something
essentially unnameable, provides the support that gives rise to political
signification.
It allows for a linguistic referent that replaces the figure of a
political representative or leadership, thus facilitating the articulation
political claims and the creation of meanings during a social protest
(Barria-Asenjo et al., 2021).
A Gendered Dimension of Trauma
Memory Transmission in Exile
Recent exploratory studies investigating the Chilean diaspora observed the
transmission of trauma in generations born in exile. They
also noted tensions
between daughters and mothers caused by silences during conversations on topics
related to the dictatorship period,
or the will to avoid talking about
“some topics” (De Los Reyes & Mulinari, 2024; Espinoza, 2024).
Over 400,000 Chileans
had to leave the country between 1973 and 1990 (Bolzman,
1993). A gendered study by De los Reyes and Mulinari (2024) focused on the
daughters of Chileans in exile in Sweden. Findings showed some had constructed
their memory on a positive perspective of the political
history of exile and a
negative memory grounded in the silences of the exiled mothers about their
experiences of torture or political
violence during the dictatorship (De los
Reyes & Mulinari, 2024).
Some of these mothers in exile had opted for silence. They avoided talking
generation and shield
them from a memory that would expose them to experiences of torture, trauma,
repression, and pain (De los Reyes
& Mulinari, 2024). Another study with
exiled women living in Spain, France, Norway, Belgium, Sweden, Italy, and the
United Kingdom
(Espinoza, 2024) showed traces of psychological violence in
daughters. They inherited their mothers’ struggles and ideologies,
which they grounded their social activism in social movements and claims for
social justice. Other cases showed a more conflictive
relationship between
generations. Some daughters grew up almost alone due to their mothers’
political commitment in exile.
Some of them blamed their mothers for their
feelings of abandonment and for giving priority to militancy over raising their
Transgenerational Transmission of Sexual
Violence by the State
The Collective of Surviving Women Always Resisting (Colectivo Mujeres
Sobrevivientes Siempre Resistentes, CMSSR) gathers women who
suffered political
and sexual violence during the dictatorship in the torture centre Venda Sexy, in
the city of Santiago. Over time,
other women have joined them to support their
demands and initiatives. The Collective focuses on activism as a way to process
and collective grief by highlighting the sexual dimension of torture
and the gendered dimension of the abuses they suffered.
A 38-year-old member, who participated in the high school student movements
in 2001 and was a founder of the
Feminist Coordination 8 of March
2019, explained that the women survivors of the Venda Sexy had to:
lobby hard in the 1990s and 2000s at the commission for reparations to obtain
the effective recognition of sexual political violence
as a differentiated
mechanism of political violence that was not being recognised at the roundtables
or in the spaces of memory until
then. (Individual
interview, 2023)
At that time, members of CMSSR reviewed records of survivors and observed
discriminatory actions in spaces established by the regime
and political actors
that followed the dictatorship (
la concertación
) in the 1990s and
2000s. They were told that women and men suffered similar violence during the
dictatorship and that there was no
reason to distinguish gender-based violence
reported in survivors’ testimonies. In 2016, the Collective published a
to denounce these omissions:
During the civil-military dictatorship, the vast majority of women who were
kidnapped or detained were subjected to political sexual
violence or sexual
torture in a systematic way and a differentiated manner in relation to male
detainees. This situation was not
explicitly considered by the Commission on
Torture and Political Imprisonment and its specificity has remained invisible,
in generalisations, and subsumed under the category of
‘torture’. Its omission constitutes an additional act of
discrimination
against women by the Chilean state. (La Izquierda Diario, 2016,
The statement addresses, in general terms, the impunity that has prevailed
for perpetrators of crimes against humanity who have violated
the physical and
sexual integrity of women, according to international laws and human rights
principles. It also highlights the persistent
struggle of women calling for the
recognition of sexual political violence as a crime against humanity separate
and distinct from
The institutional recognition and consignment of sexual political violence as
a crime against humanity have remained a weakness in
Chile’s institutional
transitional justice practices. Beatriz Bataszew, a member of the collective of
survivors, Venda Sexy,
recalled that the Rettig Commission established in 1991
focused exclusively on the cases of disappeared and executed citizens (Boche,
2023). Moreover, Bataszew noted that women survivors were only considered as
witnesses able to provide information on the cases in
the report. In 2011, the
second report by the National Commission on Political Imprisonment and Torture
(Comisión Nacional
sobre Prisión Política y Tortura, 2011)
did not include sexual political violence to qualify people as victims from
cases it considered. It limited itself to register only torture and political
imprisonment.
In 2020, after a decades-long struggle by the
Collective of Surviving Women to bring the state to recognise sexual political
against women, the existence of the crimes of aggravated kidnapping and
torment with sexual violence was finally taken into consideration.
sentence was handed down to the Supreme Court Judge Mario Carroza and
subsequently ratified by the Supreme Court in 2023.
This judgement implies that
sexual crimes committed in a systematic and widespread way by state agents
against women who resisted
the dictatorship are considered crimes against
humanity and are thus imprescriptible.
The actions promoted by the Collective of Surviving Women include
performances of public mourning during marches of contemporary movements,
which were the 2011 student movements and the 2019 uprising. They aim to make
visible the consequences of the sexual political
violence suffered by the women
who died. This has been achieved by erecting physical memorials through calls
for participation open
to the public and promoting the submission of testimonies
of witnesses who knew the victims in the different truth commissions.
An activist we interviewed highlighted the importance of a feminist memory
reflecting the degrees of differentiation with which crimes
involving gender
discrimination were carried out and the systematic use of sexual political
violence during the dictatorship and
in times of democracy. She insisted on the
importance of “working on the issue of women’s memory, dissident and
bodies, recognising sexual political violence as such, as a component,
a use, a tool of the states aiming to weaken social processes
movements, to exercise violence” (Individual interview, 2023).
Activists of the 2019 uprising published statements to denounce sexual
violence against women who had been detained during the ongoing
protests. The
campaign and action to make visible and demand the institutional recognition of
the sexual dimension of political violence
during the dictatorship influenced
the National Institute of Human Rights (2019). In its 2019 annual report, cases
of sexual violence
that mainly affected women and girls (53% of complaints,
total sample size
=135) during the
repression of the uprising were specifically reported. Cases included forced
nudity, the presence of police officers
of the opposite sex during stripping,
sexual filming and teasing, cavity searches, touching, threats of rape, and
beatings on the
genitals. In an interview published in 2023 (Boche, 2023),
Beatriz Bataszew, a member of the Women’s Survivors Collective
considered that:
Sexual political violence became a strategy to discipline and silence
students, women, feminised and racialised bodies during the
uprising of October
2019. So far, all the cases remain unpunished. Their omission by the Judicial
System is part of a repressive
strategy conducted by the State. It establishes
the conditions for their repetition and denial.
The visibilisation of political sexual violence by the Collective of
Surviving Women provided support for the denunciations of sexual
committed by police officers against women held in detention centres during the
2019 social uprising.
These cases unveiled the repetition in Chilian history of gender-based
violence perpetrated by the state. Mobilisation to visibilise
this gendered
dimension of repression and sexual violence perpetrated by state agents also
exemplified the care and sisterhood extended
to the transgenerational victims of
similar forms of sexual violence by the state. It opened spaces to heal a
historical wound and
transform it into a process of empowerment that has been
part of contemporary feminist movements.
The Collective of Surviving Women has organised a symbolic thread that
connects past experiences of resistance and struggles, including
dictatorship, with the current feminist movement that advocates for gender
equality and the right to make decisions about
one's own body. This “red
thread of memory”
connects women of different generations and
territories who have faced or denounce sexual violence by the state and organise
life with dignity. This connection through history and generations
supports women in their attempt to cope with the selective and
oversight and invisibilisation of their role in history. By taking part in this
project, they assert their social and
political protagonism and their commitment
to social transformation (González, 2018).
Conclusions
Combining insights from social movement studies,
social psychology, and psychoanalysis, this article has shown the way social
on different issues (education, feminism, opposition to the neoliberal
social and economic model) have stirred up individual and
family histories. They
have opened spaces and social devices where individual, family, and collective
traumas could be unveiled,
articulated, and processed. By doing so, these
movements have shown how deeply individual subjectivity and identity,
the whole Chilean society, remain shaped by state violence caused by the
dictatorship. This includes those who have grown up after
the dictatorship ended
and in cases where this suffering has been silenced. These traumatic events have
left a deep imprint on the
daily lives of Chileans, remaining present in
century social movements, even if these movements do not
primarily focus on memory or human rights violations by the dictatorship.
We acknowledge the limitations of this research and the oblivion of state
violence suffered by populations from different backgrounds.
Further research
will need to address the state violence towards Indigenous peoples, notably
within the Mapuche movement, as well
as Afro-descendant Chilean citizens. This
must consider both the similarities with the cases we mentioned and their
specificities
in the context of Chile’s historical and contemporary state
Implementing an analytical approach to the case studies and building on
interviews with activists from movements that emerged in Chile
between 2011 and
2019 offers theoretical and practical insights for research in psychology and
social movement studies. It also informs
recommendations for the individual,
collective, and institutional treatments of the trauma unleashed by state
violence, notably during
the dictatorship. For research in psychology, this
article has insisted on the need to recognise the effects of trauma in
generations
that were born after the dictatorship. The indirect consequences of
repeated human rights violations continue to impact the lives
of young people
who have grown up in the 21
century, almost 50 years after the
military coup. The cases show that some psychosocial effects of political
violence perpetuate
suffering and shape the psychic and narrative responses of
later generations.
This research aims to contribute to the literature and debate in social
movement studies in two ways. First, it shows that the transgenerational
transmission of trauma connected to state violence constitutes an additional
dimension of the bridges between different generations
of social movements.
Second, it highlights the crucial role played by social movements that do not
focus primarily on human rights
abuse and memory in the unveiling of violence
that has been invisibilised at the family or society levels. This research
the significant role of social movements in contemporary Chile. They
play a crucial role in the encounter between generations, the
construction of
memory, and the unveiling of untold stories and suffering from state repression
during the dictatorship. Social movements
open spaces to express stories of
repression that have remained hidden and to recognise the effects of trauma in
generations that
were born after the dictatorship. These spaces of encounter
allow younger generations to make conscious and process the legacy of
violence, even as their families live the trauma silently, contributing to an
intergenerational narrative that challenges
forgetting and repression. Young
people who have grown up in a democracy and who have participated in social
movements bring with
them experiences of loss that have been silenced by their
families regarding the horrors of the dictatorship.
In terms of political sciences and the research on political institutions,
this research converges with the approaches that connect
the representation of
institutions and affects. This is crucial in understanding how signifiers emerge
in the political narrative
of descendants of direct victims of state violence
and dictatorships. This study also has implications for literature on and
of transitional justice. We hope this research will provide empirical
material and a theoretical approach that strengthen the calls
institutional procedures to generate public policies of transitional justice
that acknowledge the differences of gender,
class, race, and positionality
inherent to political violence.
Acknowledgments
This article was written thanks to the project Memory and Resistance, which
Wallonie-Bruxelles International funded in the framework
of the cooperation
between Chile and Wallonie.
Correspondence:
Karla Henríquez, researcher at Centre for
Interdisciplinary Research on Democracy, Institutions and Subjectivity (Cridis),
Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium.
karla.henriquez@uclouvain.be
N., & Torok, M. (1989).
Corteza y núcleo: Contribuciones al
estudio de la psicología del dolor
. [Cortex and nucleus:
Contributions to the study of the psychology of pain]. Amorrortu Editores.
Badilla, M. (2019). The Chilean student movement: Challenging public memories
of Pinochet’s dictatorship.
Mobilization
https://doi.org/10.17813/1086-671X-24-4-493
Badilla, M. (2020). When a social movement
quarantines: The power of urban memory in the 2019 Chilean anti-neoliberal
Space and Culture
(3), 286–292.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1206331220938632
Bajoit, G. (2013).
L’individu sujet de lui-même
individual as subject of himself]. Armand Collin.
Barria‐Asenjo, N., Žižek, S., Aguilera, R., Cabrera, J.,
Pinochet‐Mendoza, N., Uribe, J., & Letelier, A.
(2021). The return of
Freud’s group psychology. A popular Chilean revolt approach.
Psychotherapy and Politics International
(3), Article e1604.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ppi.1604
Boche, R. (2023). Beatriz Bataszew, sobreviviente de Venda Sexy. [Beatriz
Bataszew, survivor of Venda Sexy].
Revista Desbandada
, 8 October
https://revistadesbandada.com/2023/10/08/beatriz-bataszew-sobreviviente-de-venda-sexy/
Bolzman, C. (1993). Exilio, familia y juventud. [Exile, family and youth]. In
F. Montupil (Ed.),
Exilio, derechos humanos y democracia. El exilio chileno
(pp. 45-51). Coordinación Europea de Comités
Pro-Retorno.
Cabrera, J. (2023). Trauma transgeneracional y
posmemoria entre nietos de víctimas de la dictadura chilena.
[Transgenerational
trauma and post-memory among grandchildren of victims of the
Chilean dictatorship].
Revista de Estudios Sociales
(84), 59-76.
https://doi.org/10.7440/res84.2023.04
Comisión Nacional sobre Prisión Política y Tortura.
Informe y nómina de personas reconocidas como víctimas
en la Comisión Asesora Presidencial para la Calificación
Detenidos Desaparecidos, Ejecutados Políticos y Víctimas de
Prisión, Política y Tortura
[Report and list of persons
recognised as victims in the Presidential Advisory Commission for the
Qualification of the Detained and
Disappeared, Politically Executed and Victims
of Prison, Political Imprisonment and Torture]. Instituto Nacional de Derechos
https://www.indh.cl/bb/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Informe2011.pdf
Cubillos-Vega, C. (2023). Reparation policy in gendered political violence:
Gendered torture during the dictatorship and the recent
explosion” in Chile.
Journal of Human Rights and Social
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41134-023-00248-1
Davoine, F., & Gaudillière, J. M. (2004).
Histoire et trauma:
La folie des guerres
. [History and trauma: The madness of war]. Les
Empêcheurs de penser en rond.
De Los Reyes, P., & Mulinari, D. (2024). Memories in between: Daughters
from the Chilean diaspora in Sweden speak about their
(6), 1469-1482
https://doi.org/10.1177/17506980231219594
Espinoza, J., Reyes, M., García, M., Yáñez-Urbina, C.,
Faúndez, X., & Sagredo, O. (2024). Dictaduras
y violencia
política en América Latina: aproximaciones interdisciplinarias
para la construcción de memorias
y reparación. [Dictatorships
and political violence in Latin America: Interdisciplinary approaches to memory
building and
reparation].
Psicoperspectivas
https://doi.org/10.5027/psicoperspectivas-Vol23-Issue3-fulltext-3381
Espinoza, C. (2024). Transmisión intergeneracional del trauma en
mujeres exiliadas chilenas en Europa. [Intergenerational transmission
in Chilean women exiled in Europe].
Revista de Psicología,
https://doi.org/10.5354/0719-0581.2024.72296
Faúndez, X., Brackelaire, J. L., & Cornejo, M. (2013).
Transgeneracionalidad del trauma psicosocial: Imágenes de
detención de presos políticos de la dictadura militar Chilena
reconstruidas por los nietos. [Transgenerationality
of psychosocial trauma:
Images of the detention of political prisoners of the Chilean military
dictatorship reconstructed by grandchildren]
(2), 83-95.
https://doi.org/10.7764/psykhe.22.2.563
Faúndez, X., Cornejo, M., & Brackelaire, J. L. (2014).
Transmisión y apropiación de la historia de prisión
política. [Transmission and appropriation of the history of political
imprisonment].
Terapia Psicológica
(3), 201-216.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-48082014000300003
Faúndez, X., & Goecke, X. (2015). Psychosocial trauma transmission
and appropriation in grandchildren of former political
prisoners of the civic
– military dictatorship in Chile (1973-1990).
Journal of Social Science
(2), 26-39.
https://doi.org/10.4119/JSSE-743
Feldman, M. (2006). Survie et destin psychique des enfants juifs
cachés en France pendant la Deuxième Guerre mondiale.
and psychological destiny of Jewish children hidden in France during World War
L’autre. Cliniques, cultures et sociétés,
(1), 61-77.
https://doi.org/10.3917/lautr.019.0061
Feldman, M. (2023). D’un désemboitement
générationnel à l’ouverture d’une boîte
en héritage: clinique actuelle auprès d’enfants des
survivants de la Shoah, ex-enfants juifs cachés durant
l’Occupation. [From generational disembodiment to the opening of an
inherited box: A current clinic with the children of Holocaust
survivors, former
Jewish children hidden during the Occupation].
Cahiers critiques de
thérapie familiale et de pratiques de réseaux
(70), 173-189.
https://doi.org/10.3917/ctf.070.0173
Friedländer, S. (1992). Trauma, transference and “working
through” in writing the history of the “Shoah”.
History and
(1), 39-59.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/25618626
González, M. (2018). El hilo rojo que une la rebeldía
feminista: Estamos de vuelta porque nunca nos fuimos. [The red
thread that binds
feminist rebellion: We’re back because we never left]
https://oge.cl/el-hilo-rojo-que-une-la-rebeldia-feminista-estamos-de-vuelta-porque-nunca-nos-fuimos/
Henríquez, K., & Pleyers, G. (Eds.) (2023).
movimientos
https://biblioteca-repositorio.clacso.edu.ar/bitstream/CLACSO/248858/1/Chile-en-movimientos.pdf
Hirschberger, G. (2018). Collective trauma and the social construction of
Frontiers in Psychology, 9
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01441
Hepworth, A. (2019). From survivor to fourth-generation memory: Literal and
discursive sites of memory in post-dictatorship Germany
Journal of Contemporary History
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022009417694429
Instituto Nacional de Derechos Humanos. (2019). Informe Anual 2019:
Situación de los Derechos Humanos en Chile en el Contexto
de la Crisis
Social. [Annual Report 2019: The situation of human rights in Chile in the
context of the social crisis]. Instituto
Nacional de Derechos Humanos.
https://bibliotecadigital.indh.cl/bitstreams/9b8845b0-9bfe-46fd-8063-26184ca1a3e7/download
Instituto Latinoamericano de Salud Mental y Derechos Humanos. (2025). Nuestra
historia. [Our history].
https://ilas.cl/quienes-somos/nuestra-historia/
Jara, D., Badilla, M., Figueiredo, A., Cornejo, M., & Riveros, V. (2018).
Tracing Mapuche exclusion from post-dictatorial truth
commissions in
International Journal of Transitional Justice
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijtj/ijy025
Jelin, E. (2021).
Las tramas del tiempo. Familia, género, memorias,
derechos y movimientos sociales
. [The plots of time. Family, gender,
memories, rights and social movements].
Kubal, T., & Becerra, R. (2014). Social movements and collective memory.
Sociology Compass
(6), 865-875.
https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12166
Laclau, E. (2005).
La razón populista
. [The populist reason].
Fondo de Cultura Económica.
LaCapra, D. (2014).
Writing history, writing trauma
. John Hopkins
University Press.
La Izquierda Diario. (2016, May 7). Derechos Humanos. Llaman a recuperar casa
de tortura “Venda Sexy”. [ Human Rights.
Call to recover torture
house “Venda Sexy”].
Géneros y Sexualidades
https://www.laizquierdadiario.com/Llaman-a-recuperar-casa-de-tortura-Venda-Sexy
Lira, E. (2013). Algunas reflexiones a propósito de los 40 Años
del golpe militar en Chile y las condiciones de la reconciliación
política. [Some reflections on 40 years after the military coup in Chile
and the conditions for political reconciliation]
http://ojs.uc.cl/index.php/psykhe/article/view/21167
Lira, E. (2020). Testimonio: trauma, verdad y reparación. [Testimony:
Trauma, truth and reparation].
Revista De Ciencias
, 62, 18-35.
https://doi.org/10.29340/62.2197
López, L., Férnandez, R., & Piper, I. (2024). Del cruce
entre los campos de estudios de las memorias y los movimientos
sociales a las
memorias políticas. [From the crossover between the fields of memory
studies and social movements to political
(1), 283-302.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/s0718-23762024000100283
Martín-Baró, I. (1989). Political violence and war as
causes of psychosocial trauma in El Salvador.
International Journal of Mental
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207411.1989.11449115
Maystorovich Chulio, N. (2022). Democratising collective memory through
forensic exhumations in Spain.
Aust J Politics Hist
68: 410-427.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ajph.12865
Miranda, N. (2021). No más Afp: dos activismos contra el sistema de
pensiones chileno. [No more Afp: Two activisms against
the Chilean pension
system] PhD Thesis, Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium.
https://dial.uclouvain.be/pr/boreal/object/boreal%3A250861/datastream/PDF_01/view
Palma, E., Abarca, X., & Bravo, D. (2021).
“Teaching them that pain exists”: Dilemmas regarding memory
transmission
and entrepreneurship in adult children of former political
prisoners 40 years after the Coup D’Etat in Chile.
Interpersonal Violence,
(13-14), 6550-6577.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260518819881
Pleyers, G. (2016). De la subjectivation à l'action
jeunes alter-activistes. [From subjectivation to action. The case of young
alter-activists]. In G. Pleyers & B. Capitaine
Mouvements sociaux.
Quand le sujet devient acteur [Social movements. When the subject becomes the
(pp. 27-48). Maison des sciences de l'homme.
Pleyers, G. (2025). The Chilean awakening in a global decade of social
movements. In H. Onodera, M. Kaskinen & E. Ranta (Eds.),
Citizenship
Utopias in the Global South
(pp. 68-83). Routledge.
Melucci, A. (2003).
Challenging codes: Collective action in the
information age
. Cambridge University Press.
Ricoeur, P. (2000).
La mémoire, l’histoire,
. [Memory, history, forgetting]. Seuil.
Salazar, G. (2006).
Violencia política popular en las
“grandes alamedas”: La violencia en Chile, 1947-1987. [Popular
political violence
in the “Great Avenues”: Violence in Chile,
1947-1987].
LOM Ediciones.
Sandoval, J., & Carvallo, V. (2019). Una Generación “Sin
Miedo”: Análisis de discurso de jóvenes
protagonistas del
movimiento estudiantil chileno. [A generation “without fear”:
Discourse analysis of young protagonists
of the Chilean student movement].
Última Década
(27), 225–257.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-22362019000100225
Scribano, A. (2011). Sociology and epistemology in studies on social
movements in South America.
Sociologija. Mintis ir veiksmas
(1), 131-148.
https://doi.org/10.15388/SocMintVei.2011.1.6119
Smelser, N. (2004). Psychological trauma and cultural trauma. In Alexander,
J., Eyerman, R., Giesen, B., Smelser, N., & Sztompka,
trauma and collective identity
(pp. 31-59). University of California Press.
Tamayo, T. (2022) Recognition as transitional justice “from
below”: Analysing victims’ grassroots activism in postconflict
International Journal of Transitional Justice
(3), 314-330.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijtj/ijac024
Taylor, S., Bogdan, R., & DeVault, M. (2015)
Introduction to
qualitative research methods.
Tisseron, S., Rand, N., Torok, M., Rouchy, J., Hachet, P., & Nachin, C.
(2012). Le psychisme à l’épreuve des
générations. [The psyche tested by generations]. DUNOD.
Touraine, A. (1985). An Introduction to the study of social movements.
Social Research
(4), 749-787.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/40970397
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (730 KB)
PDF format (364 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter