URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AdminRw/2010/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:44:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lloyd, Stephen; Mitchell, Donald --- "Statements of the Decision Maker's Actual Reasons" [2010] AdminRw 9; (2010) 59 Admin Review 54
Current topics
Statements of the decision maker’s actual reasons
The source of the obligation to give reasons
Areas of concern
Ex post facto provision of reasons
Decisions made by committees
Admissibility
Current topics
This section examines four topics—statements of reasons by
administrative decision makers, the nature of merits review, the
administrative decision makers in judicial review proceedings (the
principle), and standing. The topics are discussed briefly in
four separate and thought-provoking pieces from members of the practising
profession and from a leading academic in the area of administrative
Statements of the decision maker’s actual
Stephen Lloyd SC and Donald
The essential requirement of a statement of reasons is truth—to convey
the actual reasons of the decision maker. When referring
to an obligation to
give reasons in the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), McHugh, Gummow and
Hayne JJ said:
It requires no more than that the Tribunal set out the findings which it did
make. Neither expressly nor impliedly does this section
require the Tribunal to
make, and then set out, some findings additional to those which it actually made
… A requirement to
set out findings and reasons focuses upon the
subjective thought processes of the decision-maker. All that [the provision]
the Tribunal to do is set out its findings on those questions of fact
which it considered to be material to the decision which it
made and to the
reasons it had for reaching that
simple enough. And yet there are a number of circumstances in which, for the
reasons explained shortly, hazards or difficulties
arise in achieving this
A requirement to provide a statement of reasons advances a number of
different objectives, among them that the statement:
• provides a measure of governmental transparency
• is capable of creating a certain rigour in decision making to promote
critical thinking and improved decision making (through
exposure to criticism
and review)
• empowers people aggrieved by decisions to find out why the decisions
were made and, if still aggrieved, can assist in making
any decisions whether to
seek to exercise rights of review in either merits review tribunals or
• where review rights are exercised, informs the body carrying out the
review of the reasons, which can be important for merits
review bodies as well
as courts performing judicial review. A statement of reasons greatly improves
the effectiveness of judicial
review and thereby ensures that government
decision making is more likely to proceed in accordance with the
SZBEL v Minister fo
Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
the Court said, in relation to the
reasons of the tribunal, ‘The detailed exposure by the Tribunal of its
reasoning processes
was not criticised and represented in itself a praiseworthy
method of fulfilling the duty to give
As it turned out,
the reasons clearly revealed error to the High Court.
The source of the obligation to give reasons
It is well settled that, as a matter of judicial duty, a judge in the first
instance has an obligation to provide reasons for a
Yet there is no common
law obligation on an administrative decision maker to provide
Statute has to an extent sought to redress this shortcoming. There are, for
example, limited rights to reasons provided by s 28 of
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1977
(Cth) (and see s 37(1) of
that Act). In most cases, however, in the Commonwealth context the right to a
statement of reasons and
the obligation to provide one are created by
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth). This
note focuses on s 13 of the ADJR Act.
With some exceptions, s 13 permits any person who is aggrieved by a
decision that is reviewable by the Federal Court or the Federal
Magistrates
Court under the ADJR Act to ask the decision maker to furnish in writing within
28 days a statement setting out their
findings on material questions of fact and
giving reasons for their decision. A corresponding obligation is placed on
decision makers
to provide the statement (again with exceptions).
There are of course a great many other statutes that oblige decision makers
to provide a statement of reasons in respect of particular
powers; the content
of such statements is largely determined by
Interpretation Act 1901
The Administrative Review Council has prepared a number of guidelines on the
preparation of statements of reasons. Among the Council’s
publications are
Practical Guidelines for Preparing Statements of Reasons
(revised in
November 2002) and the accompanying commentary and, more recently, the booklet
Decision Making: reasons
in the best-practice guide series (August 2007).
These publications set out clearly and concisely what is expected of decision
by s 13 of the ADJR Act.
Areas of concern
Notwithstanding these considerable and important steps taken in relation to
the provision of statements of reasons, there remain some
aspects that might be
improved by further consideration and possible reform.
Ex post facto
provision of
The general position relating to decisions to which s 13 of the ADJR Act
applies is that there is no obligation to provide reasons
until a request is
made. A request can generally be made within 28 days of receipt of the decision,
and a further 28 days is generally
allowed for the provision of the statement of
reasons. It follows, then, that there can be a material lack of contemporaneity
the date of the decision and the time when the statement of reasons is
prepared. The Administrative Review Council’s
Practical Guidelines for
Preparing Statements of Reasons
observes that it is ‘best
practice’ (and by inference not mandatory) to prepare statements of
reasons at the time of
the decision.
Putting aside circumstances in which detailed notes have been made and kept
when the decision was actually made, there is a real risk—even
conscientious efforts to be accurate—that the statement of reasons will
not record the decision maker’s actual reasons.
These difficulties associated with reflecting the actual reasons can be
exacerbated in circumstances where the fact that a request
has been made puts
the decision maker on notice that the decision might be subject to some form of
review. It is only human for a
decision maker to want to provide the ‘best
possible’ reasons for the decision in fact made. But, unfortunately, the
best possible reasons might not have been the
reasons. This is
perhaps less crucial if the review to be carried out is merits review and the
statement of reasons plays more the
role of a submission to the next tier of
decision making. If, however, the review being mooted is judicial review, the
of a statement of reasons that does not reflect the actual reasons
presents a threat to the rule of law.
This problem can be aggravated if the decision maker seeks help from
colleagues in positing a statement of reasons. Unless those colleagues
involved in the actual decision making, it is not clear how they would be able
to help with the preparation of a statement of
reasons. It might be appropriate
for the Administrative Review Council to consider whether rules or guidance
should be given in relation
to seeking such assistance.
Perhaps a more problematic practice—although the extent to which it
occurs is unclear—arises when decision makers seek
‘draft’ statements of reasons ‘settled’ by legal
advisers. It is difficult to see how this practice
is designed to reveal the
actual reasons of the decision maker. The imposition of legal professional
privilege further serves to
prevent transparency. It might be appropriate for
the Council to consider the extent to which this practice should be allowed and
whether legal professional privilege in such cases should be maintained. The
Council might also want to consider whether recommendations
should be made to
professional bodies about whether it is appropriate for barristers or solicitors
to provide advice on whether ‘draft’
statements of reasons should be
amended to remove apparent legal errors.
A different question arising from the
ex post facto
nature of the
s 13 obligation emerges when the original decision maker is no longer
available to provide the statement of reasons.
This could occur, for example,
because the decision maker has left or been removed from office, has died, has
become unfit for duty
or has retired. It would be a real detriment to the
aggrieved person if a statement of reasons could not be provided at all. Putting
aside again circumstances in which detailed notes have been made and kept when
the decision was actually made, however, it is not
clear how such a statement
can provide the actual reasons for the decision made. The Council might want to
consider whether in such
a case the person responsible for the area when the
request is received could give their reasons for the decision made or, if that
person is of the view that a different decision should have been made, be
empowered to make the different decision and provide reasons
for it. In this way
any review will proceed on the basis of a set of actual reasons for what is the
current decision.
Another difficulty arising from the
ex post facto
drafting of
statements of reasons emerges when decisions are made by senior decision makers
such as ministers. When decisions are
made following consideration of
submissions to the minister that are written in neutral terms so as to allow a
range of findings,
it will often not be possible to determine from the decision
made what the findings and reasons were. The Council might want to consider
whether any administrative reforms would improve the recording of ministerial
(and similar) reasons at the time of decision making
to ensure that accurate
statements of reasons can be provided if they are sought. The kinds of
difficulties that can arise were exemplified
Re Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte
Of course, in considering what, if any, reforms should take place, regard
will need to be had to the very different kinds of decisions
s 13. It could be that a ‘one-size’ solution will not fit all
in respect of some of these more specific concerns.
Section 13 covers
• that will be of interest to an individual only—for example,
entitlement to a subsidy or payment—and that are
liable to be challenged
only if the application is refused
• that affect the public interest and might be liable to challenge
regardless of whether the application is granted or refused—for
decisions on whether or not to grant approval to a proposed action under the
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
(Cth) that affects a matter of national environmental significance
• that are made in circumstances where the agency involved is producing
hundreds of thousands of decisions a year
• that are made in circumstances where the agency or decision maker makes
a handful of decisions a year
• that are made where there is a right to full merits review
• that are made where judicial review only is available.
Decisions made by committees
A further area where difficulties can arise is when committees are the
decision makers preparing statements of reasons. Although there
is probably a
requirement that a committee provide reasons under s 13 (where applicable),
the form the reasons should take is not
clear. How, for example, should a
committee go about ensuring that the reasons are the reasons of all the members
of the committee?
Must all committee members approve and settle the statement of
reasons? And what happens when there is dissent among committee members
what the reasons were? Section 13 leaves these questions unanswered.
The difficulties are, of course, exacerbated when the reasons need to be
provided some time after the decision was made. It is quite
likely that
membership of the committee will have changed, thus making the provision of
actual reasons more difficult.
Admissibility
There is also a question about how a decision maker goes about proving that a
statement of reasons represents their real reasons for
a decision. There is
doubt, for example, about the evidentiary status of statements of reasons under
s 13 of the Act in circumstances
where the statement has been prepared
after the decision was made. In
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v
the Full Federal
Court was considering an appeal from a decision of Wilcox J to reject the tender
by the minister of a statement
of reasons prepared more than a month after the
relevant decision was made. All three judges dismissed the appeal on the basis
admission of the statement of reasons would not have affected the outcome
of the proceedings, but only French J held that the statement
should have been
admitted. Davies and Hill JJ, on the other hand, held that Wilcox J was
correct in rejecting the tender, largely
for the reason that a
self‑serving statement made after the event is not normally admissible at
the hands of the person who
These concerns would, it is submitted, be heightened in circumstances where,
in preparing the reasons the decision maker has been
assisted by another person,
particularly a lawyer. It could be that, if more rigorous requirements were
imposed to ensure that reasons
were the actual reasons of the decision maker, it
would be appropriate to make special provision for the reasons’
admissibility.
There are, of course, countervailing considerations that suggest
that an affidavit would be a preferable form of evidence if the
reasons are not
contemporaneous or are disputed.
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
promote the integrity of the administrative decision-making and judicial review
processes. Its ability to meet that objective,
however—in terms of both
the decisions to which it does and does not apply and the manner in which it is
being implemented—requires
reconsideration. This paper touches on only
some of the difficulties presented.
The pieces were compiled and
reviewed in December 2008 by Melissa Perry QC, a member of the Administrative
Review Council.
Both members of Sixth Floor,
Selborne/Wentworth Chambers, Sydney
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Yusuf
(2001) 206 CLR 323, 346.
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade v Boswell
[1992] FCA 321
(1992) 36 FCR 367
Burns v Australian National
[1982] FCA 59
(1982) 40 ALR 707
[2006] HCA 63
(2006) 228 CLR 152
Beale v Government Insurance
Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430.
Public Service Board of New
South Wales v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656
(2003) 216 CLR 212.
especially 227.
[1990] FCA 169
(1990) 23 FCR 162.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (43.3 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter