URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Celermajer, Danielle; Saul, Ben (update) --- "Are we entering a post human rights era? Are there good enough reasons to torture?" [2007] HRightsDef 8; (2007) 16(1) Human Rights Defender 19
Are we entering a post human rights era? Are there good enough reasons to torture?
Are we entering a post human rights era? Are there
good enough reasons to torture?
Danielle Celermajer
This article was originally printed in the HRD, Vol 14 issue 1 2005. It
is followed by an update written for this issue by Ben Saul.
Is it just to torture a small number of individuals who are suspected of
holding information that could lead to the prevention of
a terrorist attack on
the United States? This was the question I asked my students to contemplate just
a year after 9/11 and just
a few kilometres uptown from the site of the attacks
in New York City. At the time, none of us had any idea how relevant and alive
this question would become in debates about public policy and human rights over
the next two years.
When it came to grading the papers, I was shocked by the high proportion of
students who argued that it would be just to torture a
few, in order to achieve
the higher good of saving thousands of American lives. The qualifier –
American lives – is not
my embroidery but was often built into their
argumentation. The fact that they were answering this question in the context of
on theories of justice is of course very relevant to the way they
answered the question. Had I asked if the proposed torture would
violate human
rights, their answers would (or should) have been very different –
demanding an absolute prohibition on torture
under all circumstances. This
difference, however, and the unique intervention in international public policy
that the human rights
framework represents, are dissolving under the legal
quills of the US administration, and the violent acts that have gained their
stamp of authority and legitimacy.
In fact, at the very time that my students were preparing their papers,
Deputy Assistant Attorney General John Yoo and Special Counsel
Delahunty were drafting their own memo to the General Counsel for Department of
Defence, William J. Haynes II, explicitly
arguing that no international
laws—including human rights law and the laws of war—applied to Al
Qaeda and Taliban Detainees
(Memorandum, 2002).
We now know that all throughout this period, that is, during 2003 and until
the exposure of the Abu Ghraib photos in late April 2004,
men and women detained
by US forces or their allies in service of the War against Terror had been
tortured and subjected to cruel
and inhuman treatment (CIT) at the US bases in
Afghanistan, Iraq and Guantanamo Bay. The US public first saw the Abu Ghraib
on US television on 28 April 2004, but already in July 2003 the
International Commission of the Red Cross had issued a report detailing
allegations of extensive prisoner abuse in Iraq. The treatment, as documented by
the Red Cross, Human Rights Watch and the report
that the US administration
itself commissioned after it learned of the abuses (the Taguba Report), included
such acts as:
hooding combined with beating for several hours over a period of two to four
consecutive days;
being paraded naked outside cells in front of other prisoners and guards,
sometimes hooded or with women’s underwear over
being forced to remain for prolonged periods in stress positions such as
squatting or standing with or without the arms lifted.
These, and a list of about 40 other techniques, were classified according to
severity into three categories and assessed by the US
administration in terms of
legality and public policy. When, in December 2002, Defence Secretary Rumsfeld
approved the use of so-called
category I and II techniques and left open the
possible use of category III (the most vicious) subject to specific approval,
technique of having prisoners stand in stress positions for up to 4 hours
particularly caught his eye. ‘I stand for 8-10 hours
added in a handwritten note at the bottom of the memo, ‘Why is standing
limited to 4 hours?’
The Yoo and Delahunty memo was amongst the first of a series of memoranda and
reports bouncing between players at the upper echelons
of the US administration,
all similarly arguing that torture or at least CIT were indeed legally
permissible. They provided Byzantine
and legally suspect technical analyses of
international and domestic law to justify the basic ‘You have our
go-ahead, boys
(and girls)’ position.
So, for example, they argue that because the Taliban and Al Qaeda did not fit
squarely into any of the categories of combatants explicitly
mentioned by the
Geneva Conventions, their members could not claim the safeguards that
humanitarian law afforded prisoners of war,
including protection against
torture. In regards to human rights law, they argue that a combination of US
reservations on, and understandings
of international treaties exempted the USA
and hence US personnel from the apparently unambiguous prohibitions on torture
in treaties ratified by the US, including the Convention Against Torture
and other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(CAT). And, in a
move that would surely shake anyone sentimental about the rule of law, they
argue that the President has the unrestrained
constitutional power to treat
enemy combatants as he sees fit. Should Congress try to regulate the
President’s ability to detain
and interrogate enemy combatants, they
advised, it would be violating the
Constitution
, because it vests
Commander-in-Chief authority (including, they deduce, authority over
interrogation) solely in the President. They
then advise that if subordinates
were to exercise this authority it would be best if they did so under explicit
presidential directives
(and we can presume that the President would not have
been holding Iraqis on a leash himself).
This puts an interesting angle on the question of command responsibility.
Historically, political leaders go to great lengths to remove
Human Rights Defender : 19 Post Human Rights Era
themselves from the chain of command in cases of systematic human rights
violations, and indeed, the characterization of the Abu Ghraib
‘bad apples’ conforms to this pattern. Yet, here the advice would
unambiguously place the President at the
head of that chain.
The direction of the causal relationship between the official memos drafted
in Washington and what was actually being done in Iraq,
Cuba and Afghanistan is
something on which we might reflect. Was it the case that the administration
knew about the torture and was
seeking to provide legal justification should a
member of the US forces get hauled before a Court? Alternatively, were the memos
symptomatic of the attitude emanating from Washington and being transmitted to
the prison cells where they were translated into beatings,
sexual humiliation
and, as we now know, the death of several prisoners?
The latter seems the more likely explanation given what we know about some of
the more explicit and colourful instructions coming
from the administration.
During the interrogation of John Walker Lindh, for example, the office of
Defence Secretary Rumsfeld instructed
military intelligence officers to
‘”take the gloves off” in interrogating him’ (Serrano
2004). This single
instruction was generalized in a memo issued by a US Army
intelligence officer in 2003, which stated: ‘The gloves are coming
gentlemen, regarding these detainees. Col. Boltz has made it clear that we want
these individuals broken. Casualties are mounting
and we need to start
gathering info to help protect our fellow soldiers from any further
attacks.’ (Confidential Memo, 2003).
The memo also appealed for
suggestions on how to extract information from prisoners in Iraq by 17 August
Even if the causal relationship moved in the other direction, that is torture
on the ground came first and Washington was then faced
with the question of
torture’s legitimacy, it then becomes the responsibility of the
administration to explicitly signal its
condemnation, drawing on domestic and
international law to bolster this position. Whichever way one reads the
narrative, the administration
bears significant responsibility for the ongoing
torture of prisoners, especially given that it had been given credible evidence
of violations by at least mid 2003. Nevertheless, the prospect that the US
government was actually sourcing, rather than simply pragmatically
accommodating
human rights violations represents a much more far-reaching threat.
From the point of view of the people all around the world who look to the
human rights framework as a final barricade against the
‘pragmatic’
and often despotic laws and policies of their own governments, the gravest
fallout of this story is its impact
on that framework itself. It is no secret
that the US has long been complicit in human rights violations (including
systematic torture)
in its support of authoritarian regimes globally. However,
this studied, legally-based, decimation of what is undeniably one of the
fundamental human rights norms is far more damaging to the authority and
legitimacy of the international human rights regime
Effectively, the message is that human rights may be trumped by pragmatic
considerations. In this case, the pragmatic justification
is the need to obtain
critical intelligence for a war, a justification that is ennobled by describing
this war as a campaign to protect
innocent people against terror and popularised
with nationalist, ideological and religious washes: protecting the American way
life, freedom, and fighting Islamic fundamentalism. Abstract the substance of
the justification, however, and the structure of the
argument remains: the human
rights of some people have to be sacrificed under certain conditions.
This is, as I noted, precisely what some of my students argued. However, they
were drawing on utilitarian theories of justice and
not on human rights, and the
difference between those approaches is crucial in understanding what is unique
and important about the
human rights framework. As soon as one tries to reframe
human rights arguments in utilitarian terms (sacrifice the few for the greater
good), the human rights idea, as a distinct approach to regulating public
action, has been lost. The core of the human rights approach
is that it sets out
absolute rights for all human beings under all circumstances. Certainly, human
rights treaties contemplate the
need to balance rights and take note of context.
Even then, however, there are certain non-derogable rights: rights that cannot
violated under any circumstances whatsoever. Torture is always on that list,
perhaps even constituting the archetypal non-derogable
right. Even killing is
permissible, in war or in self-defence, but torture is ruled out under all
circumstances for everyone.
That is why, for example, when ‘other’ governments have justified
torturing ‘dissidents’ by pointing to the
supposedly precarious
state of the ‘nation’, people draw on human rights arguments rather
than, say, arguments from ethics
or justice. Certainly, there are conceptions of
justice that insist on categorical rules, but
has been understood as permitting some derogation. In fact, as a
number of my students argued, there are theories of justice that
demand that one
sacrifice the good of the few in order to achieve some good for the many. This
is not the case for the human rights
canon, which establishes a universal,
categorical refusal to permit certain acts no matter what their commission might
achieve. This
legally entrenched notion of a non-derogable right is one of the
key marks distinguishing human rights from other available approaches.
as one allows that certain circumstances may constitute legitimate defences for
those who commit torture, one is no longer
speaking the language of human
And this is precisely what the memos do when they argue that torture, which
on face value looks like a human rights violation, may
violate human rights law, if one can show that there was a good reason (a
justification or excuse) for committing the specific acts.
The two main defences
they moot and find particularly appealing in this context are necessity and
self-defence.
To explain how necessity comes into play in assessing the legality of an
otherwise unlawful act, the March 2003 Working Group Report
(utilitarian) legal commentary: ‘the law ought to promote the achievement
of higher values at the expense of lesser
values, and sometimes the greater good
for society will be accomplished by violating the literal language of the
criminal law.’
The report finds the necessity defence particularly
relevant here given the link between the objective of torturing prisoners in
War Against Terror and public policy. Though this remains unsaid, the authors
clearly share the view of some of my students that
the protection of American
lives is a higher value than the protection of individuals from torture, or the
protection of the universally
affirmed norm of condemning torture itself.
When it comes to contemplate the application of self-defence, the report
stretches the concept beyond recognition and distorts its
usual legal meaning.
Self-defence is rigorously circumscribed by the principle of imminence, which
means that the attack is occurring
in the present or is about to occur. But
this Report argues that the ‘self’ in self-defence may encompass
as vague and remote as the nation as a whole and the attack against
which one might justifiably and legally defend oneself includes
one that might
occur at some unspecified time in the future.
These moves to insert utilitarian justifications and national interest into
the interpretation of human rights are not simply interpretive
deviations within
human rights jurisprudence, but actually eviscerate the framework. The
prohibition of torture
the prohibition of torture
committed for
some other purpose
. This fact is built into the CAT itself, which defines
torture as the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering ‘for
such purposes of obtaining from him or a third person information or a
confession’. The report actually takes note of this
acknowledges that it could be argued that this definition was intended to imply
that ‘the good of obtaining information
- no matter what the circumstances
- could not justify an act of torture’. Its rejoinder, however, is simply
to point out that
when Congress enacted criminal legislation to implement the
CAT, it removed the purpose element in the definition of torture. The
this definitional slide deprives the law of its specific intent and undercuts
the meaning of human rights is not remarked
Similarly, the argument that torture could be justified in defence of the
nation, or in the pursuit of public policy objectives dissolves
qualifiers in the concept of universal human rights.
What distinguished the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and its subsequent
treaties from previous bodies of (domestic) law was that this body of law
specified rights that adhere to all people irrespective
of race, gender,
ethnicity or any other status and irrespective of the policy objectives or
national interests of any state. The
moment one links a person’s access to
human rights with national difference or national interest, one has left the
of universal human rights and entered the State Department.
In the US today, this is precisely what is happening. President Bush has just
nominated John R. Bolton, currently the Under Secretary
of State for arms
control and international security affairs, to represent the US at the United
Nations. Bolton, as any student of
human rights law knows, is one of the
foremost opponents of international human rights law and the author of a number
of highly invective
articles attacking its legitimacy as law and urging the US
to opt out of any type of multilateral regulation. By the time this comes
press, we should know if Bolton’s nomination has been approved.
Irrespective of the final outcome, however, the fact that
the President of the
most powerful state in the world has chosen an Ambassador to the UN who is
publicly committed to the decimation
of human rights as a constraining force on
the actions of governments is a highly sobering thought.
At the end of the 20th century we celebrated 50 years of an international
human rights regime and looked forward to its reach widening
to benefit all
people in all parts of the world. At the beginning of the 21st century we will
have to act mindfully and strategically
to ensure that the post human rights era
in the US does not become the global norm.
Dr Danielle Celermajer is the Director of the Bachelor of Global Studies,
University of Sydney. She is a former Fellow at the Center
for the Study of
Human Rights, Columbia University and former director of policy in the
indigenous rights policy unit of the Australian
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission.
References Application of Treaties and Laws to Al Qaeda and Taliban
Detainees, 1 September 2002, available at
www.msnbc.msn.com/id/5025040/site/newsweek/
Confidential Memo, issued by US Army
intelligence officer in Summer 2003 and reported in ‘Memo Appealed for
Ways to Break Iraqi
Detainees’, Washington Post Foreign Service, 23 August
2004, at A12 Serrano, Richard A, ‘Prison Interrogators’
Gloves Came
Off Before Abu Ghraib,’ Los Angeles Times, 9 June 2004
The greater the distance from 9/11, the less it seems we are entering a post
human rights era. Danielle Celermajer’s timely
warning against the
tempting moral slide towards torture is symptomatic of why that era has not come
United States and elsewhere have found the idea of
human rights precious enough to be worth defending, even against the
overwhelming
power of the last great superpower. The Bush administration’s
arrogant assertion of legal exceptionalism, exemplified in its
lurch towards
torturing terrorists, has spectacularly backfired. Images from Abu Ghraib and
Guantanamo Bay fuelled hatred of –
and resistance to – American
policies everywhere and demoralized America’s armed forces. Professional
US military lawyers,
schooled in the dignity-preserving laws of war, expressed
their disgust at the contrived efforts to legalize torture in interrogation.
British courts have thrown out evidence tainted by torture in the war on terror.
America’s allies have retreated from their
traditions of unequivocal
support of the US. America’s moral authority has been crippled and its
global reputation is looking
decidedly tattered. President Bush’s
popularity is at an all time low, in part because hitting the panic button to
terrorists exacted a heavy political price. Ultimately, the reaction
against American torture resulted in President Bush publicly
reaffirming
America’s commitment to the prohibition on torture, and the US Congress
explicitly legislating to forbid it. After
a long struggle, John Bolton was not
appointed US ambassador to the United Nations, due to fierce resistance in
Congress. Of course,
not all has come good – some US torturers received
light justice; European governments were complicit in CIA ghost flights;
conditions at Guantanamo Bay may well be inhuman or degrading. But the power of
the idea of human rights has been something to
behold – and something even
the most powerful cannot afford to push aside.
Dr Ben Saul is Senior Lecturer and Coordinator, Master of International
Law Program at the Faculty of Law at the University of Sydney.
Ben specialises
in public international law, particularly anti-terrorism law, humanitarian law,
international criminal law and human
rights law. He has recently published
Defining Terrorism in International Law
(OUP, 2006).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (38.7 KB)
PDF format (255 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter