URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:29:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Waterford, Kate; Disele, Thuto --- "A Strong, Positive Workplace Culture: From a Foot in the Door to a Seat at the Table" [2024] PrecedentAULA 7; (2024) 180 Precedent 22
A strong, positive workplace culture:
From a foot in the door to a seat at the table
By Kate Waterford and Thuto Disele
Young Solicitor Thuto Disele and Managing Partner Kate Waterford sit down
together to discuss creating the strong, positive workplace
culture essential to
a well-functioning team – starting with an open-door policy.
THUTO’S STORY
I am originally from South Africa, and I migrated to Sydney in 2005, where I
developed an interest and passion for social justice
and the law. In 2021, as a
graduate with minimal experience, I experienced firsthand how difficult it was
to get my foot in the door,
let alone an entire seat at the
Eventually, after numerous disappointments, all roads led me to Canberra. For
the past year, I have had the pleasure of working alongside
Kate Waterford and
her talented medical negligence team.
Navigating the corporate field in a foreign city, I quickly realised that I
had to step outside my comfort zone to silence the intrusive
thoughts that
surfaced whenever an opportunity presented itself. I had been approaching the
industry with the mindset that all lawyers
were intimidating people. This almost
led me to develop imposter syndrome. However, with the benefit of hindsight, my
perspective
has changed: lawyers are not intimidating at all: lawyers simply
wear confidence and intelligence in a way that can be perceived
intimidation.
I can confidently say that, as young lawyers, we are hungry to learn and
eager to prove ourselves. In my opinion, to overcome any
feelings of doubt and
perceived intimidation, a positive mindset is required.
I sat down with Kate to discuss other aspects of success, including a sense
of curiosity and enthusiasm for the law, cultivating interests
outside the law
to become a more well-rounded lawyer and better leader, and fostering a cohesive
yet diverse team.
Q&A WITH KATE WATERFORD
Please provide us with a brief professional background.
I first worked for Maliganis Edwards Johnson (MEJ) as a law clerk for about a
year, in my first year of studying at the Australian
National University, then
transferred to the University of Sydney to complete my law degree and other
qualifications. I went on to
work in commercial law firms in Sydney and at a
university in Asia, then came back to MEJ at the beginning of 2013. I worked my
up through the ranks of senior associate and special counsel before taking
partnership in early 2022.
In the meantime, alongside my law career, I have served on various
not-for-profit boards and committees in the ‘for purpose’
government sectors. I was appointed to my first non-executive directorship in
2014, and I have now spent over a decade serving
in various governance roles
with organisations such as Amnesty International Australia, Amnesty
International, the Fred Hollows Foundation,
the Australian Institute of Company
Directors, the Physiotherapy Board of Australia, the Australasian Birth Trauma
Association and
the AusCam Freedom Project, among others. Volunteer work is a
very important part of my value set and lifestyle, and it has also
given me many
professional skills, making me a more well-rounded lawyer and a better
As a partner of MEJ, I oversee one of the firm’s larger litigation
teams. I recently became the managing partner upon the retirement
Rolfe AM, who capably led the firm for many years. My team runs a range of
personal injury claims for plaintiffs, with
a particular focus on medical
negligence cases. We also represent plaintiffs in motor vehicle accidents,
public liability, and institutional
abuse claims.
What factors do you consider when defining long-term goals?
When setting long-term goals for our law firm, my partners and I have a
strong sense of who we are, and what we stand for as a firm.
The partners have
all been with MEJ a long time. This solid understanding of our values, our
history and our key strengths helps
us to jointly set our long-term goals.
Personality-wise, I am a goal setter by nature. I endlessly write and rewrite
strategy plans, objectives, and task lists, in various
aspects of my life, so
that I always know where I am going and how I am getting there. I find that a
clear definition of long-term
goals helps me to make the endless smaller choices
along the way.
For example, when hiring a new person for my team, or dealing with HR issues
that come up for our staff, the decision of the day is
usually made easier when
I keep at the forefront of my mind our long-term goals. I know that to do the
best job we can in representing
our clients, we need to have in place strong,
cohesive teams; skilled professionals who are committed to our firm; and a
of excellence, ethical behaviour and diligence.
I want our staff members to feel that they are valued for their hard work and
good work; that they have opportunities for growth and
development; and that the
partners will support them when they face professional or personal challenges. I
keep those sorts of goals
in the forefront of my mind, and I articulate them to
myself and others often. It helps to steer me to the right call on the decision,
and I avoid getting too bogged down in matters which are ultimately a
distraction or unimportant in the bigger context.
How have you fostered a cohesive and functional team with so many diverse
Over recent years, I have often had very positive feedback about my team,
from people within and outside that team, which is something
I am very proud of.
Team members have come and gone, particularly as we have many casual law student
employees, but they have generally
bonded well with each other. They work hard
and effectively; and they often socialise outside the office.
While I have been very fortunate to secure some
extremely talented people to our group, I feel that that cohesiveness has arisen
design as much as by luck.
Whenever we hire someone for my team, I think carefully about group dynamics.
I usually conduct interviews alongside our long-term
office manager and she is
terrific at spotting which personalities will go well or poorly together. I
would never hire someone for
their academic brilliance if I thought that they
had poor interpersonal skills, or a hint of arrogance – it wouldn’t
be worth it. Once, our receptionist told me that a job applicant had spoken
rudely to her on arrival, before I came in to start the
interview, and I
immediately knew that we could not hire that person, as they had the wrong
attitude to fit into our team and our
firm’s culture. On the other hand,
not everyone has to come from the same mould: there is value in having people in
who come from different backgrounds and bring fresh skillsets and life
experiences to the job, or who have new ways of approaching
problems and issues.
That increases the capabilities of the team.
Given the type of work we do, it is important
that all our staff members, both lawyers and non-lawyers, be people who have
good emotional
intelligence, some ‘street smarts’, and an ability to
work well with others. They not only need to be able to interact
respectfully
and professionally with our clients (individuals who are often living through
one of the worst periods of their life
due to injury or loss); they also need to
be able to work effectively with their colleagues at times of stress and under
time constraints,
since most of the work we do in litigation is subject to those
A strong, positive workplace culture is essential
to a well-functioning team. I like to think that I lead by example in setting
culture. I want to be known to show respect and appreciation to all our
staff members. There are times I have to pull people up for
they’ve made in their professional work or in their behaviour, of course
– that’s an unfortunate reality
for any manager. However, I always
treat people kindly, and I try to make my feedback constructive, focused on
opportunities for
improvement. I also praise and reward people where I see them
supporting each other in a collegiate manner. Everyone on my team knows
dislike destructively competitive behaviour. It is not an environment where
people will get ahead by undermining other team
We hold regular social events, both at a team level and firm-wide level, such
as morning teas to celebrate birthdays and other special
events; team lunches;
and firm parties. This gives us opportunities to get to know each other
How have you nurtured the interests, wants and needs of your
I try to listen to my employees and understand their goals and needs. I hope
that those on my team consider me to be an approachable
person and know that
they can speak up about their interests, wants and needs. Certainly, a lot of
them have come to me over the
years to raise those, and I have worked with them
and what I can offer to support them as best I can.
Whenever someone new joins my team, I have a chat to them quite early on
of working. I then
try to send work their way which I know they will find interesting, and give
them opportunities to participate
in cases where they develop their skills.
What avenues have you and your partners
pioneered or facilitated to enable your employees to feel supported in their
individual career
goals while continuing to produce great results?
• Encouraging our young lawyers to volunteer on committees of various
kinds outside the office, and to write papers or give
presentations.
• Facilitating attendance at conferences which align with individual
• Holding professional development discussions with individual
solicitors, tailored to their stage of development; and articulating
level the expectations for the various seniority levels.
• Supporting studies that complement our work.
• Offering flexible work arrangements where appropriate.
Ideally, young lawyers should feel stretched, challenged and valued. They
should often be given new tasks, responsibilities and work
areas, and not settle
into a comfortable rut in which they don’t learn. My responsibility as
partner is to provide a safe environment
for learning and growth to occur, by
monitoring staff members to the extent appropriate to their experience; and by
ensuring that
they know there is someone they can go to with questions or for
As someone who started their legal career as a paralegal, what do you
believe was the key to your success over the years?
I always had a great sense of curiosity and enthusiasm for the law, and a
zest for life generally, and this has served me very well.
Many law students seem to think that there is a single right path to success
in the law, which starts with getting clerkships at the
right firms, then going
into those firms as a graduate, and working through a ladder of promotions,
keeping blinders on to avoid
distractions outside of that legal career path.
That may be the right journey for some, but not necessarily for everyone. I
worked at MEJ as a paralegal when I was still a teenager, in my first year
of law school. I then went on to work as a paralegal and
lawyer elsewhere,
before returning to MEJ much later. In the decade after finishing high school, I
studied at three universities,
lived in five countries, and had around a dozen
different types of jobs in quite different fields.
At the time, the various things I did over those years felt like a ‘zig
zag’. It took me a while to work out how to piece
together my skills and
interests, and to create a space for myself in the legal profession which met my
needs. Later, I worked out
that those life experiences had been invaluable to
making me a strong senior lawyer, and that my skills combined in quite a unique
way. It also gave me a broader view of the world. In trying different things, I
worked out what I liked and didn’t like, and
the sort of people I wanted
to surround myself with. In the end, I carved out my own role at MEJ,
establishing a practice area that
interested me and building it up for the
As a new managing partner, how do you intend to facilitate an environment
whereby your employees at all levels feel secure in their
abilities to vocalise
their own ideas and views for the improvement of their legal practice?
Being new to the role of managing partner, I am building on the work of my
very experienced partners, past and present.
Our firm has always held regular practice meetings, at which all solicitors
are encouraged to raise opportunities and ideas for improvement.
It is important for a managing partner – and leaders generally –
to follow an ‘open door’ policy. Quite literally,
this is what our
gem of an office manager advised me on my first day in the new role: keep the
door to your office open as much as
possible; and we will tell people repeatedly
that they are welcome to come and raise problems and questions with you. We have
and lollies in a bowl outside my door, so that people can stop by, grab a
sweet, peer in, and come to talk to me.
Giving employees the sense of security to
vocalise their opinions does not occur overnight. It depends on the strength of
our broader
workplace culture, which is something that we as partners set and
all employees should contribute to. It follows when we articulate,
and stand by,
the values and behaviours that we hold to as a firm.
Graduates and young lawyers often feel like ‘little fish in a big
pond’ as they navigate the legal community and create
identities. What advice would you care to share that you wish someone had shared
with you when you began your career?
To be the best lawyer you can be, I strongly recommend that young lawyers
cultivate their skills and interests beyond the law. Lawyers
need to know the
law, of course, and many of them will spend a large portion of their waking
hours in any given week within the office
walls. It is important that young
lawyers do that, to learn their trade. However, they should not focus too
narrowly on the law.
Rather, they should strive to be well-rounded people, and
to develop strong connections with their broader communities.
For some, that might mean, say, playing sports, joining a theatre group or
fundraising for a local cause. In my case, since I am passionate
rights, I have always done a lot of related volunteer work in my spare time.
Linguistics was my other main area of study
at university, and I have kept up my
language studies for pleasure, and participated in related community groups,
ever since high
school. These interests have opened up all sorts of friendships,
and give me the confidence of being in touch with what is going
community beyond my association with other lawyers.
I mentioned earlier that good lawyers need ‘street smarts’. This
comes from being out in the world; participating in community
life; and learning
to understand how people operate.
Those interests and activities can help a young lawyer’s legal career
directly. The people one meets through community activities,
might end up being
professional connections or clients. The skills one gains through hobbies,
sports and other activities may also
be relevant to your work as a lawyer.
Teamwork on a soccer field might help foster a sense of how to be an effective
team player
in the office, leadership skills, etc. Pursuing outside interests
also helps lawyers to relax, de-stress and achieve a better work/life
Overall, a person who is involved in life outside the law firm is someone who
will be more effective within it.
For further discussion, See N
Elads, ‘Inclusivity: Not just a seat at the table’ Opinion,
Australian Lawyers Alliance
(6 July 2023)
<https://www.lawyersalliance.com.au/opinion/inclusivity-not-just-a-seat-at-the-table>.
Kate Waterford EMAIL
KWaterford@mej.com.au
Thuto Disele EMAIL
tdisele@mej.com.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (28.8 KB)
PDF format (234 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter