URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kirby AC CMG, The Hon Justice Michael --- "Alex Castles, Australian Legal History and the Courts" [2005] AUJlLegHist 1; (2005) 9(1) Australian Journal of Legal History 1
II Alex Castles And The High Court
IV Judges And Historians
V The Inescapable Problems Of History
VI The Inevitable Judicial Failure Over ‘Historical Truth’
VII Conclusion
ALEX CASTLES, AUSTRALIAN LEGAL HISTORY AND THE
THE HON JUSTICE MICHAEL KIRBY AC
I ALEX CASTLES REMEMBERED
In the eye of history, it is but yesterday that I took part in the
inauguration of this lecture series.
could not have been more modest. Essentially, it was to play the foil (as I had
on many earlier occasions) to Alex Castles.
He was to give the first lecture
named for him. I was to warm up the crowd.
In so short a time, Alex Castles has died. It now falls to me, as his friend,
to continue the series. But first I must talk of the
man. History prepares us
for mortality, for mortality provides history’s ultimate solution to the
contributions of saints and
tyrants alike. Yet Alex Castles was always such a
lively spirit, brimming over with new ideas and plans (not always fulfilled)
his own end had ever seemed a long way off. He was not a person sliding
gracefully into old age. To the last moment he was bubbly,
excitable, slightly
disorganised but intensely interested in the discipline he had made his own:
Australian legal history.
In her essay ‘Australian Legal Histories in Context’, Dean
Rosemary Hunter of the Griffith University Law School declared,
before Alex
Castles’ death:
Australian history has only emerged as a field of scholarship in its own
right in the last twenty years. Prior to that, Australian
legal history tended
to be written
and taught as a footnote to the
great sweep of English legal history – the history of the King’s
Courts, the common law
and equity, and major nineteenth century statutory
reforms, with a chapter at the end about the classification of the Australian
colonies as ‘settled’ colonies, and the consequent reception of
English law. This year [2002] sees the twentieth anniversary
Castles’ ground-breaking work An Australian Legal
the first book to take Australian
laws and legal institutions as its entire subject matter. It is also the
twentieth anniversary
of the first Australian law and history conference. The
years since 1982 have seen the advent of the Australian and New Zealand Law
History Society, increasing attendances at its annual conferences, the
establishment of the Australian Journal of Legal History,
the completion of a
number of PhD theses in the field, and the publication of further influential
texts and edited collections ...
In all that follows, Alex Castles will be acknowledged as the Founder. His
timing was impeccable. He happened to be on the scene when
Australian law and
governmental institutions shook off the last vestiges of direct imperial rule.
The appeals to the Privy Council
were at last
and, in a remarkable combination of
statutes - United Kingdom, federal and State, the tiny residuum of Imperial
intrusion into our
Australian legal independence was finally
It was done, symbolically enough,
by the Queen herself at Parliament House, Canberra commanding the proclamation
that brought into
force the signing into law of the federal
I will not pause to ask (once again) what business it was of the United
Kingdom Parliament in 1986 to be enacting a law with respect
to independent
Australia, without any consent or request of the people of this long, free
nation. More than once I have referred
to this doubt in my judicial
Perhaps this last bemused British
intrusion into direct Australian lawmaking should be seen as the stuff of legal
fairytales –
an act to be evaluated as a final wave of an Imperial wand
and not to be examined more closely for the law or the
Realpolitik
gesture involved.
The tribute by Rosemary Hunter is an appropriate text with which to begin a
lecture to honour Alex Castles. In the future, it must
be expected, that
lecturers will ascend the podium who have not known him as a person, a lively
colleague and a creative intellect.
But at this time his memory is vivid. We do
well after his passing to reflect once again on the main events of his life.
Alex Castles was born in March 1933. He was raised in Melbourne and attended
the famous Scotch College and the University of Melbourne.
He then took his JD
degree at the University of Chicago. There followed intervals in Melbourne and
North America before, in 1958,
he accepted appointment to the Faculty of Law at
the University of Adelaide. It was there that he did his most important
work, including on legal history. In addition to the book in 1982
which is seen as laying the foundation-stone, he had heralded that
publication a
decade earlier in his
Introduction to Australian Legal History
publication of a source book in 1979. He served on countless community bodies
connected with the United Nations Organisation,
the International Commission of
Jurists, the Australian Institute of International Affairs, the inquiry into the
Australian Broadcasting
Commission and he was a long-time member of the Council
of the University of Adelaide. He was a joiner and a doer.
Alex Castles became a noted media commentator and a great public talker. When
we came together for the last lecture in this series
he held a post of Visiting
Professor at the Flinders University. I lament to say that his signal
contributions to Australian legal
scholarship, and specifically our
country’s legal history, were not honoured appropriately with civic
honours or degrees
honours causa
, such as he deserved. Perhaps it was
because we are neglectful of such things in Australia. Perhaps it was because we
did not expect
his death at age 70. Perhaps we thought that we could wait till
he was greyer and more stooped. We should honour leading scholars
lifetimes. Words of praise in their absence, after death, seem strangely hollow.
I came to know Alex Castles when we served together as foundation Members of
the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) set up in
1975. Lionel Murphy,
Attorney-General in the Whitlam Government, piloted the statute to create the
Commission through a restless
Federal Parliament, but he won the support of all
I was appointed the first Chairman.
Alex Castles was one of the first part-time Commissioners. We took on ourselves
the presumption
of finding premises, establishing a library, appointing staff,
embarking on the first projects of the Commission, consulting the
raising awareness and putting the ALRC on the map where it remains to this day.
Other such Commissions have been abolished.
But the ALRC has proved itself
useful to successive governments of different legal and philosophical
inclinations. That is how it
should be. Fortunate have been those who have
served on or with the Commission. Fortunate was the Commission to have people
as the first part-time members. Fortunate was Australia that Alex Castles
was one of them.
I have on the wall of my judicial chambers in Sydney, the city in which the
ALRC was first established in 1975, the photograph of
that small, determined
band. They look down on me every day of my working life. By an uncanny
coincidence, another of the Foundation
Commissioners, Associate Professor Gordon
Hawkins of the Sydney Law School, died within a few weeks of Alex
The other three who made up the
complement were Mr F G Brennan QC (later Chief Justice of Australia), Mr John
Cain (later Premier
of Victoria) and Mr Gareth Evans (later federal
Attorney-General and Foreign Minister, now the head of an influential agency
with international dispute
resolution).
It was, you will agree, a
happy combination of personalities and intellect. Alex Castles held his own and
made distinct contributions
to all of the projects that he worked on.
As I look at the photograph, I can see the character of those first
Commissioners in their faces, now sadly reduced by two deaths.
Alex Castles,
alone of the photographic subjects, presents himself standing, in effect,
side-on. At that instant, when our images
were caught by the exposure of film to
light it was as if he was symbolising a desire to stand apart. On his face is a
slightly querulous
look – as if complaining about being lined up and
photographed – or standing still, or standing at all, whilst others
younger (like me) were sitting. Alex was first, and always, the scholar. He was
a questioner; because that is what history had taught
him to do. He did not
necessarily go along with the approaches of us, his colleagues. Often he was
listening to a different drum.
The drum of history.
As I look at his photograph I can still hear his interventions in the
Commission debates. Commonly, they came at the issue from side-on.
lacked in the strict syllogistic reasoning of Gerard Brennan or the mobilised
brilliance of Gareth Evans, the urbane experience
of the world of Gordon Hawkins
and the practical political realism of John Cain, they made up with a deep
knowledge of the history
of our nation. For Alex Castles, every law reform
problem challenged his mind to see the issues in the context of history. He knew
more than any of us the truth of Maitland’s
Nowadays we may see the office of historical research as that of explaining,
and therefore lightening the pressure that the past must
exercise upon the
present, and the present upon the future. Today we may study the day before
yesterday, in order that yesterday
may not paralyse today, and today may not
paralyse tomorrow.
Yet it is a mistake to portray Alex Castles as a parochial historian,
interested only in the legal history of Australia. He knew that
history began as a derivative of one of the greatest and most influential
streams of legal history in the world: that of
the British Isles. He had read,
and doubtless been taught by reference to, Sir Victor Windeyer’s
He knew as well as
Law is a matter of present day rules. Yet the rules are the products of the
past. Their origins, whether remote or recent, are there.
It may be in some
ancient statute, or old ruling of a court, or in the exposition by one of the
old writers from Glanvil or Bracton
to Coke, Hale or Blackstone. Or it may be in
a statute or by-law made yesterday or in a decision of a court given yesterday.
Mr Fifoot [said half a century ago]:
Legal history as has often been said, is the history of ideas. But ideas are
not self-sown. They are coloured by environment and conditioned
by the climate
of opinion; but they are, after all, the creatures of men’s minds and to
isolate them from the pressure of personality,
even if it were desirable, is
impossible.
The arrival of Alex Castles’s insight into the integrity of Australian
legal history must be understood in the context of the
emergence of Australian
history more generally from its earlier capture as a backwater of British
imperial history. This change happened
in harmony with political developments
surrounding the gradual decline and fall of the British Empire and changes in
the technology
of transport and communications that made Australia less of a
In the 1930s Professor W K Hancock wrote his monograph
work reinforced Professor Ernest Scott’s effort in
A Short History of
, striking out on a new path. Mid century Brian Fitzpatrick, Ian
Turner and Bob Gollan wrote on Australian legal history in a way
that earned
them the epithet of ‘radical nationalists’. Their historical
interests were often concerned with labour relations
and this too placed them at
odds with Robert Menzies’s imperial perceptions of Australia. In 1958,
Russel Ward wrote
The Australian Legend
, seeking to identify the features
of Australia’s story that were unique or special. Recent and contemporary
Australian historians
such as Manning Clark, Geoffrey Blainey, Geoffrey Bolton,
Stuart Macintyre, Henry Reynolds, Marilyn Lake, Judy Brett and many others
of Australian history as a new and exciting subject of study. It is no accident
that most of these historians first refined
their early thinking in Melbourne,
as Alex Castles also did.
In more recent times there has been a swing away from this nationalist focus.
Now, once again, historians are rediscovering the global
and regional aspects of
Australia’s history. But in legal history the new equilibrium will never
own stories that marked the time before Alex
Castles wrote his trailblazing works. Truly it can be said of him that, in legal
he shifted the fulcrum.
We who celebrate Alex Castles’s contribution to legal scholarship and
writing, Australian legal history, law teaching, law reform
and the legal
process miss him as friend, colleague, gadfly, tangential thinker. The best way
we can remember him is not only to
speak sadly of his passing (as we do) but to
continue the work that he began. We need to infuse an appreciation of legal
in all law courses. It is impossible to understand the common law system
of law without a sound appreciation of legal history. We
need to see and realise
the peculiarities of Australian legal history and also to see it in its larger
context: including today through
the perspective of international law. As the
years pass, it will seem increasingly odd to view the topic from our peculiar
vantage point in any other way.
II ALEX CASTLES AND THE HIGH COURT
The high esteem in which Alex Castles came to be viewed by the High Court of
Australia is witnessed by the many references to his
writings that appear in the
reasons of members of the Court.
One of the earliest that I could find was the reference by Justice Brennan to
An Australian Legal History
in his reasons in 1992 in
Queensland [No 2]
That case, which
concerned the reconsideration within Australia of the status of Aboriginal title
to land, required all members of
the High Court to consider issues of the
history involving the interface between the indigenous people and the settlers
successors. Justice Brennan invoked Castles in connection with the
proposition that new territories could be claimed by occupation
if particular
land was uncultivated because, by the common law, European settlers
conventionally had a right to bring lands into
production if they were left
uncultivated by the indigenous inhabitants of a newly settled colony.
A few years later, in
Cheattle v The
the same text was cited by a
unanimous Full Court as authority for the proposition that, at the time of
Australian Federation, the
common law institution of trial by jury had been
adopted in all of the Australian colonies as the ordinary method of trial for
criminal offences.
In 1995, in
Commissioner of Stamp v Telegraph Investment
Justices McHugh and Gummow quoted
the text as the background to describe the extent to which particular statutes
applied under common
law principles concerning the reception of the law in
settled colonies. This was a subject that particularly interested Alex Castles.
He wrote clearly and lucidly on it.
Gould v Brown
the first and
temporarily unsuccessful attempt to smash the scheme of cross-vesting of State
Toohey cited the text to explain how the
Supreme Court of New South Wales, established by the
Charter of Justice
exercised jurisdiction under laws enacted by the colonial legislature. Later, in
Brownlee v The Queen
Callinan invoked Castles’s text to explain a further point concerning the
history of juries in the early colonial years
of Australia. There are many
further citations of this work by Justices of the Court. The foregoing is an
indication of the widespread
respect accorded to it as an accurate and authentic
record of Australia’s legal story.
With my own appointment to the High Court in 1996, the citations increased.
For me, using and citing Alex Castles’ work was
not merely an intellectual
activity but a mark of profound personal respect for his knowledge, learning and
analysis. In
Mackenzie v The Queen
together with Justices Gaudron and Gummow, we invoked the 1982 text to make the
point that juries, in our legal tradition, have long
had a role in mollifying
harsh laws and exhibiting humanity whatever the strict letter of the law might
demand. This was a point
Chief Justice King had made several times in criminal
appeals in South Australia.
Juries acted in
this way in England, during the years of British transportation, by their
decisions concerning the value of objects
stolen or misused – thereby
sparing the accused the hangman’s noose. Juries may still exercise that
privilege. Alex Castles
made the point that this mollification of the letter of
the law is an indication that our discipline is not always coldly logical.
concern, as O W Holmes Jr famously reminded us, is not with logic but with human
experience.
In many other cases I have drawn on Alex Castles’
And I have not confined myself to
the book of history for which he is justly most famous. In
Thorpe v The
Commonwealth
a case concerned with the
issue of justiciability, I called in aid his analysis of non-justiciable
questions. Alex Castles was a
legal historian. But he was also a fine analyst of
difficult and technical legal problems.
The use of his writings will continue in the High Court. His basic text of
history will gain still greater fame in the years ahead.
Now that there is a
finite collection, never to be enlarged, new research and new knowledge will
leave it to his successors to continue
scholarly contributions to the
understanding of legal issues and legal history in Australia’s highest
court. Yet at this time
it is proper that I should acknowledge, on behalf of the
High Court, the signal contribution that Alex Castles’ work has made.
is a splendid contribution. Because its primary focus has been history, it will
be less prone to the attrition of the years than
is the case of virtually every
other department of legal scholarship. Age will not weary nor the years condemn
Alex Castles’s
scholarly insights. They will remain bright and true in the
pages of the
Commonwealth Law Reports
and elsewhere, whenever they are
III THE HIGH COURT AS HISTORIAN
Commonwealth Law Reports
are full of cases in which the High Court
of Australia has explored and decided contested issues of legal history to
resolve cases
before it. It happens all the time. One of the most curious cases
in the High Court involving the use of history was
Giannorelli v
That was a case that concerned
the immunity, claimed by legal practitioners in defence of a negligence suit
brought against them
by dissatisfied clients. Recently, the High Court was taken
decision of the House of Lords that held that the immunity was abolished, as a
general rule, in England and Wales.
decision in the new case in the High Court stands
Accordingly, I say nothing about
it. However, it is relevant to refer to the earlier decision because it shows
how judges, as historians,
can sometimes disagree with each other and express
their disagreements in terms of vehemence that would do credit to professional
historians.
In his excellent analysis of ‘The Use of History and Other Facts in the
Reasoning of the High Court of
Australia’,
Justice Bradley Selway of
the Federal Court of Australia quoted, in turn, an aphorism of another excellent
Adelaide lawyer, Dr John
For the historian, ‘history is a contested terrain. Interpretation, as
well as the method of interpretation, is an ongoing debate
in which historical
“truths” are constantly revisited and revised’. For the Judge,
however, history once used in
legal reasoning, becomes part of the law –
history becomes as fixed and unchangeable (or not) as is the law itself.
Justice Selway classified the differential use of history in judicial
decision-making. Thus, he said, history may sometimes constitute
a fact that is
in issue between the parties to litigation, in much the same way as any other
fact may be in issue. Sometimes, however,
history will constitute a
‘constitutional fact’ so as to be relevant to the validity and
operation of a law. Thirdly,
history may be invoked in advancing legal reasoning
to illuminate where the law has come from, where it is and where it is going,
This is a helpful organisation of the uses of history by Australian courts,
including the High Court. Doubtless there are other ways
to classify the uses of
history. In a sense, every judge of the common law tradition (perhaps of any
legal tradition) lives with
the legal past. The casebooks on our walls are
nothing if they are not secondary histories of the contests and struggles that
memorialise.
A few years back, I became greatly interested in the trial of King Charles I
of England. I gave a lecture on the subject at Gray’s
Inn in London and at
Parliament House in Sydney.
itself is inherently fascinating. What I had not known, until I read the
footnotes to C V Wedgwood’s book on the
was that the story of the
King’s trial – although before an
constituted by a law enacted without his Royal assent – is faithfully
recorded in
Cobbett’s State
Hidden away in such law books
are the records of trivial and eminently forgettable events of legal history and
legal authority. But
also the records of legal events of the greatest
constitutional significance for Australia as of Britain. King Charles’
and the ensuing sentence that condemned him to death are simply vivid
illustrations of history in our lawbooks.
If we look through the first century of the decisions of the High Court of
Australia in the authorised reports we would find many
cases of historical
importance. Within the Australian context, some clearly stand out. They would
surely include the decisions in
Ex parte Walsh and Johnson
In the cases involving Egon
Bank Nationalisation
Communist Party
the struggle over the
determination to hang Robert Peter Tait
and, possibly, the companion decisions of
In most if not all of the foregoing decisions, there can be no doubt that the
Justices of the High Court were conscious, at the time
of each decision, of the
historical importance of what they were doing. It may be doubted whether, in
three and a half centuries
time, lawyers will still be pouring over those
records of history with the same excitement that we can feel on reading the
interchanges between the captive King Charles I and his judges. Yet each
one of the Australian cases was an important milestone in
the history of this
Communist Party Case
, Justice Dixon uttered the well-known
justification of the use by judges of matters of general history known to
educated people in
the society in which they
Just as courts may use the general facts of history as ascertained or
ascertainable from the accepted writings of serious historians
... and employ
the common knowledge of educated men upon many matters and for verification
refer to standard works of literature
and the like ..., so we may rely upon a
knowledge of the general nature and development of the accepted tenets or
doctrines of communism
as a political philosophy ascertained or verified, not
from the polemics of the subject, but from serious studies and enquiries and
historical narratives. We may take into account the course of open and notorious
international events of a public nature. And, with
respect to our own country,
matters of common knowledge and experience are open to us.
Yet, in his essay on the use of history in the High Court, Justice Selway
reminds us of the comment that Justice Gummow made amidst
the controversies over
the history under review in
There remains lacking, at least in Australia, any established taxonomy to
regulate ... uses of history in the formulation of legal
norms. Rather, lawyers
have ‘been bemused by the apparent continuity of their heritage into a way
of thinking which inhibits
historical understanding’. Even if any such
taxonomy were to be devised, it might then be said of it that it was but a
device devised to render past reality into a form useful to legally
principled resolution of present conflicts.
The difficulty of the Dixonian green light to the use of history in court
decisions is that it obviously has limits. Sometimes those
limits are difficult
to chart. Basic concerns of due process and procedural fairness will be raised
where judges invoke, without
notice to the parties themselves, historical facts
that the parties might have desired to question, challenge, answer or
In such cases, it becomes a question
of the precise way that the judge proceeds to use the historical material.
Somehow there needs
to be a compromise between fairness to the parties and an
appreciation that judges are not entirely hostage to the parties’
research. By definition, that research is usually self-interested, variable in
quality and often unsatisfying. It is this consideration
that has led Professor
Enid Campbell to suggest that courts in the future – certainly final
courts – might be provided
with independent research institutes out of
recognition of the fact that practising lawyers are often not equipped, or
(even when they are otherwise interested) to help in discovering
background historical and other material important to informed judicial
decision-making.
cases were bound to be highly controversial,
given the preceding understanding of the common law, the deep interests both
and emotional at stake, and the judicial choices that had to be made.
The use of historical materials, designed to elucidate the
choices in those
cases has evoked much comment and some
Such criticism may or may not be
justified. However, it is important to remember the differing functions of the
historian and the
judicial decision-maker. It is vital to keep in mind the
differing facilities, time frames and duties proper to each professional.
IV JUDGES AND HISTORIANS
Such a point was well made by former Justice Hal
at a conference organised by the
Australian Academy of the Humanities, aimed to bring historians and lawyers
together. Hal Wootten
could look at the issue from the vantage point of an
experienced trial lawyer and judge; but also from the standpoint of a scholar
and former law dean. In a sense, he could understand the perspective of each
side of the critical controversy. For the historian,
facts are normally
provisional. There is rarely, if ever, a final word or interpretation on an era,
on social events or even an occurrence.
On the other hand, judges and lawyers
speak in the language of finality. They do so because that is what the orders of
designed to provide. They work within the somewhat artificial
environment of courtrooms and the hearing places of tribunals. They
subjected to rigorous time constraints. They labour with imperfect and
incomplete materials. They have neither the time nor the
inclination nor the
skills to ruminate too long over a particular case. Other cases constantly crowd
their desks, demanding resolution.
The foregoing may not be reasons for imperfections in judicial
decision-making. But they do explain the differing focus of judicial
They also explain the tensions that arise over the way lawyers gather most
historical, as well as other, facts. Lawyers
puncture the stream of verbal
explanation with their questions. Often, they do not let the historian
elaborate, qualify or explain
at scholarly length. Lawyers attack the premises
of the chronicler. They demand that those premises be exposed when, often, they
must depend on surmise, guesswork and assumption.
Hal Wootten and the other participants in the Academy conference could
understand the problems of which the historians complained.
But they demanded
that the historians, for their part, see the reasons for the courts’
methods. Hal Wootten read the participants
part of the splendid passage from
Pearse v Pearse
which, in 1846,
explained the inescapable limitations on the search for historical truth in a
The discovery and vindication and the establishment of truth are the main
purposes certainly of the existence of Courts of Justice;
still, for the
obtaining of these objects, which, however valuable and important, cannot be
usefully pursued without moderation,
cannot be either usefully or creditably
pursued unfairly or gained by unfair means. Not every channel is or ought to be
open to them.
The practical inefficacy of torture is not, I suppose, the most
weighty objection to that mode of examination. Truth, like all other
things, may be loved unwisely – may be pursued too keenly – may cost
At the Academy conference, a most powerful point concerning this interface
between the historian, judges and lawyers was made to explain
the reasons why
judges demand the proof of the premises upon which historical assertions rest.
The story was told by Professor Graeme
Davidson. He did so by reference to a
case tried in England before Justice Gray concerning the ‘Holocaust
historian David Irving. A Cambridge historian, Richard Evans,
was called to give evidence that there were too many factual errors
Irving’s writings to justify his assertions about the anti Jewish measures
of the Nazis so as to warrant his complaint about
defamation by a critic of his
work. History was not completely freed from provable facts. It was not wholly a
matter of opinion.
Its truths were, at least in broad outline, discoverable and
provable. They could be established, where necessary, within the constraints
necessary to a court of law.
Needless to
say, Professor Evans pronounced himself entirely satisfied with the law’s
procedures. For him the High Court in
London ‘turned out to be a good
place to settle the historical and methodological points in issue in the Irving
What David Irving thought is not recorded. But it can be
Allowing fully for an insistence on the law’s way of doing things, the
Academy meeting demonstrated that sometimes there is
a need for the law to adapt
its ways to special circumstances.
One special circumstance to which the law may need to adopt involves securing
historical evidence from indigenous peoples. An understanding
of their history
and culture is the bridge that must be built between their world of
understanding present and past reality and our
own if injustice arising out of
misunderstanding is to be avoided. That bridge is littered with many obstacles.
The different languages
may provide one such impediment. The fact that
Aboriginal history was not written down, as that of Western civilisation has
means that it is absurd and unjust to demand a continuous written record
extending to the time before the settlers arrived in Australia.
Cultural issues
also arise in communication with judges and lawyers, at least communication by
some Australian Aboriginals. The law’s
procedures of interrupting their
dialogue and squeezing it into the orthodox mode of testimony, familiar to
courtrooms, runs headlong
into the narrative style typical of their traditional
forms of communication. Court practice makes no real allowance for parables,
metaphors, for poetry and for the communication after the song lines. The demand
that each premise be proved as an established
fact may not be possible when
dealing with the legal claims of that part of the nation that is represented by
the indigenous peoples.
Many of these
issues were raised by the appeal to the High Court in
Yorta Yorta Aboriginal
Community v Victoria
Within the High
Court on these subjects there were distinctly different views. Justice Gaudron
and I took one approach. The majority
of the Court took another.
Each world – law and history – can explain itself to the other
given enough time. However, after the optimism of the early
days that followed
, the results of later cases in the High Court have
led to an expressed disillusionment with the courts on the part of many
leaders, as a means of providing a venue accepted by both sides: one
able to decide the issues in contest justly and on the basis
of equality of arms
and information.
Perhaps this conflict is
eternal and insoluble. Perhaps there is no resolution to it. Perhaps it merely
teaches that the ultimate
solution to the economic, legal, social, educational,
medical, housing and other disadvantages of the indigenous people of Australia
lies in the other branches of government – not the judiciary. Perhaps the
courts meant well; but were just not equipped to
solve such complex,
multi-faceted problems of the Australian nation by a few bold litigious
V THE INESCAPABLE PROBLEMS OF HISTORY
We may conclude from this quandary that the law’s methodology and the
techniques of courtrooms work appropriately enough in
a case like that of David
Irving’s. But they are less effective in resolving the complex questions
of the rights within the
same polity of peoples whose history and experience
have been so utterly different from that of the majority. We may feel that the
growing willingness of courts to look at extrinsic materials makes it likely
that history will play an increasing part in judicial
reasoning and rhetoric and
in exposing the points of principle upon which judges and lawyers of the past
have differed and that need
to be resolved in each succeeding generation.
Justice Selway has suggested that, at least in constitutional analysis, I
‘dispute the appropriateness of using history at
However, this is not my belief.
If anything I have written was so unclear as to suggest such a view, I hereby
recant. I do so without
any Cramnerian pre-burning
prevarication.
My objection is rather to
the notion that history
the meaning of a national constitution.
My protest is against the idea that the thoughts and purposes of the founders
forever govern
those who live under the constitution as their organ of
government. This is what I regard as an intolerable
Justice Selway well describes the horrors to which such an historical view of
Constitution
can sometimes lead. In the infamous
Chief Justice Taney of the United
States Supreme Court rejected the notion that slaves in that country had legal
rights which the
courts would uphold. He did so by reference to their precise
legal position at the time that the American colonies had separated
Britain in 1776:
The legislation and histories of the times ... show that neither the class of
persons who had been imported as slaves nor their descendants,
whether they had
become free or not, were then acknowledged as part of the people, nor intended
to be included in the general words
used in that memorable instrument.
We saw dark reflections of a similar notion in the belief that persons
detained by the Commander-in-Chief at the Guantanamo Bay facility
of the United
States were beyond the power and authority of the federal courts when they were
not citizens of the United States.
The Supreme Court recently knocked that
misguided idea on the head.
The idea of
a living national constitution to the historical opinions of
its writers, or the ideas of its time of writing, is so incompatible
governmental
of such a document that it must be rejected.
Although one still sees reflections of such a view in court reasoning, happily
rarely given effect in Australia in contemporary judicial
I would be the last to argue that, in seeking the meaning of the
constitutional text, a court should not make use of all possible
construction. Such aids include historical materials and statements of the
founders’ purposes.
The derivation of
meaning is not a mechanical function for judges or for anyone else. Least of all
is it so in interpreting a national
constitution. But in the giving of meaning,
contemporary judges must ultimately shoulder the responsibility themselves. They
forfeit their function to purely historical studies of what the founders
meant. The founders were speaking to the centuries. Once
they had endorsed their
compact and recommended it to the sovereign people who accept it as their basic
charter of government, the
Constitution
passed beyond the founders’
History is a useful tool of
analysis. It is not a confining intellectual straight-jacket. This truth was
perceived long ago by one
of the founders of the United States of America.
Writing to James Madison, Thomas Jefferson
‘No society can make a
Constitution
or even a perpetual law. The earth belongs always to the
living generation.’
VI THE INEVITABLE JUDICIAL FAILURE OVER
‘HISTORICAL TRUTH’
In our courts, it is increasingly recognised that judges are imperfect
assessors of credibility and truth-telling in the ordinary
For practical reasons, appellate
courts must normally accept the resolution by trial judges of contested
testimony. Yet even here
exceptions are allowed against the risks of serious and
demonstrable injustice.
The difficulties of sorting out contests over truth in damages claims, hard
though they may sometimes be, pale into insignificance
beside the difficulty of
discovering the truth of contested matters of history. Of these, Professor Maoz
Judges are not capable of ruling on such issues. Judges should not engage in
such activity. One may doubt whether there exists such
a concept as
‘historical truth’; one may doubt whether historians are capable of
reaching it; one may argue that it is
not facts but narratives that historians
offer us. Regardless of what conclusions one draws, it is submitted that the
task to adjudicate
history should not be imposed on courts, nor on commissions
of inquiry. If indeed a historian is doomed to fail in his efforts to
‘historical truths’, the more so the judge. This is not only because
the judge lacks the necessary skills for
the mission; it is because he must come
up with an ‘objective truth’ on an issue where no such truth is
obtainable.
Yet sometimes an official decision-maker is obliged to know, or find and
apply, notions of historical truth. It may be about the Holocaust,
the Communist
Internationale or Aboriginal links with particular tracks of land and sea. Then
it becomes a question of what the decision-maker
can properly do.
Often such cases are the bitterest that arise for judicial decision. Usually
a judge is not privileged to decline jurisdiction or
withhold decision. In 1994
a case of high emotions came before the Supreme Court of Israel. A docu-drama
Mishpat Castner
[the Castner trial] was programmed for screening on
Israeli State television. In the drama, the author had Castner accuse a
woman (Hannah Senesh) of handing over two Jewish comrades to the
Hungarian police, after which they perished. The woman’s brother
petitioned the Supreme Court of Israel, sitting as the High Court of Justice, to
order the Israeli Broadcasting Authority to remove
the scene from the play. The
Israeli court rejected the petition. That great jurist, President Aharon Barak,
writing for the majority,
The controversial paragraph does not reflect historical truth. It has no
historical foundation whatsoever. It is not true. [Nevertheless]
a democratic
society which loves freedom does not make its protection of expression
contingent on them reflecting the truth ... A
democratic society does not
protect a legend by harming Freedom of expression and art. The legend must stem
from the free expression
of opinions and views. It must not be a result of
governmental restrictions on freedom of’ expression and art. Hannah
legend will exist and flourish thanks to the freedom of the
truth, not following the silencing of the untruth.
And Justice Barak quoted another distinguished President of the Supreme
Court, once a frequent visitor to Australia, Justice Moshe
The distortion of historical facts does not justify the disqualification,
because its creators could argue that there is no single
historical truth;
rather each historian has his own truth. And anyway, since when does untruth
disqualify a movie or a play from
being screened or performed in a State which
guarantees freedom of expression to the citizen?
Truth – historical truth – may indeed sometimes be loved
unwisely. Between this insight, the rejection of total relativism,
performance of judicial functions in the real world that we inhabit in the
courts and the compulsory exercise of lawful jurisdiction
lie the dilemmas of
the judiciary as history finders and history tellers.
VII CONCLUSION
I can just see Alex Castles rushing up to me after these words. His
excitement, as an historian and broadcaster, with the Israeli
cases would have
been unending. His impatience with judges would have been loudly and vehemently
expressed. As a liberal Australian
and historian, his empathy with the
indigenous people before the courts would have been boundless. His appreciation
of the problems
of history and law and law and history would come bursting forth
from a lifetime’s experience. A torrent of excited words.
We, his friends,
all miss his energy and lateral thinking on an occasion such as this. But we are
truly fortunate to be the beneficiaries
of his scholarship and of his authentic
Australian spirit which lives on – just as history teaches.
Alex Castles Lecture on Legal History,
2004, delivered at the State Library of South Australia, Adelaide on 11 August
Justice of the High Court of Australia.
The author acknowledges the assistance of Mr Alex De Costa, Legal Research
Officer of the
High Court of Australia, in providing materials used in the
preparation of this lecture.
A C Castles, ‘Working with our
Legal History: A Revolution is Just Beginning’
(2003) 7(1)
Journal of Legal History
originally delivered as the first
‘Alex Castles Lecture on Legal History’, Flinders University, School
of Law, Adelaide,
12 August 1999). See also M D Kirby, ‘Living with Legal
History in the Courts’
(2003) 7(1)
Australian Journal of Legal
17 (Address
for Flinders University of South Australia, at the
inauguration of the Alex Castles Lectures on Legal History).
R Hunter, ‘Australian Legal
Histories in Context’
Law and History Review
Eg, W J V Windeyer,
Lectures on Legal
(2nd ed, 1957).
Following the
Privy Council
(Limitation of Appeals) Act
Privy Council (Appeals from the
High Court) Act
1975 (Cth) and
Kirmani v Captain Cook Cruises Pty Ltd [No
Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
[1985] HCA 27
(1985) 159 CLR 461.
Australia Act
Australia Act
received the Royal Assent in the United Kingdom on 17 February 1986. The UK Act
was brought into force (with effect from 3 March
1986) by a statutory instrument
dated 24 February 1986 signed by the Principal Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs
(SI 1986/319). The
Australia Act
assented to by the then Governor General on 4 December 1985. The Queen signed a
proclamation in Australia on 3 March 1986
which brought the federal Act into
force. It has been suggested that Her Majesty signed the proclamation in
Australia to make it
clear that she signed it in her capacity as Queen of
Australia: T Blackshield and G Williams,
Australian Constitutional Law &
Theory: Commentary and Materials
(3rd ed, 2002) 167-168; cf
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 72
(2003) 78 ALJR 203
[107]-[109].
Most recently in
Attorney-General
(WA) v Marquet
[2003] HCA 67
(2003) 78 ALJR 105
, [202]-[208].
Law Reform Commission Act
G Wood, ‘Gordon Hawkins’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
The Hon J G Evans AO QC is the
President and Chief Executive Officer of International Crisis Group based in
F W Maitland,
Three Collected
438 cited D Campbell, ‘Lawyers’ Uses of History’
[1969] UQLawJl 1
University of Queensland Law Journal
Windeyer, above n 3.
W J V Windeyer, ‘History in Law
and Law in History’
Alberta Law Review
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
[1995] HCA 44
(1995) 184 CLR 453
(1998) 193 CLR 346, 375.
[2001] HCA 36
(2001) 207 CLR 278
[1996] HCA 35
(1997) 190 CLR 348
R v Kirkman
O W Holmes,
The Common Law
(1881) (M De Wolfe Howe ed, 1968) 1; cf M D Kirby,
Judicial Activism –
Authority, Principle and Policy in the Judicial Method
Wu v The Queen
[1999] HCA 52
[2001] HCA 36
(2001) 207 CLR 278
[1997] HCA 21
(1997) 144 ALR 677
See eg, A C Castles, ‘The
Elusive Common Law and
Judiciary Act 1903
Australian Law Journal
Blunden v The Commonwealth
(2003) 78 ALJR 236, 253-254; 203 ALR 189, 213.
(1988) 165 CLR 543.
The curiosity of
the case is that, on one view, the
Legal Profession Practice Act
(Vic) s 10(2) froze the legal liability of contemporary barristers in Victoria
by reference to the extent of the legal liability
of a solicitor for negligence
on 23 November 1891.
Arthur J S Hall & Co v Simons
[2002] 1 AC 615 (HL).
D’Orta-Ekenaike v
Victorian Legal Aid & Anor
[2005] HCA 12
(2005) 79 ALJR 755.
University of Tasmania
J Williams, ‘Constitutional
Intention: The Limits of Originalism’ in N Naffine, R Owens and J Williams
Intention in Law and Philosophy
(2001) 321, 333.
M D Kirby, ‘The Trial King
Charles 1: Defining Moment for our Constitutional Liberties’
Australian Law Journal
Judicial interest in earlier English history
is alive and well. See J J Spigelman,
Becket and Henry – the Becket
C V Wedgwood,
The Trial of Charles
Complete Collection
of State Trials
Vol IV, 1640-1649 (1809) 1000 ff.
Amalgamated Society of Engineers v
Adelaide Steamship Company
[1920] HCA 54
(1920) 28 CLR 129.
[1925] HCA 53
(1925) 37 CLR 36.
The King v Carter; ex parte
[1934] HCA 50
(1934) 52 CLR 221
, 234, 248.
Bank of New South Wales v The
Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
(1948) 76 CLR 1.
Australian Communist Party v The
Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1.
Tait v The Queen
[1962] HCA 57
(1962) 108 CLR
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
[1992] HCA 23
The Wik Peoples v Queensland
(1996) 187 CLR 1.
H P Lee and G Winterton,
Constitutional Landmarks
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
, 196. See M Dreyfus,
‘Historians in Court’ in I MacCalman and A McGrath,
Truth: The Humanist as Expert
(2003) 71, 73 (‘
(1996) 187 CLR 1
Selway, above n 29, 135.
Campbell, above n 12, 5.
J Fultcher, ‘Sui generic History
– the Use of History in
in G Hiley (ed),
Case: Issues and Implications
(1997) 51. See also Williams, above n 30,
334-336; G Del Villar, ‘Pastoral Leases and Native Title: A Critique of
[2004] BondLawRw 2
Bond Law Review
H Wootten, ‘Conflicting
Imperatives: Pursuing Truth in the Courts’ in
Proof & Truth
above n 43, 15.
[1846] EngR 1195
(1846) 1 DeG & SM 12
[1846] EngR 1195
, 957, per Sir James Knight Bruce V-C.
G Davison, ‘History on the
Witness Stand: Interrogating the Past’ in
Proof & Truth
n 43, 53, 63. See now Richard Evans,
Lying About Hitter
A Glass, ‘Making the Facts
Proof & Truth
above n 43, 123; A McGrath,
‘History and Land Rights’ in
Proof & Truth
, above n 43,
233; A McGrath, ‘“Stories for Country”: Aboriginal History and
Land Claims’ in
Proof & Truth
above n 48, 251.
[2002] HCA 58
(2003) 214 CLR 422
Western Australia
[2001] HCA 47
(2001) 207 CLR 344
, 381-382 [104]-[105].
This was the opinion of Mr Noel
Pearson at the Centenary Conference of the High Court of Australia, October
2003. He said that,
in the light of recent decisions of the courts, the
Aboriginal people had to look to other branches of government for justice, not
the courts. See N Pearson, ‘Land is Susceptible of Ownership’ in P
Centenary Essays for the High Court of Australia
(2004) 111,
124. Also N Pearson, ‘The High Court’s Abandonment of “The
Time-Honoured Methodology of the Common Law”
in its Interpretation of the
Native Title in Mirriuwung Gajerrong and Yorta Yorta’
[2003] NewcLawRw 1
Newcastle Law Review
A similar view about the ‘damage of raising
unrealistic expectations about what might be achieved by recourse to the
was expressed by Merkel J in 1999. See review by the author of
Litigation – Past and Present
(2004) by Wilfred Prest and Sharyn
Anleu (eds), in
Australian Bar Review
Selway above n 29, 144.
Jasper Ridley,
Bloody Mary’s
(2001) 132.
Brownlee v The Queen
[2001] HCA 36
, 322 [127];
SGH Limited v Federal Commissioner o/ Taxation
[2002] HCA 18
, 86-87 [77]-[78]. See also M D Kirby, ‘Constitutional
Interpretation and Original Intent’
[2000] MelbULawRw 1
Melbourne University Law
Scott v Sandford
[1856] USSC 9
(1857). See Selway above n 29, 154. See also
Al Kateb v Godwin
[2004] HCA 37
Rasul v Bush
[2004] USSC 2325
[1999] HCA 30
Ex parte Taylor; re Patterson
(2001) 207 CLR 391
, 398 [21, 493
Shaw v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 72
(2003) 78 ALJR 203
are clear illustrations of a non-historical approach by
the majority. There are many others. Cf
Re Wakim; Ex parte McNally
198 CLR 511.
As permitted by
Cole v Whitfield
[1988] HCA 18
(1998) 165 CLR 360.
See Selway, above n 29, 146.
R MacQueen, ‘Why High Court
Judges Make Poor Historians’
Federal Law Review
Letter 6 September 1789. See J Appleby
and T Ball (eds),
Jefferson: Political Writings
(1999) 596.
State Rail Authority (NSW) v
Earthline Constructions Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 3
(1999) 73 ALJR 306
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118.
A Maoz, ‘Law and History –
A Need for Demarcation’
and History Review
A Moaz, ‘Historical
Adjudication: Courts of Law, Commissions of Inquiry and “Historical
Law and History Review
Senesh v Israeli Broadcasting
, High Court (Israel) 6124, cited Moaz above n 64, 626.
Ein Gal v Board for Supervision of
Films and Plays
noted in More, ‘Film and Theatre Censorship in
Israel’ (1979) 9
Israel Year Book of Human Rights
225 and quoted in
Moaz, above n 64, 626.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (558 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter