URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AdminRw/2010/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:44:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McMillan, John; Carnell, Ian --- "Administrative Law Evolution: Independent Complaint and Review Agencies" [2010] AdminRw 6; (2010) 59 Admin Review 30
Administrative law evolution: independent complaint and review agencies
The emergence of independent review agencies since the 1970s
Widening of the Auditor-General’s mandate
Taking stock: review bodies’ contribution to the work of government
Looking ahead: future challenges
Independent review agencies and the Parliament
Independent review agencies and the executive branch
The relationship of independent review agencies to each other
Administrative law evolution:
independent complaint and review agencies
John McMillan and Ian
The framework for Australian government accountability has developed and
changed markedly in the past 30 years. Two changes stand
out. One is the
creation by statute of a large number of independent agencies (in addition to
tribunals) that review and scrutinise
executive government processes, including
by complaint handling. These review agencies—watchdogs, as the media often
them—have their roots in administrative law culture and its
values of legality, rationality, fairness and transparency.
The second development is to do with the role of the oldest independent
accountability agency at the Commonwealth level, the Auditor-General,
established in 1901 under the fourth Act passed by the new Commonwealth
Parliament.
Since the 1970s,
through the broader mandate of performance auditing, the Auditor-General has
analysed in detail selected administrative
decision making in a manner that
complements administrative law processes.
These two developments tell us a great deal about how government has changed
over the period, both in structure and in its relationship
with the public. The
review agencies continue to flourish and to deal with new challenges in
government accountability.
The emergence of independent review agencies since the
The first of the new independent review agencies to be created at the
Commonwealth level was the office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
established in
1976 following a lead set by Western Australia in 1971 and quickly followed in
other Australian states.
primary function of the Ombudsman, then as now, is to investigate complaints
received from members of the public about the administrative
decisions and
actions of government agencies, including departments. The number of approaches
and complaints handled by the Commonwealth
Ombudsman has steadily increased over
the years, from 2656 complaints in 1977–78 to 45 719 approaches and
complaints in 2008–09.
From an accountability perspective, a special feature of ombudsman offices is
their statutory independence from parliament and the
executive. The office is
created by statute.
Commonwealth Ombudsman is appointed for a fixed term of up to seven years and
can only be removed from office by both Houses
of parliament. An investigation
is to be conducted ‘as the Ombudsman thinks
There is a broad
discretion to begin or cease an investigation—including the authority to
initiate an own-motion investigation.
Extensive investigative powers, matching
those of a royal commission, are conferred on the Ombudsman, among them the
power to require
documents, to take evidence on oath or affirmation, and to
enter premises. A complainant to the Ombudsman is protected against civil
proceedings (for example, defamation) and Ombudsman officers are not compellable
to provide evidence in other legal proceedings.
The Ombudsman can make a special
report to parliament and has discretion to publish information in the public
It has become commonplace for independent review agencies to be established
along similar lines. Even so, the familiarity of this
model of independent
review should not detract from the profound nature of this change in government.
It involved a marked departure
from traditional means of accountability, which
focused on the role of parliament. Before, accountability for government
administrative
action was primarily to the parliament in three
ways—through the answerability of ministers for the administrative actions
of government agencies, through the oversight role of parliamentary committees,
and through the constituency grievance role of individual
members of parliament.
The creation of ombudsman offices was a new and radically different way of
requiring government agencies to justify their actions
and expose their
processes to independent external scrutiny. This change in the mechanisms of
accountability was a response to significant
growth in the functions and
activities of government.
Government had accepted greater responsibility for providing social welfare
support, community grants and commercial incentive payments.
As a consequence,
more people, were affected by government decision making. Government regulation
had also expanded, prompted by
a host of new policy imperatives to combat
injustice, safeguard the vulnerable, control development, regulate business,
commerce, expand taxation, protect the environment, suppress criminal
activity and respond to security threats. Other social changes—for
example, in tertiary education and in entrepreneurial business activity and the
rise in international travel—meant that people
were more likely to require
government permission or approval for social or business activities. The
cumulative effect of all these
changes was greater interaction between the
community and government and government exercising more discretionary authority
human affairs and business activity.
This greater interaction between the community and government was accompanied
by other changes. People expected more of government
agencies and officials:
they expected them not only to act lawfully and in the public interest but also
to be responsive, transparent
and answerable. Allied to this change was the
notion that people have a ‘right to complain’ against a failure by
or its staff to comply with the standards of good administration. This
expectation is now well entrenched in community attitudes.
The creation of ombudsman offices was a response to this change in the role
and functions of government and in government’s
relationship with the
public. There quickly followed the creation by statute of a number of other
independent review agencies with
a similar role of upholding the rule of law in
government administration, protecting the public against wrongful agency action,
fostering good governance. Among these agencies were the
• The Australian Human Rights Commission, established in 1986 as the Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, administers
functions under laws
relating to human rights, age discrimination, disability discrimination, sex
discrimination, racial discrimination
and equal employment
opportunity.
The functions of the
commission are discharged by its president, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Social Justice Commissioner,
the Disability Discrimination
Commissioner, the Human Rights Commissioner, the Sex Discrimination Commissioner
and the Race Discrimination
Commissioner. These functions include investigating
and conciliating complaints alleging discrimination and breaches of human
conducting public inquiries and consultations, raising public awareness
to provide advice on
human rights principles.
• The Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security, created in 1987,
provides independent review of the six intelligence
agencies—the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, the Australian Secret
Intelligence Service, the Defence Signals
Directorate, the Defence Imagery and
Geospatial Organisation, the Defence Intelligence Organisation and the Office of
National Assessments.
inspector‑general can conduct investigations in response to a complaint
from the public or a reference from a minister
or on its own motion. Other
activities include inspections (effectively compliance audits) of the legality
and propriety of agency
operations.
• Among other things, the Privacy Commissioner, created in 1988, monitors
compliance by Australian government agencies with
11 Privacy Principles that
control how personal information may be collected, stored, used and
The commissioner
exercises diverse functions, among them investigating complaints, conducting
own-motion investigations, auditing
agency practices, providing advice and
guidance on privacy matters, and raising awareness in government and the
community about privacy
rights and responsibilities.
• The Inspector-General of Taxation, established in 2003, reviews the
systems established to administer Australian taxation
laws and makes
recommendations for improvement.
The inspector-general does not investigate individual taxation complaints but
does conduct public inquiries to examine the need for
systemic improvements in
taxation administration with a view to reducing the administrative burden for
taxpayers in meeting their
taxation obligations.
• The Integrity Commissioner, supported by the Australian Commission for
Law Enforcement Integrity, was established in 2006
to detect, investigate and
prevent corruption in the Australian Crime Commission and the Australian Federal
A corruption
investigation can begin as a result of a complaint to the Integrity Commissioner
on the initiative of the commissioner
or in response to a referral from the head
of a law enforcement agency, the Minister for Justice or another agency such as
the Commonwealth
• The Aged Care Commissioner, established in 2007, reviews decisions made
by the Complaint Investigation Scheme (located in
the Department of Health and
Ageing) concerning aged care services that are subsidised by the Australian
Government and the conduct
of the Aged Care Standards and Accreditation
In addition to receiving
complaints, the commissioner can initiate an own-motion investigation into the
scheme’s processes
for investigating aged care complaints or the conduct
of the agency.
• Legislation was introduced into parliament in late 2009 to establish the
Office of the Information Commissioner, to be constituted
commissioners—the Information Commissioner, the Freedom of Information
Commissioner and the Privacy
Commissioner.
The functions of
the new office will include monitoring agencies’ compliance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
promoting the objects of both Acts, issuing guidelines on administration of the
Acts, providing training to agency staff, investigating
complaints received from
the public, conducting own‑motion investigations, advising government on
information policy, and reviewing
agency FOI decisions and making determinations
that can substitute for those decisions.
Four features are common
to these review bodies:
• They are established by statute as independent bodies that are not
subject to government direction on how reviews should
be conducted or other
functions exercised.
• They can investigate the administrative actions of government agencies,
including on receipt of complaints from members of
• Investigation reports are often published, either by the review body or
through the minister or parliament.
• They have extensive statutory powers to conduct investigations, and
there are associated protections for the investigation
process, investigation
staff, witnesses and complainants.
Many of the review bodies have
functions additional to their investigative role. As noted, some have a
record-inspection program or
conduct audits in selected areas of government
administration in order to gauge whether decisions are being lawfully and
made. That is the dominant activity of the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security, who works in an area, national security,
largely hidden from public view. Another example of a specialist function is the
Ombudsman’s role in preparing a report,
tabled in parliament, on every
person held in immigration detention for more than two
Sometimes monitoring can be in ‘real time’. The Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security can attend questioning
conducted under warrant by
ASIO; if the inspector-general expresses concern, the questioning is suspended
until the concern is
Some of the review bodies have additional powers that reflect their
specialist functions. The Integrity Commissioner, for example,
can investigate
police corruption; this can be done by means of telephone interception,
electronic surveillance, undercover and controlled
operations, and passport
confiscation.
bodies—the Ombudsman, the Privacy Commissioner and the Australian
Rights Commission—have a jurisdiction that extends both to government
agencies and, at least to some degree, to the private
sector. The National
private businesses, including health
service providers, Commonwealth
contractors, and businesses with an annual turnover exceeding $3 million.
The disability, race and
sex discrimination standards administered by the Human
Rights Commission similarly extend to most private businesses that provide
and services to the public. The Ombudsman’s jurisdiction extends to
private businesses that provide government services
under contract to the public
and to some private postal operators that join the Postal Industry Ombudsman
Another distinguishing feature is that some review bodies place strong
emphasis on educational activities to promote better decision
making and respect
for human rights values and privacy principles, in and outside government.
Also notable is the fact that the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement
Integrity reports to a parliamentary committee that is
required by statute to
monitor the commission’s work. Additionally, the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security must
report to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Intelligence and Security on certain
Widening of the Auditor-General’s
Before the mid-1970s the main task of the Auditor-General, supported by the
Australian National Audit Office, was financial auditing
to verify the
information contained in the financial statements of Australian government
agencies. A profound change in the 1970s
was the widening of the
Auditor-General’s mandate to include performance auditing, which involves
scrutinising the efficiency
and effectiveness of program management by
government agencies.
performance audit will typically examine both how an agency is performing its
functions and whether it is achieving the objectives
of the program in
There is overlap between performance auditing and administrative law, in
terms of both the topics covered and the objectives. In the
case of the topics,
performance auditing and administrative law review cover all of government.
Often the focus is on the areas of
government that interact directly with the
public, either through providing services to the public or through regulating
and business conduct. In recent years, for example, the
Auditor-General has carried out performance audits of payments made to
individuals, such as age pension payments, Medicare claims
; government grants to
regional and community projects
registration of business activity for taxation and business
; administrative
; and immigration and
visa processing.
The Auditor-General has also carried out performance audits of components of
the administrative law system. Among the topics examined
have been the
management of appeals by the Migration and Refugee Review Tribunals,
Centrelink’s review and appeals system,
veterans’ appeals against
disability compensation decisions, the administration of freedom of information
requests, confidentiality
in government contracts, complaint handling, and
customer service charters.
In the case of the objectives, performance auditing and administrative law
are both concerned with ensuring that public administration
is accountable and
transparent. Both are also concerned with ensuring, at a more practical level,
that administrative decision making
and service delivery are lawfully and
properly conducted. Tribunals and courts pursue that objective principally by
the review of
individual decisions that are the subject of an application for
review by a tribunal or court. Review bodies such as the Ombudsman
only individual cases but also systemic matters. Performance auditing achieves
the same objective by examining a random
selection of individual decisions to
see if errors are occurring but also considers systemic or governance
Both techniques can be effective in identifying flaws in decision making and
service delivery. This can have a beneficial influence
on public administration
beyond the individual decisions that are reviewed or audited. The reports of the
Auditor-General, along
with the published decisions and findings of review
agencies, tribunals and courts, provide a body of principle and case law that
can guide officials when discharging their functions.
This message is the more influential because it comes from an external
agency. The reality and potential of external review is that
it provides a
stimulus for officials to work more assiduously to improve the integrity and
defensibility of decision making and service
delivery. The underlying lesson is
that it is more efficient and effective to get a decision right in the first
instance than to
have a flaw exposed publicly by an external agency at a later
time. Public confidence in government programs and agencies can also
undermined if serious or frequent errors are detected by an external
One other point of cross-over is that audit activity is increasingly being
used by some review agencies as a means of promoting legality
and propriety in
government administration. From its inception the office of the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security has
devoted the larger part of
its resources to regular examinations of intelligence agencies’ use of
their special powers and
capabilities, such as entry and search or
telecommunications interception warrants. Inspecting the records of law
enforcement agencies
to ensure compliance with laws controlling
telecommunications interception, electronic surveillance, controlled operations
to stored communications is now a routine function of the
Similarly, the
the Information Privacy Principles.
Taking stock: review bodies’ contribution to
the work of government
Individually and collectively, independent review agencies play an important,
active and developing role in government. Government
agencies take the work of
the review agencies seriously, in responding to their investigations and reports
and in implementing their
recommendations. Routinely, in legislative and policy
development, government agencies refer to the recommendations of review agencies
as a catalyst for change. Most government agencies now have either a dedicated
unit or specific procedures for liaising with the
Auditor-General, the
Ombudsman, the Privacy Commissioner and other review bodies.
Another dimension of review work is that individuals who are aggrieved by
government administrative decisions and actions are given
a genuine opportunity
to express their concern and have it redressed. Again, it is routinely accepted
in the community and in government
that individuals have a right to complain,
every complaint must be examined, a reasoned response must be given, and a
remedy (including
compensation
) should be provided
if there was defective administrative action.
One way government agencies have acknowledged this point is by establishing
their own complaints units, which for the most part are
well resourced and deal
with a much higher number of direct inquiries and complaints than the external
review agencies. Examples
are ATO Complaints, the Centrelink Customer Service
Centre, the Child Support Agency Complaints Service, the Department of Defence
Fairness and Resolution Branch and the Department of Immigration Global Feedback
Unit. This mechanism is supplemented by customer
service charters adopted by
government agencies; the charters outline the service standards the agency will
meet and the complaint
avenues available to a client who feels the agency has
broken its commitments.
Government as a whole has also taken up this approach. A strong theme in the
government reform agenda is the need for agencies to
be ‘customer
focused’ or ‘citizen centered’. In an address in 2009 Prime
Minister Rudd identified one of
the five tasks facing the Australian Public
Service as the need to ‘deliver high-quality programs and services that
citizen first’.
This point was echoed in the government discussion paper
Reform of Australian
Government Administration
, published in October 2009. The paper outlined the
Government’s commitment to a ‘citizen centred philosophy’:
Being truly citizen centered means placing the citizen at the centre of the
entire public service endeavour. This requires a meaningful
commitment to
actively engaging and empowering people at all points along the service delivery
chain—from high‑level
program and policy formulation all the way to
the point of service delivery, and capturing feedback from the users of
services. The
public service also needs to be capable of effectively interacting
with citizens with unique or special needs or whose circumstances
what might be considered the
The work of
the review bodies also contributes to sustaining fundamental principles of
Australian government and civil service. Foremost
is accountability—a
principle that is strengthened through the work of review bodies in handling
tens of thousands of complaints
each year against government agencies,
investigating selected government activities and programs, auditing and
monitoring government
administration and publishing reports that are critical of
government agencies, and through public appearances before and presentations
parliamentary committees, conferences and in the media. All this work also
ensures a greater measure of transparency in the workings
of executive
government.
Another fundamental principle the review agencies safeguard is that
government administration must be free of corruption, bias and
conflict of
interest. The work of the Auditor-General is significant in this regard, in its
close scrutiny of government financial
transactions followed by regular
reporting to the parliament. Important, too, is the recent creation of the
Australian Commission
for Law Enforcement Integrity to combat corruption in law
enforcement agencies.
of the Ombudsman and some other complaint and investigation agencies also
provides a means of deterring unacceptable conduct,
in particular because these
agencies are prepared to accept anonymous and whistleblower complaints and
promise protection to those
who allege misconduct.
The extensive jurisdiction and powers of standing independent review agencies
have been an important element in Australia’s
consistently high ranking in
the annual Transparency International Corruption Perception Index (Australia was
ranked eighth in 2009).
Looking ahead: future challenges
Independent review agencies are now a permanent element of the government
accountability framework. Their role in government is likely
to grow, both in
activity and in importance. One sign of this is the government decision in 2009
to establish three new officers—the
National Security Legislation Monitor,
the Information Commissioner and the Freedom of Information
Commissioner.
Another sign is the increased functions of some of the existing review
agencies. One point of note is a general movement beyond individual
handling: the agencies are now more active in conducting own‑motion
investigations, publishing reports, setting standards
for good administration,
and monitoring and auditing government administrative
Complaint and own-motion investigations by standing review agencies have a
number of advantages over ad hoc reviews. There is no delay
and establishment
cost in launching an inquiry, staff with expertise are readily available, there
is capacity to monitor responses
to the report, and the review agency itself
remains accountable for its work. The review agencies also have strong powers
and protections
available to them and are often flexible and inquisitorial in
approach. These sorts of advantages led the Australian Law Reform Commission
conclude in 2010 that some public inquiries are best conducted by existing
bodies such as the Ombudsman, the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security
and the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement
The independence and expert knowledge of a review agency have a range of
potential uses. An example is that the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and
Security—following on from the abolition of conclusive certificates as a
means of denying access to documents
under the freedom of information and
archives legislation—has been given a role in the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal as an
expert witness on whether disclosure of documents would or could
cause damage to Australia’s security, defence or international
The Australian Law
Reform Commission has built on that example by recommending that the
inspector-general be allowed to provide expert
advice or assistance to relevant
royal commissions.
Looking ahead, another way of evaluating the future role of independent
review agencies—the opportunities as well as the difficulties
face—is to examine their relationship to the parliament, to the executive
branch of government, and to each other.
Independent review agencies and the
The Auditor-General has long been designated by statute ‘an independent
officer of the Parliament’
and reports to the Joint Parliamentary Committee of Public Accounts and Audit.
That Committee monitors the Auditor-General’s
work and can play a role in
approving or rejecting a recommendation for the appointment of the
Auditor-General.
As noted, the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security and the Integrity Commissioner
are also required by statute to report
to specialist joint parliamentary
committees, at least on some
Many of the review
bodies can also make special reports to
parliament.
A continuing debate concerns whether the role of ombudsman and similar
offices should be tied specifically to parliament. Two of the
early ombudsman
offices, in Western Australian and Queensland, were named the
‘Parliamentary Commissioner for Administrative
Investigations’
specialist parliamentary committees exist in some
Internationally, the
prevalent model for creating an ombudsman is to make it an officer of
parliament.
It is not likely that there will be broad, sweeping change along these lines
at the national level. Existing arrangements are settled,
they rest on a mixture
of formal and informal relationships between individual review bodies and
parliamentary committees and parliamentarians,
there is a high degree of
cooperation and mutual respect, and the arrangements are generally effective.
There is nevertheless scope
within those arrangements for accentuating the
relationship between review agencies and parliamentary committees.
The terms of reference of current committees could be sharpened to make more
explicit their relationship with the review agencies
in their area of activity.
If a committee were to hold a hearing on the annual report of a review agency,
this would also afford
the review agency an important forum for discussing its
work: at present many of the review agencies line up periodically for the
parliamentary estimates hearings, sandwiched between central government
departments and agencies, and are often not called because
of political stoushes
that can dominate the hearings.
From time to time there will also be scope for creating a new parliamentary
committee to which review agencies can report. A welcome
development in this
regard was the Government’s announcement in December 2008 that it would
establish a Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Law Enforcement to extend
parliamentary oversight to include the Australian Federal
The dual advantage of these and similar reforms would be to strengthen the
independent role of review agencies and enable them to
provide more targeted
assistance to the parliament in its compatible role of ensuring executive
accountability.
Independent review agencies and the executive
Review agencies’ relationship to the executive branch is also well
settled, yet could be refined. There are three main areas
of contact.
First, review bodies can be more effective if government agencies cooperate
in their investigations, readily provide information and
assistance, and
acknowledge and respect the bodies’ independence. For the most part this
occurs. There are occasional instances
of resistance, which can usually be
overcome by use of the review body’s coercive investigative powers. The
threat of adverse
publicity is another valuable tool.
Second, a crucial performance measure for a review body is whether its
recommendations and reports are accepted by government agencies.
It is difficult
to measure this precisely, since recommendations often require adaptation or
implementation over time by an agency—for
example, a recommendation that
that an agency provide more assistance or a better explanation to a member of
the public, expedite
the resolution of a person’s application, revise its
administrative procedures, or provide better training to agency decision
Nevertheless, the rate of acceptance is high. For example, for the last three
years the Ombudsman has reported that between
80 and 92 per cent of the
recommendations made in formal reports were accepted in whole or in part, with
some others depending on
further agency
This question of implementation and follow-up warrants consideration. The
Auditor-General’s practice is to monitor the implementation
recommendations and conduct follow-up audits when necessary. Similarly, the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
monitors implementation closely
and can initiate own-motion inquiries or report to ministers and ultimately the
parliament if not
satisfied. In 2009 the Ombudsman instituted a new system of
asking each agency six months after publication of a report to explain
taken to implement the report’s recommendations.
Government agencies are required to provide in annual reports information on
the most important developments in external scrutiny
of the agency, including
judicial and tribunal decisions and reports of the Auditor-General and the
The degree to which
this is done seems variable, particularly in relation to implementation of
changes within the agency that flow
from such decisions and reports.
More generally, there is no formal institutional means in the administrative
law system for ensuring that review outcomes are ‘fed
back’ into the
administrative system in order to achieve systemic
Review agencies and
tribunals are given all the powers necessary to conduct investigations and
hearings, but less thought has been
given to designing mechanisms for ensuring
that the findings of those investigations and proceedings are heeded. This point
Access to Justice
report launched in 2009 by the
Attorney-General.
recommended that all government agencies develop mechanisms for reporting to
tribunals and the Ombudsman on the action
taken in response to individual case
decisions and recommendations, to help resolve systemic shortcomings and to
communicate external
review findings to staff of the agency. A similar
recommendation was made in 2010 by the Henry review into the Australian system,
that the Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit should monitor
implementation by the Australian Taxation Office of recommendations
Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Inspector-General of
The third area of contact between review agencies and the executive branch is
in relation to their budget. Put bluntly, the executive
branch can undermine a
review agency by starving it of finance. From time to time complaints are made
that this occurs, but it has
been less of a problem in recent years. For
example, the staffing numbers of the Auditor-General, the Ombudsman and the
rose during the five years from 2004 to 2009 from 296 to
352 (Auditor‑General), 89 to 152 (Ombudsman) and 36 to 64
The experience of the
present authors is that, on the whole, the executive branch will give sincere
consideration to any submission
for a new or extended function.
The area of budgetary difficulty for review agencies is the efficiency
dividend, introduced in 1987, whereby most government agencies
receive a reduced
budgetary allocation each year of 1.25 per cent, plus an additional one-off
2 per cent in 2008–09. Larger
government agencies can usually absorb
that reduction by phasing down an existing program or developing a new policy
proposal that
attracts new funding. It is not as easy for small agencies,
including all the review bodies, to take the same action. As the Joint
of Public Accounts and Audit noted in a report in 2008:
The system favours larger agencies and agencies with a stronger policy focus
over small agencies. This latter type of agency usually
has a technical,
precisely defined function that gives them reduced discretion over how they
manage their operations. They have poorer
economies of scale. Further, they have
fewer opportunities to top up their funding through new policy proposals because
rarely involved in new
the difficulties some review agencies reported were recruitment and retention of
quality staff in a competitive labour market,
reduced training opportunities for
staff, and difficulty with funding innovation.
The committee recommended a formula for exempting small agencies from the
efficiency dividend and sufficient funding for the Australian
National Audit
Office to enable it to conduct each year the number of performance audits
determined necessary by the Auditor-General
and endorsed by the committee. The
committee’s set of recommendations has not apparently been accepted by the
Government.
The relationship of independent review agencies to
The statutory independence of each review agency means that they are
necessarily independent of each other. Indeed, many of them have
investigate complaints about the other. For example, the Ombudsman, the Human
Rights Commissioner and the Privacy
Commissioner can each investigate the
administrative actions of the other. And, necessarily, the Auditor‑General
can scrutinise
the accounts of all agencies.
Cooperation between the agencies occurs in numerous ways along the
informality–formality spectrum. There is some statutory regulation;
example, the Inspector-General of Taxation is required to consult the Ombudsman
and the Auditor-General at least
, the Ombudsman is
required to transfer particular complaints to the Privacy Commissioner or the
Integrity Commissioner
Australian Human Rights Commission must refer complaints against the
intelligence agencies to the Inspector-General of Intelligence
Some review agencies
have also signed memorandums of understanding with each other, to deal with
cooperation, referral of complaints,
and investigation of complaints about the
other agency. In addition, there is a considerable amount of informal contact
between the
office holders and staff of the various agencies; for example the
Auditor-General circulates (to all government agencies) a draft program of
audits for the following year, and there can be cooperation
with other review
agencies in conducting those audits.
Another link between the review agencies is that many are now located within
the portfolio of the Department of the Prime Minister
Cabinet—specifically, the Australian National Audit Office, the
Commonwealth Ombudsman, the Inspector-General of Intelligence
and Security, the
Information Commissioners.
Together with the Australian Public Service Commissioner and the National
Archives of Australia, these agencies are at times described
‘integrity group’ within government, and they occasionally meet
under that rubric.
This grouping coincides with a broader emerging suggestion that the review
agencies be viewed as a separate and fourth branch of government—the
accountability or integrity
It has been conventional
to describe them as being located in the executive branch ‘because they
fit in here better than anywhere
Obviously, the
review agencies are not part of the other two acknowledged and traditional
branches of government—the legislative
and judicial branches.
The suggestion is that we should update our constitutional thinking and
recognise that independent review agencies have become a distinct
group within
government. In particular, they have statutory independence from the executive
branch, their role is to ensure the integrity
and accountability of the
executive branch, and they do not implement government policies and programs in
the traditional manner
of the executive branch. Rather, review agencies are a
new and effective means of enforcing the rule of law in government, checking
propriety of administrative decision making and controlling government action.
Prof. John McMillan AO has
taken leave as the Commonwealth Ombudsman while he is the Information
Commissioner Designate; Ian Carnell
has recently retired from his position as
the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security. Both have been members of
the Administrative
Review Council.
Audit Act 1901
The Western Australian office
was called the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administrative Investigations.
Ombudsman offices were
established in South Australia in 1972, Victoria in 1973,
Queensland in 1974, New South Wales in 1975 and Tasmania in 1978.
Ombudsman Act 1976
An example of an oversight
agency not included in this list is the Inspector General of the Australian
Defence Force, which investigates
complaints from defence personnel about
military justice matters and conducts audits and performance monitoring of
military justice
arrangements. The inspector general is a statutory office (see
Defence Act 1903
Part VIIIB)
that is independent of the normal
chain of command but is located within the Department of Defence. Another
example is the National
Security Legislation Monitor, to be established in 2010
to review the operation of Australia’s counter-terrorism and national
security legislation, although it will not have a complaint function—see
National Security Legislation Monitor Act 2010
Australian Human Rights
Commission Act 1986
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Disability Discrimination Act
Age Discrimination Act 2004
Workplace Relations
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(Cth). See I Carnell & N Bryan
2006, ‘Watching the watchers: how the Inspector-General of Intelligence
and Security helps
safeguard the rule of law’,
Admin Review
no. 57, ARC, Canberra, 33.
Inspector-General of
Taxation Act 2003
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
Aged Care Act 1997
Information Commissioner
The Inspector-General of
Taxation does not have a complaint investigation function.
Migration Act 1958
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Respectively, the
Intelligence Services Act 2001
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
J Wanna, C Ryan & C Ng
From Accounting to Accountability—a centenary history of the
Australian National Audit Office
, Allen & Unwin, Sydney, chs 4 and
Administration of Complex
Age Pension Assessments
, ANAO report no. 26 of 2006/07;
Accuracy of
Medicare Claims Processing
, ANAO report no. 20 of 2007/08;
Administration
of Youth Allowance
, ANAO report no. 12 of 2009/10.
Performance Audit of the
Regional Partnerships Programme
, ANAO report no. 14 of 2007/08;
Distribution of Funding for Community Grants Programmes
, ANAO report no.
39 of 2006/07;
Administration of Grants by the National Health and Medical
Research Council
, ANAO report no. 7 of 2009/10.
Administration of
Australian Business Number Registrations Follow-up Audit
, ANAO report no. 15
of 2007/08;
Export Certification Australian Quarantine and Inspection
, ANAO report no. 2 of 2006/07.
Administration of Tax
ANAO report no. 31 of 1999/2000.
Visa Management: working
holiday makers
, ANAO report no. 7 of 2006/07;
Management of the
Processing of Asylum Seekers
, ANAO report no. 56 of 2003/04;
of Incoming International Air Passengers
, ANAO report no. 10 of 2009/10.
Management of Tribunal
Operations—Migration Review Tribunal and Refugee Review Tribunal
report no. 44 of 2006/07;
Centrelink’s Review and Appeals System
Follow-up Audit
, ANAO report no. 40 of 2006/07;
Veterans’ Appeals
Against Disability Compensation Decisions Follow-up Audit
, ANAO report no.
58 of 2002/03;
Administration of Freedom of Information Requests
report no. 57 of 2003/04;
Confidentiality in Government
Contracts—Senate order for departmental and agency contracts (calendar
year 2008 compliance)
, ANAO report no. 6 of 2009/10;
Centrelink’s
Complaints Handling System
, ANAO report no. 22 of 2008/09;
Centrelink’s Customer Charter—follow-up audit
, ANAO report
no. 33 of 2006/07;
Taxpayers’ Charter—follow-up audit
report no. 40 of 2007/08.
The importance of reputation
has been emphasised by the Australian Public Service Commissioner—see L
Briggs 2006, ‘Building
the reputation of the Australian Public
Service’, 31 August,
www.apsc.gov.au/media/briggs310806.htm
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Surveillance Devices Act
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 15UA.
One scheme through which
financial compensation can be provided is the scheme for Compensation for
Detriment caused by Defective
Administration—see Commonwealth Ombudsman
Putting Things Right: compensation for defective administration
Report no. 11/2009. A Review of Government Compensation Payments, by the Senate
Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee,
began in February
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd,
John Paterson Oration, Australia New Zealand School of Government Annual
Conference, Canberra, 3 September
2009. Note also that the title of the
Commonwealth Association for Public Administration and Management Conference
held in Australia
in October 2009 was ‘Government—it’s all
Advisory Group on Reform of
Australian Government Administration 2009,
Reform of Australian Government
Administration: building the world’s best public service
, October, 28.
The report of the Advisory Group,
Ahead of the Game—blueprint for the
reform of Australian Government administration
, was released by the
Government on 29 March 2010.
In May 2009 the
Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on the Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity began an inquiry
into whether ACLEI’s jurisdiction
to investigate corruption should be extended to other Australian government
agencies—see
Inquiry into the Operation of the
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
See notes 5 and 12.
More generally, the role
independent public inquiries play in government might increase following the
proposals of the Australian
Law Reform Commission in 2010 for a new
—see Australian Law Reform Commission 2010,
Making Inquiries: a new
statutory framework
, ALRC, Sydney.
Making Inquiries: a new
statutory framework
, paras 13.113–13.115.
Freedom of Information
Archives Act 1983
Australian Law Reform
Commission 2010,
Making Inquiries: a new statutory framework,
111, ALRC, Sydney, Rec 13-4.
Auditor-General Act
Public Accounts and Audit
Committee Act 1951
See note 16.
For example, the
Ombudsman Act 1976
Parliamentary
Commissioner Act 1971
(WA). The Queensland Parliamentary Commissioner was
renamed the Ombudsman in 2001. The Victorian Ombudsman has since been declared
Constitution
to be ‘an independent officer of the
Parliament’—
Constitution
(Vic) s 94E(1).
For further discussion see R
Creyke & J McMillan 2009,
Control of Government Action: text, cases and
, 2nd edn, LexisNexis, Sydney, 268–73.
Commonwealth
Attorney-General, Media release,
Comprehensive Response to National Security
Legislation Reviews
, 23 December 2008.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Annual Report 2008–09
, 12 (80 per cent);
Annual Report
, 16 (84 per cent);
Annual Report 2006–07
(92 per cent).
Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet 2009,
Requirements for Annual Reports
Canberra. These guidelines are approved by the Joint Committee of Public
Accounts and Audit under
Public Service Act
R Creyke & J McMillan
2002, ‘Executive perceptions of administrative law—an empirical
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
177–9, 184.
Attorney-General’s
Department 2009,
A Strategic Framework for Access to Justice in the Federal
Civil Justice System
, AGD, Canberra, 135–7.
Australia’s Future
Tax System, Final Report, Recommendation 118
http://taxreview.treasury.gov.au/content/Content.aspx?doc=html/pubs_reports.htm
These figures are taken from
the annual reports of the agencies. Each uses a different counting method, but
the trend picture is
Joint Committee of Public
Accounts and Audit 2008,
The Efficiency Dividend and Small Agencies: size
does matter
, Report 413, vii.
The 2009 Budget did allocate
additional four-year funding of $20.1 million to the ANAO and
$3.3 million to the Ombudsman to continue
oversight of the Northern
Territory Emergency Response—see
Budget Measures: promoting integrity
and accountability
, Media release 16/2009 by Senator Faulkner, Cabinet
Secretary and Special Minister of State.
Inspector-General of
Taxation Act 2003
Ombudsman Act 1976
Australian Human Rights
Commission Act 1986
The Attorney-General’s
portfolio includes the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, the Australian
Commission for Law Enforcement
Integrity and the Australian Human Rights
Commission.
For example, see JJ
Spigelman 2004, ‘Jurisdiction and integrity’, Australian Institute
of Administrative Law National
Lecture Series; and J McMillan 2005, ‘The
Ombudsman and the rule of law’,
, no. 44, 1.
C Saunders 1998,
Constitution
: governing Australia today
, Federation
Press, Sydney, 99.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (110 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter