URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/1998/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:35:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Right to Silence - Discussion Paper [1998] NSWLRCDP 41
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
1. INTRODUCTION
THE COMMISSION'S REFERENCE
CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE
OPTIONS FOR REFORM
THE STRUCTURE OF THE DISCUSSION PAPER
2. HISTORY OF THE RIGHT TO SILENCE
THE RIGHT TO SILENCE IN ENGLAND
The right to remain silent when questioned by police
The right to remain silent at trial
THE RIGHT TO SILENCE IN NEW SOUTH WALES
THE RIGHT TO SILENCE AS A CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT
RECENT EXAMINATION OF THE RIGHT TO SILENCE
United Kingdom
3. THE RIGHT TO SILENCE WHEN QUESTIONED BY POLICE
THE LAW IN NEW SOUTH WALES
The right to silence when questioned by police
Statutory abrogation
Other police powers
Concealing serious offences
The obligation of police officers to provide information to citizens
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
Serious Fraud Office
REFORM OF THE RIGHT TO SILENCE WHEN QUESTIONED BY POLICE
Arguments for reform
Used by guilty suspects
Serious offences
Prior convictions
Complex offences, organised crime, drug offences
Legal advice
Ambush defences
Abolition subject to additional protections
The need to guide juries
Arguments for retaining the existing right to silence
Reasons for silence consistent with innocence
Police practices
Fundamental principles
Procedural fairness at trial
4. PRE-TRIAL DISCLOSURE
PRE-TRIAL DISCLOSURE IN NEW SOUTH WALES
Legislation
Barristers' and Solicitors' Rules
Prosecution Guidelines
Supreme Court Standard Directions
International law
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
Northern Territory, South Australia, Tasmania, Australian Capital Territory
Western Australia
United Kingdom
Serious fraud
REFORM OF COMPULSORY PRE-TRIAL DISCLOSURE
Compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure
Arguments for disclosure
Arguments against disclosure
Compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure
Arguments for disclosure
Arguments against disclosure
OPTIONS FOR REFORM
Compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure
Material to be disclosed
Unrepresented defendants
Protective measures
Confidentiality
Consequences of non-compliance
Compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure
Option 1: Disclosure of expert evidence
Option 2: Disclosure of expert evidence and the intention to raise certain 'defences'
Option 3: Disclosure of the issues which will be litigated at trial and expert evidence
5. THE RIGHT TO SILENCE AT TRIAL
THE LAW IN NEW SOUTH WALES
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
South Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania
Northern Territory, Victoria
United Kingdom, Singapore
REFORM OF THE RIGHT TO SILENCE AT TRIAL
Arguments for reform
Used by guilty defendants
The need to guide juries
Differences between police interrogation and trial
Arguments against reform
Reasons for silence consistent with innocence
Fundamental principles
Procedural fairness at trial
OPTIONS FOR REFORM
Prosecution comment on silence
Court to ensure defendant aware of right to, and consequences of, silence
APPENDIX A — SUBMISSIONS RECEIVED
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of reference
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW), the Attorney General, the Honourable Jeff Shaw QC MLC, referred the following matter to the Law Reform Commission by letter
dated 1 August 1997:
To inquire into and report on the law relating to the right to silence in New South Wales, including but not limited to:
(i) whether such a right should exist at all;
(ii) if so, the nature of any inference that should be able to be drawn from the exercise of that right;
(iii) the operation of
Evidence Act 1995
(iv) whether there should be any mandatory pre-trial or pre-hearing disclosure of the nature of the defence and of the evidence in
support of that defence;
(v) if so, whether it should be possible to draw any inferences from the failure to disclose such defence or evidence, or the manner
of such mandatory disclosure, or from any change in the nature of the defence or in the evidence in support of it;
(vi) the operation of the current mandatory defence disclosure provisions, including those in relation to alibi, and pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
(vii) whether changes to the current position with regard to prosecution pre-trial disclosure are needed; and
(viii) any related matter.
In undertaking this reference, the Commission was directed to consider the position in other Australian jurisdictions and other common
law jurisdictions throughout the world.
Participants
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairman of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Mr Michael Adams QC*
The Hon Judge Robert Bellear
The Hon Justice John Dowd AO
Mr Brent Fisse
The Hon Judge John Goldring
The Hon Justice Peter Hidden AM
The Hon David Hunt QC
Professor David Weisbrot
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research
Ms Ailsa Goodwin
Ms Beverley Caska
Ms Aferdita Kryeziu
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Administrative Assistance
Ms Shannon Field
Ms Wendy King
Ms Suzanna Mishhawi
Ms Kathryn Sharpe
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this Discussion
Paper. Suggestions for further research issues which should be considered are welcome.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
Sydney NSW 2001
[DX 1227 Sydney]
Phone: (02) 9228 8230
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
Current contact details for the Law Reform Commission
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 31 August 1998.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing the Report on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Discussion Paper. However,
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
1.1 On 1 August 1997 the Attorney General, the Honourable JW Shaw QC MLC referred to the Commission a review of the law relating to
the right to silence. In conducting the review, the Commission was directed to consider (but not limited to consideration of) the
following issues:
(i) whether such a right should exist at all;
(ii) if so, the nature of any inference that should be able to be drawn from the exercise of that right;
(iii) the operation of
Evidence Act 1995
(iv) whether there should be any mandatory pre-trial or pre-hearing disclosure of the nature of the defence and of the evidence in
support of that defence;
(v) if so, whether it should be possible to draw any inferences from the failure to disclose such defence or evidence, or the manner
of such mandatory disclosure, or from any change in the nature of the defence or in the evidence in support of it;
(vi) the operation of the current mandatory defence disclosure provisions, including those relating to alibi, and pursuant to the
Evidence Act 1995
(vii) whether changes to the current position with regard to prosecution pre-trial disclosure are needed; and
(viii) any related matter.
1.2 The Commission was directed to consider the position in other Australian jurisdictions and in other common law jurisdictions throughout
1.3 The expression “the right to silence” describes a group of rights which arise at different points in the criminal
justice system. This group of rights includes:
(1) A general immunity, possessed by all persons and bodies, from being compelled on pain of punishment to answer questions posed
by other persons or bodies.
(2) A general immunity, possessed by all persons and bodies, from being compelled on pain of punishment to answer questions the answers
to which may incriminate them.
(3) A specific immunity, possessed by all persons under suspicion of criminal responsibility whilst being interviewed by police officers
or others in similar positions of authority, from being compelled on pain of punishment to answer questions of any kind.
(4) A specific immunity, possessed by accused persons undergoing trial, from being compelled to give evidence, and from being compelled
to answer questions put to them in the dock.
(5) A specific immunity, possessed by persons who have been charged with a criminal offence, from having questions material to the
offence addressed to them by police officers or persons in a similar position of authority.
(6) A specific immunity (at least in certain circumstances ... ), possessed by accused persons undergoing trial, from having adverse
comment made on any failure (a) to answer questions before the trial, or (b) to give evidence at the trial.
1.4 This Discussion Paper examines the right to silence when questioned by police, the pre-trial disclosure obligations of the prosecution
and the defence and the right to silence at trial. The Commission’s review examines whether each of these rights and obligations
should exist. The review also considers whether, at the defendant’s trial, the judge, the prosecution, or both, should be permitted
to comment to the jury on the inferences which the jury is entitled to draw from the fact that the defendant chose to exercise the
right to silence, and the nature of comment which should be permitted.
CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE
1.5 The Commission received the reference in August 1997 and commenced substantial work on the reference in October 1997. During October
1997, the Commission also circulated the terms of reference to relevant individuals and organisations and invited initial submissions.
The Commission has received many submissions, which have assisted in the production of this Discussion Paper. A list of submissions
is at Appendix A.
OPTIONS FOR REFORM
1.6 This Discussion Paper considers the option of introducing extensive compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure in both the District
Court and the Supreme Court. This would require the prosecution to disclose a summary of the conceptual nature of the prosecution
case and to identify the facts which it considers suitable for informal proof and those which it invites the defence to admit. The
prosecution would also be required to disclose all relevant witness statements (including expert witness reports) and exhibits.
1.7 The Discussion Paper also raises three options for compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure. Under the first option, where scientific
evidence was proposed to be adduced, the defence would be required to provide the prosecution with copies of expert witness reports.
The second option would require the defence to disclose whether the defendant intended to raise intoxication, provocation, duress
or self defence, in addition to the existing notice requirements relating to alibi evidence and substantial impairment by abnormality
of mind defences. Disclosure of expert evidence would also be required.
1.8 The third option is more extensive. Under this option, the defence would be required to disclose the issues raised by the prosecution
which the defence intended to dispute at trial and any additional issues which the defence intended to raise. In addition, under
this option the defence would be required to provide the prosecution with copies of expert witness reports.
1.9 The Discussion Paper also considers the option of extending the operation of the
Evidence Act 1995
to permit the prosecution to comment to the jury on the defendant’s refusal to testify at trial (subject to appropriate safeguards).
THE STRUCTURE OF THE DISCUSSION PAPER
1.10 This Discussion Paper adopts the following structure:
Chapter 1 sets out the Commission’s terms of reference and the issues raised by the reference.
Chapter 2 outlines the history of the law relating to the right to silence.
Chapter 3 briefly examines the general immunities possessed by all persons and bodies from being compelled to answer questions, particularly
incriminating questions. Chapter 3 then examines the right to remain silent when questioned by police.
Chapter 4 examines the pre-trial disclosure obligations of the prosecution and the defence.
Chapter 5 examines the defendant’s right to refuse to answer particular questions or refuse completely to testify at trial.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
R v Director of Serious Fraud Office, Ex p Smith
[1993] AC 1
at 30-31; [1992] 3 WLR 66 at 74 per Lord Mustill, with whom the other members of the House of Lords agreed.
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
2. History of the Right to Silence
History of this Reference (Digest)
2.1 The right to remain silent when questioned by police and the right to remain silent at trial have different, but related, origins.
This chapter examines the history of these rights in England and Australia, and briefly considers the position in other common law
THE RIGHT TO SILENCE IN ENGLAND
The right to remain silent when questioned by police
2.2 Under investigative procedures introduced in England in the sixteenth century, constables were required to bring a suspect before
an examining justice as soon as possible after arrest for interrogation. A record of the interrogation, including the suspect’s
refusal to answer questions, was transcribed and presented at trial.
2.3 The judiciary grew to consider confessions inherently unreliable because examining justices were not an organised, effectively
supervised body and were prone to mistreat suspects to obtain confessions. Judicial distrust of confession evidence was widespread
in England by the nineteenth century.
The right to silence developed as a judicial response to this distrust. The development of the right to silence at trial also contributed
to the development of the right to silence when questioned by police.
2.4 The Metropolitan Police Force was established in 1829, followed by the various provincial forces over the next two decades.
Summary Jurisdiction Act 1848
separated the investigative and judicial functions of the state. Examining justices were prohibited from questioning suspects. This
role was given to the newly established police forces.
2.5 In the late nineteenth century, the attitudes of individual judges to the admissibility of police interrogation evidence varied,
causing uncertainty.
In 1912 the Home Secretary requested the judges of the King’s Bench to consider the issue. This led to the issue of the Judges’
Rules, which provided that whenever a police officer decided to charge a person with a crime, the police officer should first caution
the person that he or she was entitled to remain silent.
The Judges’ Rules operated as a code of practice rather than a rule of law.
The caution was revised during the following decades. In 1978 the Judges’ Rules were formally adopted by the Home Office and
a revised version was published and circulated to police.
2.6 The trial judge was permitted to direct the jury that any person suspected of a criminal offence was entitled to remain silent
when questioned by police and that the jury must not hold this against the defendant.
The right to remain silent at trial
2.7 The development of the right to remain silent at trial is frequently attributed to the practices of the English Courts of Star
Chamber and High Commission.
During the late sixteenth century, these courts developed the practice of compelling suspects to take an oath known as the “ex-officio
oath” and, without formal accusation, to answer questions put by both the judge and the prosecutor. Failure to either take
the oath or answer questions attracted severe sanctions, including torture.
This practice was held to be unlawful on four occasions in the early seventeenth century
and both courts were abolished in 1641.
Following this, the rule developed that the defendant was incompetent to give evidence at trial.
2.8 However, other explanations for this rule have also been put forward. One theory is that the jury’s decision was made under
oath and was a form of proof. Their finding could not logically follow from another form of proof, the oath of the defendant.
Another suggested reason is the belief that anyone with a personal interest in the outcome of a trial was inherently unreliable.
It has also been suggested that the defendant was prohibited from testifying because, if the defendant’s account differed from
the evidence of other witnesses, the belief that people necessarily told the truth under oath would be challenged, undermining the
whole concept of trial by oath and public confidence in the criminal justice system.
It has been suggested that this procedure originated in the common law criminal procedure of the middle ages,
or Roman canon law.
Finally, it has been suggested that the incompetence of defendants stemmed from the concerns of judges about the unfairness of trials
to defendants, arising from the poor quality of examining justices and juries, the hastiness of trials, the severity of penalties
for offences and the inadequacy of appeal rights.
2.9 The practice of permitting the defendant to make an unsworn statement at trial was developed by the judiciary in the nineteenth
century as a way of enabling defendants to say something in their defence.
2.10 The competence of defendants to testify in their own defence was re-established by the
Evidence Act 1898
This Act provided that judges were permitted to comment to the jury where the defendant chose to remain silent at trial.
In practice, this comment was usually restricted to a direction to the jury not to assume that the defendant was guilty on the basis
of the defendant’s silence at trial.
The prosecution was barred from comment.
The Act also expressly preserved the defendant’s right to make an unsworn statement at trial.
2.11 The law relating to the right to silence in the United Kingdom was substantially modified in Northern Ireland in 1988 and in
England and Wales in 1994.
THE RIGHT TO SILENCE IN NEW SOUTH WALES
2.12 The English law relating to the right to silence applied in New South Wales until 1891, when the defendant became a competent
witness in New South Wales under the
Criminal Law and Evidence Amendment Act 1891.
This Act expressly preserved the defendant’s right to remain silent at trial by providing that the defendant was a competent
but not a compellable witness.
2.13 Two years later, the Full Bench of the Supreme Court of New South Wales held that the trial judge was permitted to direct the
jury to draw adverse inferences from the defendant’s failure to testify.
In 1898 judicial comment on the exercise of the right to silence at trial was prohibited.
2.14 The defendant’s right to make an unsworn statement at trial was abolished in New South Wales in 1994, although the right
still exists in some residual trials.
Unsworn statements have now been abolished in all Australian jurisdictions.
Evidence Act 1995
codified the common law right to silence when questioned by police in New South Wales
Evidence Act 1995
also amended the law relating to the defendant’s right to silence at trial. The Act permits the trial judge to comment to the
jury on the inferences it may draw from the fact that the defendant has exercised the right to silence.
THE RIGHT TO SILENCE AS A CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT
2.16 In the United States, the Fifth Amendment to the Bill of Rights, added to the Federal
Constitution
in 1791, provides that “(n)o person shall ... nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself”.
There are comparable guarantees in each of the state constitutions.
The United States Supreme Court has held that the Fifth Amendment guarantees the right to silence during custodial investigation
as well as at trial.
2.17 The Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
(“the Charter”) states that every person has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not
to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.
The Supreme Court of Canada has held that the right to silence when detained and questioned by police is one of the principles of
“fundamental justice” provided for by the Charter.
The Charter also states that any person charged with an offence has the right not to be compelled to be a witness in proceedings
in respect of the offence.
In Canada, both the judge and the prosecution are prohibited from commenting to the jury on the failure of defendants to testify
RECENT EXAMINATION OF THE RIGHT TO SILENCE
United Kingdom
2.18 The Justice Evidence Committee (“the JEC”) published its report on the accused as a witness in 1968.
The JEC proposed that the right to silence at trial be preserved,
but that the prosecution be permitted to comment to the jury on the failure of the defendant to give evidence at trial.
The JEC criticised the “undue moderation” of some trial judges in their jury directions and proposed a more forthright
approach to judicial comment.
The JEC also proposed that the defendant should be informed of the right to give evidence by the trial judge, in the presence of
2.19 The Criminal Law Revision Committee (“the CLRC”) published its report on evidence in 1972.
A majority of the CLRC proposed that where the defendant relied on a fact at trial which he or she did not tell the police when questioned,
the tribunal of fact be permitted to draw “such inferences from the failure as appear proper”, if the defendant could
reasonably have been expected to mention the fact earlier.
The majority recommended that the judge be permitted to comment to the jury on the inferences available.
The CLRC recommended that if the defendant refused to give evidence at trial or refused without good cause to answer any question,
the court or jury again be permitted to “draw such inferences from the refusal as appear proper”.
It recommended that both the prosecution and the trial judge be permitted to comment to the jury on the inferences available.
The CLRC also recommended that before the presentation of the defence case at trial, the trial judge call on the defendant to give
evidence and explain the consequences of the exercise of the right to silence.
The CLRC recommendations were not implemented as a result of very strong opposition and the fact that the CLRC was divided in relation
to its recommendations on silence when questioned by police.
2.20 Following the publication of the CLRC’s report, the campaign to modify the right to silence continued with the Commissioner
of Metropolitan Police criticising the right to silence in public addresses in 1972 and 1973.
2.21 The Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure reported in 1981.
The Commission proposed that the existing law be retained.
A criminal justice reform package based on the Commission’s report was implemented in England in 1984.
This package of reforms included the introduction of a duty solicitor scheme, providing suspects with a substantive right to legal
aid during police questioning.
2.22 In 1987, legislation was passed which compelled persons to respond when questioned by members of the Serious Fraud Office.
In May 1988, the Home Office established the Home Office Working Group on the Right to Silence. The Group’s terms of reference
were to advise the Government “on
to change the law, not whether or not in principle some form of change was justified”.
2.23 In November 1988, the law of Northern Ireland was modified by an Order in Council. The amendments permitted the jury to draw
strong adverse inferences from the exercise of the right to silence when questioned by police or at trial, and allowed the trial
judge to direct the jury accordingly.
The justification advanced for this measure was that it was a necessary response to terrorist suspects trained in counter interrogation
techniques exploiting the right to silence when questioned by police and raising “ambush defences” at trial.
2.24 The Working Group on the Right to Silence published its report in 1989.
The Group recommended adopting the proposals of the CLRC, subject to several safeguards for suspects.
Before any action was taken on the Group’s recommendations, the right to silence became an issue in a series of widely publicised
miscarriages of justice involving terrorist offences in Northern Ireland.
2.25 The Royal Commission on Criminal Justice was established in 1991 as a result of these miscarriages of justice.
The Commission published its report in 1993. A majority of the Commission recommended that the existing position be retained.
However, the law relating to the right to silence in the United Kingdom was substantially modified in 1994.
2.26 The law relating to the right to silence has also been considered on several occasions by Australian law reform agencies. The
Australian Law Reform Commission (“ALRC”) published its interim report on criminal investigations in 1975,
recommending retention of the existing law in relation to silence when questioned by police.
The ALRC recommended statutory recognition of this right and a statutory requirement that suspects be notified of this right.
2.27 The ALRC published its interim report on evidence in 1985.
The ALRC recommended codification of the existing law in relation to silence when questioned by police.
The ALRC also recommended permitting judicial comment on the exercise of the right to silence at trial. It recommended that the
judge be prohibited from suggesting that the defendant failed to give evidence because he or she was guilty of the offence concerned.
The ALRC recommended that the prosecution be prohibited from commenting to the jury on the defendant’s failure to give evidence.
Two years later, the ALRC published its final report on evidence, reiterating these recommendations.
2.28 The New South Wales Law Reform Commission (“the NSWLRC”) has also considered the law relating to the right to silence
when questioned by police, and at trial. The NSWLRC published its report on evidence in 1988,
recommending that if the defendant raised the fact of his or her silence at trial as an issue in the trial, the prosecution, but
not the trial judge, be permitted to comment to the jury on the adverse inferences which the jury could draw from the defendant’s
The NSWLRC also recommended that the defendant and the jury be informed by the trial judge that the defendant has a choice of giving
or not giving evidence.
2.29 The NSWLRC published its report on criminal procedure in 1990,
recommending that no adverse inference be permitted from a refusal to answer police questions or participate in police investigations.
2.30 The Criminal Law and Penal Methods Reform Committee of South Australia published its report on criminal investigation in 1974,
recommending that in deciding guilt, the tribunal of fact be entitled to draw “such inferences as seem to it to be proper”
from the defendant’s silence when questioned by police.
2.31 The Committee of Inquiry into the Enforcement of Criminal Law in Queensland published its report in 1977.
The Committee adopted the recommendations of the CLRC in relation to the right to silence.
2.32 In May 1997, the New South Wales Police Commissioner called for a review of the right to silence.
The New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions has also supported some relaxation of the right.
2.33 In addition to the Commission’s review, the law relating to the right to silence is currently under review in Victoria,
Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
1, 2 Phillip and Mary
2, 3 Phillip and Mary
cl 10; J Wigmore,
Evidence in Trials at Common Law
(McNaughton Rev, Little Brown, Boston, 1961) at para 2250; D Harvey, “The Right to Silence and the Presumption of Innocence”
New Zealand Law Journal
at 182; S Odgers, “Police Interrogation and the Right to Silence”
Australian Law Journal
. M Weinberg, “The Right to Silence — Sparing the Judge From Talking Gibberish”, paper presented at session 24 of
Australian Legal Convention
(Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997) at 4; CR Williams, “Silence in Australia: Probative Force and Rights in the Law of Evidence”
Law Quarterly Review
at 630-631.
. CR Williams at 630.
. Working Group on the Right to Silence,
Report of the Working Group on the Right to Silence
(London, 1989) at 8.
Summary Jurisdiction Act 1848
(11 & 12 Vict.).
. J Wood and A Crawford,
The Right of Silence
(The Civil Liberties Trust, London, 1989) at 7.
[1918] 1 KB 531 at footnote 3; Odgers (1985) at 83; F Neasey, “The Rights of the Defendant and the Interests of the Community”,
paper presented at the
Australian Legal Convention
(Brisbane, 16-22 July 1969) at 31.
[1918] 1 KB 531.
. Home Office,
(London, 1978)
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(London, 1993) at 50.
. Wigmore at para 2250; I Alger, “From Star Chamber to Petty and Maiden: Police Attitudes to the Right to Silence”, paper
presented at session 24 of the
Australian Legal Convention
(Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997) at para 9; Weinberg at 3-4; T O’Gorman, “Right to Silence”, paper presented at
session 24 of the
Australian Legal Convention
(Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997) at 1; K Marks, “‘Thinking Up’ About the Right of Silence and Unsworn Statements”
Law Institute Journal
at 370-371; Wood and Crawford at 5-6; CR Williams at 629-630; Justice Evidence Committee,
The Accused as a Witness
(London, 1968) at 1; S Greer, “The Right to Silence: A Review of the Current Debate”
Modern Law Review
at 710 and 711; J Michael and B Emmerson, “The Right to Silence”
European Human Rights Law Review
at 5; S Bronitt and M Ayres, “The Administration of Criminal Justice and International Human Rights Law: A Legal Practitioner’s
Guide” in D Kinley (ed),
Human Rights in Australian Law: Practice and Potential
(forthcoming, Federation Press, 1998).
. Odgers (1985) at 83.
. Wigmore at para 2250.
, cl 10, 11.
. Harvey at 181.
. Harvey at 181; Marks at 371; Weinberg at 5 suggests that this was actually a benevolent step designed to enable the defendant to
avoid exposure to eternal damnation for perjury.
. Wood and Crawford at 5.
. Greer (1990) at 710-711, citing L Levy,
Origins of the Fifth Amendment
(OUP, New York, 1968).
. Greer (1990) at 710, citing M McNair, “The Early Development of the Privilege Against Self Incrimination” (1990) 10
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
. Criminal Law Revision Committee,
Evidence (General)
(Report 11, London, 1972) at para 21; see paras 2.2-2.6.
. Marks at 372; Criminal Law Revision Committee at para 102; see para 2.14.
Evidence Act 1898
(61 & 62 Vict.) s 1.
Evidence Act 1898
(61 & 62 Vict.) s 1.
. S Nash, “Silence as Evidence: A Commonsense Development or a Violation of a Basic Right?”
Criminal Law Journal
at 146; contra Michael and Emmerson at 6.
Evidence Act 1898
(Eng) s 1(b).
Evidence Act 1898
(Eng) s 1(h).
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 34-38, 168; see paras 2.23, 3.17-3.24 and 5.15-5.21.
Criminal Law and Evidence Amendment Act 1891
(55 Vict. No 5).
Criminal Law and Evidence Amendment Act 1891
(55 Vict. No 5) s 6.
(1893) 14 LR (NSW) 150.
Accused Person’s Evidence Act 1898
(NSW) s 1; replaced in 1900 by the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 407 which was in the same terms.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 404A, inserted by the
Crimes Legislation (Unsworn Evidence) Amendment Act 1994
Evidence Act 1995
; see para 3.8.
Evidence Act 1995
; see para 5.3.
Constitution
Constitution
of Papua New Guinea
, Art 37(1).
Bram v United States
[1897] USSC 209
(1897) 168 US 532
Wan v United States
[1924] USSC 158
(1924) 266 US 1
Miranda v Arizona
[1966] USSC 143
(1966) 384 US 436.
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
R v Herbert
(1990) 57 CCC (3d) 1
R v Chambers
[1990] 2 SCR 1293.
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
Evidence Act
[1997] 1 SCR 874.
. Justice Evidence Committee,
The Accused as a Witness
(London, 1968).
. Justice Evidence Committee
at 3 and 4.
. Justice Evidence Committee at 4-5.
. Justice Evidence Committee at 4-5.
. Justice Evidence Committee
. Criminal Law Revision Committee,
Evidence (General)
(Report 11, London, 1972).
. Criminal Law Revision Committee,
Draft Criminal Evidence Bill
cl 1(1) and (2) and paras 28-52.
. Criminal Law Revision Committee at para 30. The minority agreed in general with the recommendations of the majority, but recommended
delaying implementation until tape recording of interviews was an established procedure: at para 52.
. Criminal Law Revision Committee,
Draft Criminal Evidence Bill
cl 5 and paras 108 to 113.
. Criminal Law Revision Committee at para 110.
. Criminal Law Revision Committee,
Draft Criminal Evidence Bill
cl 5 and paras 108 to 113.
. Greer (1990) at 715; Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
(London, 1981) at paras 1.27 and 1.31.
. R Mark, “The Disease of Crime: Punishment or Treatment” [1972]
Royal Society of Medicine
at 6 and 13 (public lecture) and R Mark, “Minority Verdict”,
The Listener
, 8 November 1973 (public lecture).
. Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
(London, 1981).
. Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure. Silence when questioned by police: at para 4.52 and see paras 4.48-4.53. Silence at trial:
at para 4.66 (majority recommendation) and see paras 4.63 to 4.66.
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
Criminal Justice Act 1987
(Eng) s 2. The Act makes it an offence to refuse to answer questions asked by members of the Serious Fraud Office. The maximum penalty
is 6 months imprisonment. The Act provides that the answers given cannot be used against the person subsequently unless the person
changes his or her story.
. Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 50.
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
. Michael and Emmerson at 7; see para 3.45.
. Working Group on the Right to Silence,
Report of the Working Group on the Right to Silence
(London, 1989).
. Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 126.
. G Griffith,
The Right to Silence
(NSW Parliamentary Library Research Service Briefing Paper No 11/97, Sydney, 1997) at 21.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 1.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice. Silence when questioned by police: at 54 and see 50-55. Silence at trial: at 56 and see 55-57.
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 34-38, 168; see paras 3.17-3.24 and 5.15-5.21.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Investigation
(Report 2 (Interim), 1975).
. Australian Law Reform Commission (1975) at para 150 and see paras 146-150.
. Australian Law Reform Commission (1975) at para 344 and see paras 142 and 146-150.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
(Report 26 (Interim), 1985).
. Australian Law Reform Commission (1985)
Draft Evidence Bill
cl 76 and vol 1 at paras 756-758.
. Australian Law Reform Commission (1985)
Draft Evidence Bill
cl 17 (7) and vol 1 at paras 194-199.
. Australian Law Reform Commission (1985)
Draft Evidence Bill
cl 17 (7) and vol 2 at paras 11-14.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
(Report 38, 1987)
Draft Evidence Bill 1987
. Silence when questioned by police: cl 78 and para 160. Silence at trial: cl 23 and paras 69-73.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
(Report 56, 1988).
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1988)
Evidence Bill 1988
cl 23 and para 2.32. The Commission recommended preserving the trial judge’s power to comment on prejudicial material introduced
by the prosecution by way of comment on the defendant’s silence.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1988)
Evidence Bill 1988
cl 29(2)(b) and para 2.18.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Procedure — Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990).
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1990) at 117 and 120-123.
. Criminal Law and Penal Methods Reform Committee of South Australia,
Criminal Investigation
(Report 2, 1974).
. Criminal Law and Penal Methods Reform Committee of South Australia at 106-107 and see 100-102.
. The Committee of Inquiry into the Enforcement of Criminal Law in Queensland,
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Enforcement of Criminal Law in Queensland
. The Committee of Inquiry into the Enforcement of Criminal Law in Queensland at para 194 and see paras 189 to 196.
. T Harris, “Ryan Calls for Court Overhaul”
The Australian
(29 May 1997) at 5.
. “Remaining Silent” (editorial)
(25 August 1997).
. J MacDonald, “AG Backs Review of Right to Silence”
(26 March 1998); B Pheasant, “Right to Silence Comes Under Review”
Australian Financial Review
(19 November 1997).
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
3. The Right to Silence When Questioned by Police
History of this Reference (Digest)
3.1 The right to silence when questioned by police is universally recognised in common law jurisdictions, including New South Wales.
No jurisdiction governed by rule of law makes it an offence to remain silent in response to police questions. In New South Wales
trials, both the judge and the prosecution are prohibited from commenting on the exercise of this right. However, the law in relation
to comment at trial on the exercise of this right has been modified in other jurisdictions. This chapter examines the right to silence
when questioned by police in New South Wales and reforms in other jurisdictions. The chapter considers the arguments for and against
reform of the law prohibiting comment on the exercise of the right to silence.
THE LAW IN NEW SOUTH WALES
3.2 It is not an offence to refuse to answer questions, including incriminating questions, asked by other persons or bodies.
At trial, both the judge and the prosecution are entitled to comment on the defendant’s silence in the face of an accusation
made by another member of the public. The reasonableness of interpreting silence adversely to the defendant depends on the circumstances,
including the relationship between the defendant and the accuser, the seriousness of the accusation, the situation in which the accusation
was made and how specific the accusation was.
The right to silence when questioned by police
3.3 A person who believes on reasonable grounds that he or she is suspected of having committed a criminal offence has the right to
remain silent when questioned by a person in authority about the offence. At trial, neither the judge nor the prosecution can comment
to the jury on the exercise of this right. This position applies throughout Australia as a result of the decision of the High Court
Petty v The Queen
3.4 Evidence of police interrogation which discloses that the defendant exercised the right to silence when questioned by police is
admissible at trial in certain circumstances.
The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal has held that it is reasonably foreseeable that the defence may criticise the fairness
of the conduct of the investigating police officers. The fact that the defendant was asked questions by the police is admissible
to meet this anticipated criticism. As a corollary, the answers given are also admissible.
Immediately after evidence of this type is given, the trial judge is required to direct the jury that the defendant is entitled to
remain silent and that the jury must not conclude that the defendant is guilty from the exercise of the right.
3.5 Where the defendant has participated in the police interview and answered some questions but refused to answer others, in certain
circumstances the whole record of interview, including the questions which the defendant refused to answer and the refusals themselves,
is admissible at trial. The judge must not direct the jury that selective answering of questions can give rise to an inference of
guilt. However, the jury is entitled to regard the demeanour of the defendant during the interrogation as evidence of guilt.
3.6 If the defendant exercised the right to silence when questioned by police, the trial judge is entitled to exclude evidence of
admissions made voluntarily by the defendant to a witness who the defendant does not realise is an undercover police officer. The
High Court has held that in this situation, the confession evidence should be excluded because it was effectively obtained in violation
of the right to choose whether or not to speak to the police. In
R v Swaffield and Pavic
, Brennan CJ stated that there is a public interest in ensuring that the police do not adopt tactics designed to avoid the limitations
on their inquisitorial functions.
3.7 The High Court has also held that the privilege against self incrimination is only available to natural persons. The privilege
does not extend to corporations.
Several members of the Court expressly described the privilege against self incrimination as one of the group of rights and immunities
covered by the expression “the right to silence”.
3.8 The position in New South Wales is further clarified by the
Evidence Act 1995
, which provides:
(1) In a criminal proceeding, an inference unfavourable to a party must not be drawn from evidence that the party or another person
failed or refused:
(a) to answer one or more questions, or
(b) to respond to a representation,
put or made to the party or other person in the course of official questioning.
(2) Evidence of that kind is not admissible if it can only be used to draw such an inference.
(3) Subsection (1) does not prevent use of the evidence to prove that the party or other person failed or refused to answer the question
or to respond to the representation if the failure or refusal is a fact in issue in the proceeding.
(4) In this section:
“inference” includes:
(a) an inference of consciousness of guilt, or
(b) an inference relevant to a party’s credibility.
substantially reflects the common law position stated by the High Court in
Petty v The Queen
3.10 The operation of
is illustrated by the offence of failing to furnish information under the
Traffic Act 1909
This offence is committed when a driver fails to produce his or her licence or provide his or her name or address when required to
do so by a police officer. The nature of this offence makes failure to answer questions a fact in issue in the proceedings.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
recognises the right not to be compelled to confess guilt as part of the right to a fair trial.
Statutory abrogation
3.12 The right to silence when questioned by police has been modified in different ways by numerous statutes. For example, as discussed
in paragraph 3.10 above, drivers are required to produce their licence and provide their name and address when required to do so
by a police officer. Non-compliance with this requirement is an offence. A bankrupt person must answer all questions at an examination
Bankruptcy Act 1966
This Act expressly states that answers given at an examination may be used in evidence in any bankruptcy proceedings involving the
It is an offence for a witness at a hearing before a Royal Commission to refuse to answer any question relevant to the inquiry put
by any of the Commissioners.
It is also an offence for a witness to refuse to answer questions without reasonable excuse during an investigation by the Australian
Securities Commission
or National Crime Authority
although witnesses receive an immunity preventing their answers from being used as evidence.
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW), the court can excuse a witness from giving evidence, in the interests of justice, on the ground that the evidence may prove
that the witness has committed an offence.
Alternatively, the court can require the witness to give evidence but give the witness a certificate stating that the evidence cannot
be used against the person.
Other police powers
3.13 At common law, a police officer may lawfully search the body of a person under arrest if the search is reasonably believed to
be necessary for the purpose of discovering a concealed weapon, or to secure or preserve evidence with respect to the offence for
which the person is in custody.
At common law a person may also be finger printed for the purpose of identification.
In New South Wales, these common law powers are enhanced by legislation which provides that police officers may search any person
in lawful custody and take anything found during the search.
Police officers are permitted to take all particulars necessary for the identification of suspects in lawful custody, including their
photograph, finger prints and palm prints.
When a suspect has been charged with an offence, police officers are empowered to direct a doctor to conduct a medical examination
of the suspect. This can include taking samples of the person’s blood, saliva and hair. This can only be done where the police
officer reasonably believes that the examination will provide evidence.
The consent of the person in custody is not required for the exercise of these powers.
Concealing serious offences
3.14 If a person has committed a serious offence and another person knows or believes that the offence has been committed, and that
he or she has information which might assist with the apprehension, prosecution or conviction of the offender, it is a criminal offence
to conceal that information from the police without a reasonable excuse.
It is not clear whether a suspect questioned by police is entitled to rely on the right to silence to avoid the obligation to provide
information to the police imposed by this offence. There is authority that the right to silence when questioned by police prevailed
over the common law offence of misprision of felony
which was replaced by the statutory offence of concealing a serious offence.
There is no case law on the relationship between the right to silence when questioned by police and the statutory offence, although
a similar attitude would be expected to be taken. The Commission is currently examining whether there is a need for reform of this
The obligation of police officers to provide information to citizens
3.15 Uniformed New South Wales police officers are required while on duty outside police premises to wear a name plate or numerical
identification.
Police officers also carry identification which is to be produced when necessary to establish their identity.
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
3.16 The right to silence when questioned by police is recognised in all Australian jurisdictions and common law countries. The prohibition
on judicial and prosecution comment on the defendant’s exercise of the right to silence when questioned by police also applies
throughout Australia.
However, other jurisdictions have qualified this prohibition.
3.17 In criminal trials in the United Kingdom and Singapore, the court or jury is permitted to draw inferences from the defendant’s
failure, when questioned or charged, to mention a fact later relied on in defence which the defendant could reasonably have been
expected to mention when questioned.
The court or jury is not permitted to draw inferences from the defendant’s silence itself. An inference can only be drawn when
the defendant relies on a fact, as part of the defence, which the defendant unreasonably failed to tell police during questioning.
3.18 The English Court of Appeal has noted that, before a jury can draw inferences from the defendant’s silence when questioned
by police, several conditions must be met. Proceedings must have commenced. The defendant’s alleged failure to mention facts
must have occurred after the defendant had been cautioned and before the defendant had been charged, during questioning to establish
whether or by whom the offence had been committed. The alleged failure must be a failure to mention a fact relied on in defence.
Finally, it must be reasonable to expect the defendant to mention the fact in the circumstances, including the defendant’s
age, experience, health, mental capacity, personality and state of mind.
3.19 This provision has been interpreted widely by the Northern Ireland courts. The Belfast Crown Court has held that unfavourable
inferences may be drawn where the defendant initially fails to mention the relevant fact but discloses it later during police questioning.
The Court has also held that it is not necessarily reasonable for a suspect to fail to mention a fact on the basis of legal advice
to remain silent. The question of whether a defendant could reasonably have been expected to mention a fact is decided objectively,
regardless of “ill-judged legal advice”.
The English Court of Appeal has also held that the fact that the defendant exercised the right to silence on legal advice does not
alone prevent the trial judge from directing the jury to draw adverse inferences.
3.20 The court or jury is also permitted to draw adverse inferences when the defendant fails, when requested by police, to account
for objects, substances or marks connected with the defendant which the police reasonably believe are attributable to participation
in an offence,
and when the defendant fails, when requested by police, to account for his or her presence at a place and time which the police reasonably
believe is attributable to participation in an offence.
3.21 In each case, the court or jury is entitled to draw “such inferences as appear proper”.
A defendant must not be convicted solely on the basis of an inference drawn from the defendant’s silence.
However, the relevant provisions provide no other guidance as to the types of permitted inferences.
3.22 The courts in Northern Ireland were initially cautious about drawing strong adverse inferences.
However, more recently, the Belfast Crown Court has drawn stronger inferences as a result of the defendant’s failure to answer
police questions. In
the trial judge, Lord Justice Kelly, drew an inference from the defendant’s silence when questioned by police that no innocent
explanation was available to him. He held that, in certain cases, the silence of the defendant in response to police questions may,
without more, increase the weight of a prima facie case to the weight of proof beyond reasonable doubt. In considering the inferences
open to the court, Lord Justice Kelly applied a “common sense” test, stating that “(i)t would be improper and unwise
for any court to set out bounds on whether to draw inferences or not in an individual case and the nature, extent and degree of adversity
if it decides to draw inferences”.
3.23 Subsequently, the European Court of Human Rights upheld the decision of Lord Justice Kelly in
Murray v United Kingdom
to draw very strong unfavourable inferences from the defendant’s silence when questioned by police using the “common
sense” test.
The Court held that the inferences drawn by Lord Justice Kelly did not deprive the defendant of a fair trial under the European Convention
on Human Rights (“the Convention”) in the circumstances of the case. The Court stated that the right to silence is an
inherent element of the right to a fair trial guaranteed by the Convention. It would be inconsistent with the right to a fair trial
to convict a defendant solely or mainly on the basis of the defendant’s silence. However, where a situation clearly calls for
explanation, the Court can take into account the defendant’s silence in assessing the prosecution evidence.
Where a prima facie case exists against the defendant independently of adverse inferences from the defendant’s silence, this
direct evidence combined with legitimate inferences could lead a jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant
3.24 The English Court of Appeal has approved a specimen direction to juries in relation to the inferences which can be drawn from
the defendant’s refusal to answer police questions.
The Court of Appeal has also held that the power to comment extends to cases where the defendant exercised the right to silence before
the commencement of the legislation which modified the right to silence.
Serious Fraud Office
3.25 In 1987, England established a separate scheme for the investigation, charging and trial of serious and complex fraud by the
newly established Serious Fraud Office.
The Serious Fraud Office is empowered to investigate any suspected offence which it reasonably believes involves serious or complex
The Director of the Serious Fraud Office can compel anyone under investigation or any person reasonably believed to have information
relevant to an investigation to answer questions.
Non-compliance is an offence unless the person has a reasonable excuse.
However, witnesses are protected by an immunity which provides that their answers may only be used in evidence if they are charged
with making a false statement during an investigation,
or if they are charged with an offence and give evidence at trial which is inconsistent with the answer given to the Serious Fraud
REFORM OF THE RIGHT TO SILENCE WHEN QUESTIONED BY POLICE
3.26 Arguments for reform of the right to silence when questioned by police focus on permitting judicial comment on the inferences
which the jury is entitled to draw from the fact that the defendant has exercised the right. The assessment of the arguments for
reform in the United Kingdom has been informed by a substantial body of empirical research on the use of the right to silence when
questioned by police. Although there are definitional and other methodological problems with the existing empirical research,
both the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
and the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
considered that rational decision making is enhanced by consideration of such evidence of the operation of the law in practice.
Three research studies on reliance on the right to silence when questioned by police have been undertaken in Australia. The results
of these studies as well as overseas research are referred to below as part of the Commission’s assessment of the case for
Arguments for reform
3.27 The arguments for permitting the trial judge to comment on the fact that the defendant exercised that right to silence when questioned
by police focus on the misuse of the right by guilty suspects, the relevance of silence to determining whether the defendant is guilty,
the existence of other safeguards for defendants and the need to regulate the use made of silence by juries.
Used by guilty suspects
3.28 Many submissions argued that an innocent person would deny an accusation levelled by the police and offer an explanation for
the circumstances or conduct which created the suspicion. It is argued that the right to silence when questioned by police is exploited
by guilty suspects, impeding police investigation of offences and the prosecution and conviction of offenders, particularly in relation
to offences which rely heavily on admissions to prove all the necessary elements, such as possession offences and sexual offences.
This can obviously be no more than a matter of opinion. It is impossible, in the nature of the case, to do more than guess at the
motives and processes of reasoning of persons questioned by police. It seems reasonable to accept that guilty persons will have a
powerful reason not to be candid. However, the question does not seem to be so much whether the right to silence is used by guilty
suspects. Rather, the question is the way in which it may be utilised by innocent suspects.
3.29 Three Australian research studies have examined the right to silence when questioned by police. The first, conducted by the New
South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research in 1980, concluded that 4% of suspects subsequently charged and tried in the
Sydney District Court remained silent in police interviews.
The second, undertaken by the Victorian Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions in 1988, found that the right to silence was
exercised in just over 7% of prosecutions.
The third, carried out in 1989 by the Victorian Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, found that the right to silence was
exercised in just over 9% of prosecutions.
The results of this research indicate that the right to silence when questioned by police is not widely exercised,
suggesting that modifying the right to silence would not significantly increase prosecutions or convictions.
3.30 Estimates of the percentage of suspects who remain silent during police interrogation in research conducted in England and Northern
Ireland vary between 3% and over 50%.
Studies which have relied on police reporting of reliance by suspects on the right to silence have concluded considerably higher
rates of use than those which use other means of data collection, such as independent analysis of records of interview.
3.31 Two studies on reliance on the right to silence when questioned by police in Singapore have concluded that the right was rarely
exercised by suspects and that modification of the right to silence did not materially induce suspects to answer police questions.
3.32 According to some studies, the incidence of reliance on the right to silence before trial in England has increased since the
introduction of reforms designed to improve suspects’ awareness of their right when interviewed by police.
However, this is not universally accepted.
3.33 The available empirical data suggests that reliance on the right to silence does not reduce the likelihood of charges being laid
against suspects, the likelihood of defendants pleading not guilty, or acquittal at trial. Some research studies suggest that the
likelihood of a suspect being charged and convicted increases where the suspect exercises the right to silence.
Serious offences
3.34 Proponents of reform argue that the right to silence when questioned by police is exploited by suspects questioned in relation
to serious offences.
3.35 The results of research into this argument are inconclusive. Police research undertaken in Northern Ireland indicated that just
over 50% of suspects detained for serious offences including terrorist offences refused to answer any substantive questions when
questioned by police.
This was relied on to support the introduction of legislation curtailing the right to silence in Northern Ireland.
Research undertaken by the Northern Ireland Office following the introduction of the legislation suggested that 6% of non-terrorist
suspects questioned by police in relation to serious offences exercised the right to silence.
A 1994 research study concluded that there have been fewer charges for all offences, including serious offences, since the Northern
Ireland legislation was introduced.
One research project conducted in England found that there was no strong relationship between reliance on the right to silence when
questioned by police and serious offences.
However, other English studies have concluded that the right to remain silent before trial was more likely to be exercised by suspects
questioned about serious offences.
Prior convictions
3.36 Several submissions argued that the right to silence when questioned by police is exploited by “practised” or “professional”
3.37 One way of analysing this argument is to compare reliance on the right to silence by offenders with prior convictions in the
of such suspects remained silent before the introduction of legislation curtailing the right to silence. This figure was reduced
to 35% following the introduction of the legislation.
This is to be contrasted with research undertaken in Northern Ireland which concluded that modification of the right to silence had
little effect on conviction rates for males with prior convictions.
3.38 Several research studies have analysed this argument by comparing the rates of reliance on the right to silence by suspects with
and without prior convictions. Two studies reported a higher exercise of the right to remain silent amongst suspects with prior convictions.
The reported discrepancies differ significantly. It has been suggested that, if the right to silence is exercised more frequently
by suspects with prior convictions than those without, this reflects the fact that persons with prior convictions are more likely
to be known to the police and therefore more likely to be arrested and questioned by police than persons without a criminal record.
3.39 However, other research suggests that the rate of exercise of the right to silence by suspects with prior convictions reflects
the general rate of reliance on the right to silence,
and that there is no significant difference between acquittal rates of defendants with and without prior convictions who exercise
the right to silence when questioned by police.
3.40 In 1993, the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice concluded that the research evidence neither confirmed nor refuted the suggestion
that the right to silence when questioned by police was used by a disproportionate number of experienced criminals.
Complex offences, organised crime, drug offences
3.41 Concerns about the ability of the criminal justice system to cope with complex trials have led to the argument for modification
of the right to silence in relation to complex offences.
This argument has also been raised in relation to organised crime
and drug conspiracy trials, which may involve clandestine financial transactions.
The Commission is unaware of any research examining the rate of reliance on the right to silence when questioned by police in relation
to these offences. A report commissioned by the Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, published in 1992, concluded that
the right to silence when questioned by police was “relatively unimportant”
in the context of complex criminal trials.
This report rejected the need for changes to the law regulating investigative questioning in the context of complex fraud offences.
Legal advice
3.42 One submission argued that the right to silence is exploited by wealthy suspects with access to legal advice.
3.43 Although some English research suggests that the provision of legal advice during police questioning does not significantly affect
the rate of exercise of the right to silence,
most studies have concluded that suspects with access to legal advice are more likely to remain silent during police questioning
than those without legal advice.
The reported discrepancies differ considerably.
There is also a considerable body of research on the nature of legal advice given to suspects at police stations which suggests that
suspects are not advised to remain silent as a matter of course, that advice to remain silent is often a temporary strategy, that
the quality of legal advice to suspects varies considerably, and that a suspect’s decision to remain silent is not always the
result of legal advice.
3.44 This research evidence must be considered in the context of the provision of free legal advice to suspects in England under a
government funded legal aid scheme. As a result of this scheme, approximately 30% of suspects have legal advice in the police station,
either in person or by telephone.
There is no substantive equivalent to this right in New South Wales.
Many suspects do not have the financial means, intellectual ability or knowledge to access legal advice.
Ambush defences
3.45 Finally, proponents of reform argue that the right to silence enables the defence to unfairly “ambush” the prosecution
with a fabricated defence at trial.
An “ambush” defence has been defined as a defence with the following characteristics: a defence raised for the first
time in court; based on evidence which could have been disclosed during interrogation; the prosecution is hampered by the late disclosure
of the defence; and the defendant benefits from having extra time to prepare the defence.
3.46 Again, this argument is not supported by the research, which suggests that the incidence of defences raised for the first time
at trial which succeed is between 1.5% and 5%.
The research also suggests that a defendant who raises an ambush defence is more likely to be convicted than acquitted.
In one study, every defendant who adopted an ambush defence was convicted.
It has been suggested that this is likely to reflect the lack of credibility of such defences in the view of the court or jury, where
they become aware of the fact that the defence was adopted at a very late stage.
However, under the present law, the Crown is not permitted to elicit evidence that the defence has been raised for the first time
at the trial, although it may show that the defence is inconsistent with a defence raised earlier.
Accordingly, the cases where the jury become aware of an ambush defence are relatively few and the research is therefore of limited
3.47 Another argument in favour of modifying the right to silence when questioned by police is that it would improve the efficiency
of criminal investigations by the police. If suspects were informed that, if charged, their refusal to answer police questions could
be used at trial as a basis for drawing adverse inferences in assessing the defence case, suspects with bona fide explanations for
the circumstances attracting suspicion would be more likely to co operate with the police. This would enable them to be eliminated
from the investigation at an earlier time, saving police resources which would otherwise be wasted pursuing fruitless inquiries.
Abolition subject to additional protections
3.48 It is argued that the right to silence when questioned by police can be exchanged for other measures which provide adequate protection
for suspects.
3.49 Several submissions argued that access to legal advice,
or an independent observer
during police questioning could replace the right to silence by redressing the power imbalance between the police and the suspect.
Opponents of this argument argue that, in New South Wales, suspects do not have a substantial right to legal advice when questioned
Research suggests that legal advisers do not routinely advise suspects to remain silent, that advice to do so is frequently a temporary
strategy, and that the quality of legal advice varies considerably.
Research into the exercise of the right to silence by juvenile suspects also suggests that independent observers such as adult relatives
and social workers provide little assistance or guidance to the suspect.
3.50 Several submissions argued that electronic recording of police interviews provides an objective record of police interrogation
of suspects, eliminating the need for the right to silence.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 424A provides that admissions made during police questioning in New South Wales are not generally admissible as evidence
in trials for indictable offences unless they are electronically recorded. The prosecution must establish a reasonable excuse for
failure to audio tape or video record admissions, such as mechanical failure, lack of availability of equipment or refusal of cooperation
by the suspect. In addition, the
Evidence Act 1995
provides that a document prepared by the police which records oral admissions made during questioning is not admissible as evidence
unless the defendant has acknowledged it is accurate by signing it.
3.51 However, the empirical research establishes that suspects are frequently questioned or have conversations with police prior to
their arrival at the police station where these alternative protections are available.
3.52 Another basic weakness of this argument is that the provision of alternative protections such as access to legal advice and electronic
recording of police interviews does not remove the many legitimate reasons which innocent suspects may have for remaining silent
during police interrogation.
3.53 Several submissions argued that claims that the right to silence can be dispensed with because access to legal advice and electronic
recording of all police interviews adequately protects suspects are unconvincing in light of the findings of the Wood Royal Commission
on extensive malpractice and corruption in the New South Wales police service.
3.54 The Commission has previously rejected the argument that giving practical effect to common law rights such as access to legal
advice justifies the abandonment of other protections such as the right to silence.
At all events, given the present severe limitations on legal aid budgets, the prospect of actually providing legal advice to suspects
in police stations is remote.
The need to guide juries
3.55 One submission argued that where juries are aware that the defendant refused to answer police questions, there is a real risk
that they will place too much weight on the defendant’s silence unless they are guided by judicial direction as to the inferences
which can reasonably be drawn.
3.56 In criminal trials in New South Wales, evidence which establishes that the defendant exercised the right to silence when questioned
by police is admissible in certain circumstances.
English empirical research suggests that the jury is aware of the fact that the defendant exercised the right to silence when questioned
by police in 79% - 85% of criminal trials of defendants who have exercised the right.
3.57 Several submissions argued that the prosecution should also be permitted to comment to the jury on the fact that the defendant
exercised the right to silence when questioned by police. These submissions argued that, if the trial judge is permitted to comment,
fairness requires that the prosecution also be able to comment.
3.58 It is also argued that the current prohibition on judicial comment results in a waste of court resources in terms of appeals
and retrials where the trial judge is held to have breached the prohibition.
3.59 Coldrey argues that juries do not make inappropriate use of the fact that the defendant has exercised the right to silence before
However, it is not possible to assess the validity of this argument except by resorting to speculation, since juries do not provide
reasons for their decisions.
3.60 Coldrey has suggested that it should be up to the defendant to decide whether to assume the risk that the jury will make inappropriate
use of his or her exercise of the right to silence before trial.
Arguments for retaining the existing right to silence
3.61 There are several strong arguments for retaining the right to silence when questioned by police in its current form. The arguments
include the view that there are many reasons for exercising this right which are consistent with innocence, whilst permitting judicial
comment might operate as a subtle form of compulsion on suspects; the effects on police practices and modes of detection of crime;
furthermore that it would result in the substitution of trial by a court of law by what becomes, in substance or to a significant
degree, a trial in a police station, which is repugnant to our conceptions of the rule of law. The practical consequences at trial
of any qualification to the right of silence when questioned by police are also clearly important.
Reasons for silence consistent with innocence
3.62 Several submissions challenged the argument that an innocent suspect would naturally deny police accusations, arguing that there
are many reasons for exercising the right to silence which are consistent with innocence.
3.63 The suspect may distrust the police, fearing that police will trick him or her into answering questions, distort answers and
harass potential defence witnesses. The suspect may be reluctant to repeat an explanation told to police informally which was disbelieved.
Several research studies have identified the suspect’s general attitude towards the police as a key factor in determining the
level of the suspect’s cooperation with police questioning.
3.64 It is important to note that frequently the police investigation will be incomplete, sometimes to a significant extent, at the
time the suspect is interviewed. The matters being put to him or her may well, therefore, be confused or wrong. The questions, when
the facts become known, may be seen to contain ambiguities or even be misleading. The defendant will in all likelihood never be re-interviewed
if he is arrested even where a different version of the suspected circumstances later emerges. Silence in the face of possibly incriminating
facts may well be regarded as a significant reason for justifying the arrest.
3.65 The desire to protect others, particularly family members and friends whom the suspect knows or believes is or are responsible
for or involved in the offences concerned, is another reason for silence which is consistent with innocence. Alternatively, a suspect
may remain silent for fear of being labelled a police informer or for fear of reprisal by the offender.
3.66 A suspect may exercise the right to silence when questioned by police to conceal sexual or political conduct which he or she
is embarrassed or ashamed of,
or to conceal illegal behaviour which is not under investigation.
3.67 A suspect may exercise the right to silence due to shock and confusion at police accusations. The suspect may feel unable to
sort out the facts or fear making a mistake due to the pressure of police questioning. The suspect may want to think about the circumstances,
refresh his or her memory, or obtain legal advice. This does not necessarily equate with an intention to fabricate a defence.
3.68 A suspect may genuinely not be able to answer police questions. The answers may have been forgotten or may never have been within
the knowledge of the suspect. The police may not reveal enough detail about the allegations to enable the suspect to answer or to
warrant explanation.
This is a common reason for legal advice to a suspect to exercise the right to silence.
3.69 There are several communication factors which could lead to a suspect exercising the right to remain silent when questioned by
police. The suspect may not hear or understand what the police are asking. The suspect may have limited English skills because of
limited education, or by virtue of being from a non-English speaking background. The suspect may be drunk, affected by drugs, or
otherwise inarticulate and unable to answer. One submission argued that in this context the suspect may not even understand that
a right to silence exists and cannot really be said to be exercising the right.
3.70 Personal characteristics may also influence whether an innocent suspect exercises the right to silence when questioned by police.
English research suggests that women are much less likely than men to remain silent when questioned by police,
and that juvenile suspects also rarely exercise the right to silence.
It is clear that Aboriginal suspects are more likely to answer police questions than the general population.
This has led to the creation of specific rules regulating police questioning of Aborigines in several jurisdictions.
3.71 There are various psychological characteristics which may impair a suspect’s ability to understand his or her legal rights
or make it likely that the suspect will provide information to the police which is misleading or unreliable, including mental disorders
and illnesses, intellectual and developmental disabilities, acquired brain injuries and low intelligence.
Research conducted for the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice concluded that that there was a high incidence of these psychological
characteristics among suspects interviewed by the police. The average IQ of suspects questioned was in the bottom 5% of the general
population.
A submission from the Intellectual Disability Rights Service Incorporated (“IDRS”) explained that IDRS solicitors commonly
advised clients to exercise the right to silence in their dealings with the police because of the risk of clients talking freely
with the police without any understanding of the consequences, tending to acquiesce to authority and answering questions to cover
up for ignorance.
3.72 Recent research into the effect of the modification of the right to silence in England indicates that the physical or mental
condition of the suspect was one of the main reasons for solicitors advising that their client remain silent during police interviews.
3.73 Cultural constraints may also lead to the exercise of the right to silence. For example, in certain cultures discussion of domestic
abuse and sexual assault is considered inappropriate in most contexts.
3.74 In response to this argument, it is argued that the defendant has the opportunity to tell the court at trial the reasons for
remaining silent when questioned by police.
However, many of the reasons for exercising the right to silence when questioned by police are also relevant to the exercise of the
right to silence at trial.
Furthermore, this may well deflect the trial into issues which are essentially peripheral.
3.75 If courts and juries are permitted to draw adverse inferences from the defendant’s exercise of the right to silence when
questioned by police, the caution given to suspects will have to be changed to reflect this. It is argued that this would operate
in practice as a form of compulsion, infringing the requirement that admissions made in police interviews be voluntary.
Research undertaken in Northern Ireland indicates that defence lawyers overwhelmingly believe that suspects do not comprehend the
caution introduced in 1988 to accompany modifications to the law relating to the right to silence. Defence lawyers reported that
most suspects believed the caution meant that there was an obligation to answer any question put by the police.
Police practices
3.76 Commentators have also argued that there is a risk that modifying the right to silence when questioned by police will result
in the police manipulating interviews by framing questions in a way that encourages suspects to remain silent.
It has also been suggested that the existence of the suspect’s right to silence when questioned by police is a necessary incentive
for police to investigate offences thoroughly and search for evidence other than confessions.
From the police point of view, the significance attributed to silence might well enhance the chance of conviction more than any explanation
given, even one that is difficult to prove.
Fundamental principles
3.77 Many submissions argued that permitting judicial comment on the exercise of the right to silence would undermine the principles
that the defendant is presumed innocent and that the prosecution carries the burden of proving the defendant’s guilt, which
are fundamental to the criminal justice system.
3.78 One submission also argued that the right to silence when questioned by police was fundamental to the acceptance of the criminal
justice system by defendants as being fair. This submission expressed the concern that modification to the right to silence would
result in reprisals on victims and police and an increase in defended matters.
Procedural fairness at trial
3.79 Coldrey argues that, if the court or jury was permitted to draw adverse inferences when the defendant exercised the right to
silence, procedural fairness at trial would require that the defendant be given an opportunity to rebut any adverse inferences. This
process could include extensive evidence of the defendant’s general background and behaviour and the use of expert psychological
and psychiatric evidence as to the impact of police interrogation on the defendant. This could significantly increase the complexity
and length of the trial process.
It is essentially peripheral. The trial then focuses on what happened at the police station and why rather than the evidence which
is directly relevant to the commission of the crime.
3.80 The Commission’s present view is that the right to silence when questioned by police is a necessary protection for suspects,
and that its modification would also undermine fundamental principles. It would tend to substitute trial in the police station for
trial by a court of law. A fundamental requirement of fairness in any obligation imposed to reveal a defence when questioned by police
is that legal advice be available to suspects at this stage to ensure that they understand the significance of the caution and the
consequences of silence. That requirement is incapable of being satisfied within presently available legal aid funding, and significant
increases seem extremely unlikely. Finally, the examination of the empirical data in this chapter does not support the argument that
the right to silence is widely exploited by guilty suspects, as distinct from innocent ones, or the argument that it impedes the
prosecution or conviction of offenders.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
R v Director of Serious Fraud Office, Ex p Smith
[1993] AC 1
at 30; [1992] 3 WLR 66 at 74 per Lord Mustill, with whom the other members of the House of Lords agreed;
[1976] 1 WLR 1251; [1976] 3 All ER 380;
[1976] Crim LR 741
R v Salahattin
[1983] 1 VR 521; I Alger, “From Star Chamber to Petty and Maiden: Police Attitudes to the Right to Silence”, paper presented
at session 24 of the
Australian Legal Conference
(Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997) at 1.
. S Greer, “The Right to Silence: A Review of the Current Debate”
Modern Law Review
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
65 ALJR 625
55 A Crim R 322
102 ALR 129
Glennon v The Queen
[1994] HCA 7
(1994) 179 CLR 1
68 ALJR 209
70 A Crim R 459
119 ALR 706
; A Mason, “Fair Trial”
Criminal Law Journal
(1992) 29 NSWLR 109
; cited with approval in
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60359/91, 7 June 1993, unreported) at 10 per Handley JA with whom the other members of the court
Yisrael v District Court
(NSW Court of Appeal, No CA 4011/95, 18 July 1996, unreported) at 7 per Meagher JA.
(1992) 29 NSWLR 109
at 115 per Hunt CJ at CL, with whom the other members of the Court agreed.
(1992) 29 NSWLR 109
at 115 per Hunt CJ at CL, with whom the other members of the Court agreed;
R v Mathews
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60726/95, 28 May 1996, unreported) at 3 per Badgery-Parker J with whom the other members of the
Court agreed. The Court in
held that this direction should, if necessary, be repeated by the trial judge in the summing up and that it would also usually be
appropriate to remind the jury that the defendant had been cautioned by the police as to the existence of the right to silence: at
115 per Hunt CJ at CL, with whom the other members of the Court agreed. The Court in
R v Mathews
held that the direction should be given when the evidence is first adduced, but that in any event it should ordinarily be given in
the course of summing up: at 3 per Badgery-Parker J with whom the other members of the Court agreed.
[1964] HCA 23
(1964) 109 CLR 529
at 541-542,
[1964] HCA 23
at 36 per Windeyer J;
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60359/91, 7 June 1993, unreported) at 11-12 per Handley JA with whom the other members of the Court
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60460/91, 15 March 1993, unreported) at 27-30 per Sully J, with whom the other members of the Court
Yisrael v District Court of NSW
(NSW Court of Appeal, No CA 440114/95, 18 July 1996, unreported) at 8-9 per Meagher JA.
R v Swaffield and Pavic
[1998] HCA 1
(1998) 151 ALR 98
Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
68 ALJR 127
12 ACSR 452
118 ALR 392.
Environment Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
[1993] HCA 74
68 ALJR 127
[1993] HCA 74
118 ALR 392
at 426 per Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ; cf
[1993] HCA 74
178 CLR 477
[1993] HCA 74
68 ALJR 127
[1993] HCA 74
118 ALR 392
at 408 per Mason CJ and Toohey J.
. “Official questioning” is defined as “questioning by an investigating official in connection with the investigation
or the commission or possible commission of an offence”:
Evidence Act 1995
, Dictionary.
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
65 ALJR 625
55 A Crim R 322
102 ALR 129
Uniform Evidence Law
ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1997) at 151.
Traffic Act 1909
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, Art 14(3)(g);
S Bronitt and M Ayres, “The Administration of Criminal Justice and International Human Rights Law: A Practitioner’s Guide”
D Kinley (ed),
Human Rights in Australian Law: Practice and Potential
(forthcoming, Federation Press, 1998);
Murray v United Kingdom
[1996] ECHR 3
(1996) 22 EHRR 29
; Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory,
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Royal Commissions Act 1902
. The Act does not deal with the admissibility of evidence obtained at a hearing before a Royal Commission.
Australian Securities Commission Act 1989
National Crime Authority Act 1984
Australian Securities Commission Act 1989
National Crime Authority Act 1984
For further discussion of statutory abrogation, see M Aronson,
Managing Complex Criminal Trials: Reform of the Rules of Evidence and Procedure
(AIJA, Victoria, 1992) at 14-16. Note that the immunities in relation to use and derivative use of evidence have limited practical
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Regulation 1995
(NSW) r 7 and form 1. See also
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Regulations 1995
(Cth) r 7 and form 1.
Leigh v Cole
(1853) 6 Cox CC 329
Dillon v O’Brien
(1887) 16 Cox CC 245.
[1972] 1 NSWLR 608
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 353A(1). “Lawful custody” is defined in s 353A(3C).
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 353A(3). There are special conditions in relation to suspects who are children. See s 353AA.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 353A(2), 353A(3A).
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 353A(3D).
Crimes Act 1900
“Serious offence” is defined in
[1965] 1 WLR 706;
49 Cr App R 140
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
[1991] HCA 34
65 ALJR 625
55 A Crim R 322
102 ALR 129.
Crimes Act 1900
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission
, Review of
Section 316
Crimes Act 1900
(Discussion Paper 39, 1997).
Police Regulations 1990
(NSW) r 48, 66A; New South Wales Police Service,
Commissioner’s Instructions
, Instruction 23.
. New South Wales Police Service,
Commissioner’s Instructions
, Instruction 24.
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
65 ALJR 625
55 A Crim R 322
102 ALR 129
Glennon v The Queen
[1994] HCA 7
(1994) 179 CLR 1
68 ALJR 209
70 A Crim R 459
119 ALR 706
A Mason, “Fair Trial”
Criminal Law Journal
Evidence Act 1995
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
; Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 34;
Criminal Procedure Code
(Singapore) s 123(1).
. J Jackson, “Interpreting the Silence Provisions: The Northern Ireland Cases”
Criminal Law Review
(England, Court of Appeal, 19 December 1996, unreported).
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, 20 December 1990, Kelly LJ) discussed in Jackson (1995) at 589.
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, December 1993);
Connolly and McCartney
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, 5 June 1992) discussed in Jackson (1995) at 594. The Court’s position has been criticised
by commentators. See I Dennis, “The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 — The Evidence Provisions”
Criminal Law Review
at 14; J Jackson, “Recent Developments in Criminal Evidence” (1989) 40
Northern Ireland Law Quarterly
105; Jackson (1995) at 594.
R v Condron
(England, Court of Appeal, 4 November 1996,
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
at 118-119;
[1991] HCA 34
102 ALR 129
[1991] HCA 34
65 ALJR 625
[1991] HCA 34
55 A Crim R 322
at 338 per Dawson J (diss).
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 5;
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 36;
Criminal Procedure Code
(Singapore) s 123(1).
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 6;
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 37;
Criminal Procedure Code
(Singapore) s 123(1).
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
Art 3, 5, 6;
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 34, 36, 37;
Criminal Procedure Code
(Singapore) s 123(1).
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 2(4);
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 38(4).
. J Jackson, “Curtailing the Right of Silence: Lessons From Northern Ireland”
Criminal Law Review
at 410; Justice,
Right of Silence Debate: The Northern Ireland Experience
(1994) at 5, 23-25; J Michael and B Emmerson, “The Right to Silence”
European Human Rights Law Review
at 8; S Greer and R Morgan (eds),
The Right to Silence Debate
(Bristol and Bath Centre for Criminal Justice, Bristol, 1990) at 50 and 53-59.
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, 20 December 1990, Kelly LJ) discussed in Justice at 25; and Jackson (1995) at 596.
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, 20 December 1990, Kelly LJ) discussed in Justice at 25; and Jackson (1995) at 596; Michael
and Emmerson at 8. See also
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, 8 May 1991, Hutton LCJ) discussed in Justice at 26; and Jackson (1995) at 596-598.
Murray v United Kingdom
[1996] ECHR 3
(1996) 22 EHRR 29
at 62 and 63.
Murray v United Kingdom
[1996] ECHR 3
(1996) 22 EHRR 29
Murray v United Kingdom
[1996] ECHR 3
(1996) 22 EHRR 29
at 62. The Court held that the right to access to legal advice at the initial stages of police interrogation was of “paramount
importance”. The defendant had been denied access to legal advice during the first 48 hours of detention (in accordance with
Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1987
(Eng) s 15). This violated his right to a fair trial:
Murray v United Kingdom
[1996] ECHR 3
(1996) 22 EHRR 29
R v Condron
(England, Court of Appeal, 4 November 1996,
[1995] 4 All ER 939 at 944; 3 WLR 818 at 823.
Criminal Justice Act 1987
Criminal Justice (Serious Fraud) (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng). This scheme was based on the recommendations of the Fraud Trials Committee,
Report of the Fraud Trials Committee
(London, 1986) chapter 6.
Criminal Justice Act 1987
(Eng) s 1(3).
Criminal Justice Act 1987
(Eng) s 2(2).
Criminal Justice Act 1987
(Eng) s 2(13).
Criminal Justice Act 1987
(Eng) s 2(8)(a). This is an offence under s 2(14) of the Act.
Criminal Justice Act 1987
(Eng) s 2(8)(b).
PACE Ten Years on: A Review of the Research
(Home Office, London, 1997) at 168-171.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
(London, 1981) at paras 1.34 and 1.35; D Dixon, “Politics, Research and Symbolism in Criminal Justice: The Right of Silence
and the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act
(1991-1992) 20-21
Anglo-American Law Review
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(London, 1993) at 53-54.
. This view was also strongly expressed in several submissions: D Dixon,
Submission 1
at 1; C Corns,
at 3; M Tedeschi QC,
at 1; Police Association of New South Wales,
at 2, 3, 5; R Miller,
at 4; Alger at 8; G Davies, “Justice Reform: A Personal Perspective”
[Summer 1996] 5 at 10-11; K Marks, “‘Thinking Up’ About the Right to Silence and Unsworn Statements”
Law Institute Journal
at 361; E Whitton,
Trial by Voodoo
(Random House, Milson’s Point, 1994) chapter 4; E Whitton, “Privilege that Prevents Justice Being Done”
The Australian
(21 August 1997) at 11; CR Williams, “Silence in Australia: Probative Force and Rights in the Law of Evidence” (1994)
Law Quarterly Review
629 at 632; J Woods, “Judge Calls for End of ‘Right to Silence’”
Courier Mail (Brisbane)
(24 April 1997) at 8; N Papps, “You Have the Right to Remain Silent — But Maybe Not for Much Longer”
Adelaide Advertiser
(21 January 1998) at 1-2; Criminal Law Revision Committee,
Evidence (General)
(Report 11, London, 1972) at paras 30-31;
Sullivan v The Queen
(1967) 51 Cr App R 102
at 105 per Salmon LJ.
. S Odgers, “Police Interrogation and the Right to Silence”
Australian Law Journal
at 86; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Procedure: Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990) at para 5.10.
. J Coldrey, “The Right to Silence: Should it be Curtailed or Abolished?”
Anglo-American Law Review
. J Coldrey, “The Right to Silence Reassessed”
Victorian Bar News
. This conclusion was also expressed in one submission from a New South Wales magistrate, based on anecdotal experience: A Clarke,
at 1; Aronson at 13.
. Odgers (1985) at 86-87; Dixon (1991-1992) at 37-41; D Dixon,
Law in Policing: Legal Regulation and Police Practices
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997) at 229-235 and 263-264; Dennis at 11-14; R Leng, “The Right to Silence Debate” in D Morgan
and G Stephenson (eds),
The Right to Silence in Criminal Investigations
(Blackstone Press, London, 1994) at 19 and 22-28; M Zander, “Abolition of the Right to Silence, 1972-1994” in D Morgan
and G Stephenson (eds),
The Right to Silence in Criminal Investigations
(Blackstone Press, London, 1994) at 147-148; D Wolchover and A Heaton-Armstrong, “Labor’s Victory and the Right to Silence
— 2” (1997) 147
New Law Journal
1434 at 1434-1435; J Williams, “Inferences From Silence” (1997) 141
566; G Black, “The Right Defence”
Legal Action
; Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at paras 4.43-4.46; Greer and Morgan at 38;
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 53-54; Justice at 7-12; Brown at 167-186. Note that the research findings of Justice have
been criticised: see Dennis at 13.
. The methodology of these studies has been criticised, criticism which one of the authors has acknowledged: Dixon (1991-1992) at
40-41; Dixon (1997) at 231-233; Leng at 24-28; Brown at 172.
. M Yeo, “Diminishing the Right to Silence: The Singapore Experience”
Criminal Law Review
; A Tan, “Adverse Inferences and the Right to Silence: Re-Examining the Singapore Experience”
Criminal Law Review
at 473; Greer and Morgan at 50.
. Brown at 171-175; Dixon (1997) at 235, footnote 15.
. Leng at 31-32; Dixon (1991-1992) at 38; Dixon (1997) at 230; Brown at 173.
. Brown at 181-184; Dixon (1991-1992) at 37 and 40-41; Dixon (1997) at 230 and 232-233; Dennis at 12-14; Leng at 26-29; Zander at
148; Justice at 7-12; J Gallagher,
at 5; B Hocking and L Manville,
at 15; Greer and Morgan at 6, 14 and 67;
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 53-54;
New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1990) at para 5.13.
. L Davies,
at 3, 5; E Whitton,
Trial by Voodoo
at 44; Working Group on the Right to Silence,
Report of the Working Group on the Right of Silence
, (London, 1989) at 28.
. Dennis at 11; Justice at 7. It is not known what proportion of these suspects were questioned in relation to terrorist offences.
. Dennis at 11; Justice at 7; see paras 2.23, 3.17-3.24, 5.15-5.21.
. Justice at 8. This research has never been officially released by the English Government.
. Justice at 9-10.
. Dixon (1991-1992) at 40; Dixon (1997) at 232. However, the methodology of this research has been criticised, criticism which has
been acknowledged by the author; see para 3.30.
. Black at 9; Dixon (1991-1992) at 40, Dixon (1997) at 231 and 235; Dennis at 11; Leng at 27; Zander at 146-147; Brown at 176; Greer
and Morgan at 38; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 53.
. R Miller,
at 4; Police Association of New South Wales,
at 4; B Hocking and L Manville,
at 11; Davies at 10; Marks at 361; Criminal Law Revision Committee at para 30.
. J Williams at 566.
. Justice at 11-12. The conviction rates for females with prior convictions did increase, but this increase was very small and occurred
in the context of a significant rise in female criminality.
. Odgers (1985) at 86-87; Dixon (1991-1992) at 37; Dixon (1997) at 229 and 235; Dennis at 11; Leng at 27; Zander at 147; Brown at
177; Greer and Morgan at 13 and 38.
. Leng at 27.
. Odgers (1985) at 86-87; Dixon (1991-1992) at 37; Dixon (1997) at 229; Greer and Morgan at 14; Black at 9; Royal Commission on Criminal
Justice at 54.
. Dixon (1991-1992) at 37 and 40; Dixon (1997) at 230-231.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 53.
. L Davies,
at 2; P Cloran,
at 4-5; G Santow, “Corporate Crime: Complex Criminal Trials — A Commentary” (1994) 5
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
280 at 284; H van Leeuwen, “AG Proposes New Rules for White-Collar Trials”
Australian Financial Review
(28 February 1998) at 8.
Trial by Voodoo
at chapter 4.
. L Davies,
. Aronson at 13-14.
. Aronson at 38.
. R Miller,
Submission 2
at 1; Dixon (1991-1992) at 37; Dixon (1997) at 230; Black at 9; Aronson at 34-35.
. Dixon (1991-1992) at 40; Dixon (1997) at 231 and 235; Dennis at 11; Leng at 27; Zander at 147-148; Brown at 178-181; Greer and Morgan
at 13 and 38; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 53.
. Dixon (1997) at 235; Dennis at 11; Leng at 27; Zander at 146-148; Brown at 178-181.
Submission 2
at 1; Dixon (1991-1992) at 42-46; Dixon (1997) at 236-258; J Baldwin, “Police Interrogation: What are the Rules of the Game?”
in D Morgan and G Stephenson (eds),
Suspicion and Silence: The Right to Silence in Criminal Investigations
(Blackstone Press, London, 1994) at 66-76; Coldrey (1990) at 27; Coldrey (1991) at 56; Brown at 179-181 and chapter 6; Greer and
Morgan at 26; Aronson at 35.
. Zander at 147. The rate of legal advice varies considerably between police stations: Greer and Morgan at 68.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 356N provides a right of access to a lawyer. However, there is no government funded duty solicitor scheme in New South Wales
which would make this right substantial. See D Thiering,
at 2; D Dixon,
Submission 2
at 1; G Singh,
at 3; Law Society of Australian Capital Territory,
at 1; see para 3.49.
R v Alladice
(Court of Appeal, 12 May 1988, unreported) cited in J Wood and A Crawford,
The Right of Silence
(The Civil Liberties Trust, London, 1989) at 22-23; Police Association of New South Wales,
. Leng at 29.
. Leng at 28-30; Dixon (1991-1992) at 37; Dixon (1997) at 234; Dennis at 12-14; Brown at 184-185.
. Dixon (1997) at 233; Dennis at 12-14; Leng at 30.
. Dixon (1997) at 233; Dennis at 12-14; Leng at 30.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at para 8.20; New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at paras 5.13, 5.44.
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
65 ALJR 625
55 A Crim R 322
102 ALR 129.
. J Jarratt,
at 1; Aronson at 3.
. Greer (1990) at 719-720; JMA Cramond,
at 1; R Miller,
at 4; B Bright,
R v Alladice
(Court of Appeal, 12 May 1988, unreported) cited in Wood and Crawford at 22-23; Criminal Law Review Committee (minority) at para
52; Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (minority) at para 4.51; Greer and Morgan at 29 and 30.
. L Davies,
at 6; Greer (1990) at 720; Marks at 373; Odgers (1985) at 89, 93-94; Criminal Law and Penal Methods Review Committee of South Australia,
Criminal Investigation
(Report 2, 1974) at 103.
. R Miller,
. See para 3.44.
. See para 3.43.
. R Evans, “Police Interviews with Juveniles” in D Morgan and G Stephenson (eds),
Suspicion and Silence — The Right to Silence in Criminal Investigations
(Blackstone Press, London, 1994) at
-85 and 88.
. JMA Cramond,
at 1; C Bone,
at 2-4; P Cloran,
at 4; Police Association of New South Wales,
at 3; Greer (1990) at 720. But contra Coldrey (1990) at 28 and Coldrey (1991) at 57 who argues that insight into interrogations provided
by electronic recording is superficial; and see Dixon (1991-1992) at 46-47; J Jarratt,
at 2; L Davies,
. S Moston and G Stephenson, “Helping the Police With Their Enquiries Outside the Police Station” in D Morgan and G Stephenson
Suspicion and Silence — The Right to Silence in Criminal Investigations
(Blackstone Press, London, 1994); Greer and Morgan at 26.
. Greer (1990) at 722-723; Greer and Morgan at 12-13; see paras 3.62-3.74.
. T O’Gorman, “Right to Silence”, paper presented at session 24 of the
Australian Legal Convention
, (Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997) at 21; Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service,
Final Report
(1997); D Dixon,
Submission 1
at 2; A Arfaras,
at 1; B Kennedy,
at 2; Dixon (1991-1992) at 31 raises this argument in the English context; see paras 2.24 and 2.25.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1990) at para 5.13.
. J Jarratt,
at 1; Coldrey (1990) at 28; Davies at 10; Greer (1990) at 711; Odgers (1985) at 84 and 94; Greer and Morgan at 17.
. See paras 3.4 and 3.5.
. Leng at 19.
. DS Shillington,
at 2; L Davies,
. Coldrey (1990) at 29; Coldrey (1991) at 58. Coldrey has since been appointed to the Supreme Court of Victoria.
. Dixon (1991-1992) at 36.
. Coldrey (1990) at 29; Coldrey (1991) at 58.
at 2; Marsdens Attorneys, Solicitors and Barristers,
at 1-3; D Thiering,
at 1; H Bauer,
at 2; Alger at 9; Coldrey (1990) at 27-28; Dixon (1997) at 264; Dennis at 12-13; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Investigation
(Report 2 (Interim), 1975) at paras 148 and 149; Greer (1990) at 727-728; S Greer, “The Right to Silence, Defence Disclosure
and Confession Evidence” (1994) 21
Journal of British Law and Society
102 at 104; Jackson (1995) at 595; Odgers (1985) at 84-85; R Pattendon, “Inferences From Silence” [1995]
Criminal Law Review
602 at 608-609; CR Williams at 648-650; J Williams; Wood and Crawford at 25; Justice at 4, 15-16, 29-30; Evans; G Gudjonsson, “Psychological
Vulnerability: Suspects at Risk” in D Morgan and G Stephenson (eds),
Suspicion and Silence — The Right to Silence in Criminal Investigations
(Blackstone Press, London, 1994); Zander; Greer and Morgan at 12 and 15-16; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 52 and 54; Aronson
at 33; J Gallagher,
at 3; S Kerkyasharian,
R v Kinsella
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, December 1993, unreported) discussed in Justice at 29-30,
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, November 1991, unreported) discussed in Justice at 30; see para 3.51.
. Greer (1990) at 727; Dixon (1991-1992) at 38.
. P Cloran,
at 2; Australian Law Reform Commission (1975)
at para 148; Black at 9.
. P Cloran,
(1988) 37 A Crim R 220
. P Cloran,
R v Kinsella
(Northern Ireland, Belfast Crown Court, December 1993, unreported) discussed in Justice at 29-30. In
, the defendant argued that he exercised the right to remain silent because he did not want to reveal to the police that he was working
illegally as a taxi driver. The Court rejected this argument and drew inferences adverse to the defendant under the
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
R v Kinsella
(Belfast Crown Court, December 1993, unreported) discussed in Justice at 29-30; Black at 9.
. Black at 9; Papps at 2.
. J Williams; Dennis at 12-13; Greer and Morgan at 29.
. B Hocking and L Manville,
. Dixon (1997) at 264.
. Evans at 88.
. B Hocking and L Manville,
Crimes Act 1914
(1976) 11 ALR 41. There are also administrative directions which regulate police questioning of Aborigines in all jurisdictions except
. D Thiering,
at 1; G Singh,
at 1, 2; J Gallagher,
at 3; Dennis at 12-13; Pattendon at 608; Gudjonsson; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
People With an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996) at paras 4.34-4.39 and 4.54-4.58.
. Pattendon at 608.
. J Williams.
. B Hocking and L Manville,
. K Rogers,
. See paras 5.33-5.36.
at 1; Dixon (1997) at 228; Coldrey (1990) at 28 and 30; Dennis at 10-11; D Harvey, “The Right to Silence and the Presumption
of Innocence”
New Zealand Law Journal
at 184; Odgers (1985) at 85; Pattendon at 602; J Williams at 567; Wood and Crawford at 3, 20;
Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at para 4.50; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 54-55.
. Justice at 13-15.
. Dixon (1991-1992) at 36; Wood and Crawford at 25.
at 2; A Arfaras,
at 2; Greer (1990) at 726-727; Odgers (1985) at 85. It has been noted that this reasoning may lead to increased police powers in
relation to surveillance and forensic techniques and technology: Dixon (1991-1992) at 49; Greer and Morgan at 16, 20.
. Marsdens Attorneys, Solicitors and Barristers,
at 3; D Thiering,
at 1; G Singh,
at 3; A Arfaras,
at 2; J Gallagher,
at 2; Coldrey (1990) at 25; Greer (1990) at 725; Harvey at 183-184; Wood and Crawford at 2, 20; Justice; Royal Commission on Criminal
Procedure at paras 4.51 and 4.66. Contr Odgers (1985) at 91; Pattendon at 611; CR Williams at 648; Black at 9;
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
at 128-129 per Gaudron J;
Sorby v The Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 57 ALJR 248
at 253 per Gibbs CJ.
. A Arfaras,
. Coldrey (1990) at 29.
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
4. Pre-Trial Disclosure
History of this Reference (Digest)
4.1 New South Wales does not have a legislative regime requiring general pre-trial disclosure in criminal trials. The position varies
in other jurisdictions. England and Victoria have both implemented statutory regimes requiring general pre-trial disclosure by the
prosecution and the defence, while disclosure is required in criminal trials in the Supreme Court of Western Australia by rules of
court. This chapter examines the existing law in New South Wales, the reforms undertaken in other jurisdictions, the policy arguments
for and against compulsory pre-trial disclosure and contains the Commission’s proposals at this stage for reform of pre-trial
disclosure.
PRE-TRIAL DISCLOSURE IN NEW SOUTH WALES
4.2 Pre-trial disclosure in New South Wales is regulated by a combination of common law rules, legislation, guidelines issued by the
Director of Public Prosecutions, rules issued by the Bar Association and the Law Society and standard practice directions issued
by the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
4.3 There is no general common law right to discovery by either party in criminal trials in Australia.
The prosecution is not generally required to provide the defence with copies of statements of persons whom the prosecution does not
intend to call as witnesses, even if the statements could provide the defence with relevant evidence.
However, it is considered good practice to disclose this type of material.
At common law, courts have a discretion to require disclosure in particular cases on the ground of fairness, and in particular cases
non-disclosure can amount to a miscarriage of justice.
4.4 The defence can also subpoena the prosecution to provide material in relation to the investigation and prosecution of the charge,
including witness statements.
Subpoenas are limited to material which has a bona fide evidentiary purpose and can be challenged on the basis they do not.
In deciding whether to uphold the subpoena, the court must consider whether there is a legitimate forensic purpose in the production
of the documents sought by the defence. In assessing whether there is a legitimate forensic purpose in criminal cases, the test is
whether it is “on the cards” that the documents would materially assist the defendant.
Subpoenas cannot be used to achieve one-sided discovery against the police or as a delay tactic.
An initial decision to refuse access to documents is open to review during the course of the trial.
4.5 The subpoena procedure can reveal a significant amount of information about the prosecution case. However, the full potential
of this mechanism is rarely realised. In New South Wales, legal aid is not generally available to finance preparation for committal
proceedings.
This significantly limits defence resources for pursuing disclosure via subpoenas. Further, the subpoena procedure cannot assist
the defence to obtain material if it is unaware of its existence.
4.6 The defence may seek further and better particulars. The prosecution is required to disclose such particulars as are necessary
to reasonably inform the defence of the charges the defendant faces.
4.7 If the prosecution intends to call a witness at trial who was not called at the committal, the defence should be given sufficient
notice and a copy of the relevant witness statement.
There is no corresponding duty on the defence to give notice to the prosecution at the committal of the issues it intends to raise
at trial or the nature of the defence.
Legislation
4.8 The common law is modified by statutory disclosure requirements in relation to alibi evidence in trials for indictable offences.
The defence must give written notice of particulars of intended alibi evidence, including the names and addresses of proposed witnesses
or, where the defence does not have this information, information which might assist the prosecution to locate the witness, to the
Director of Public Prosecutions within 10 days of the committal. This obligation continues to apply where the defence obtains further
information about the identity or location of alibi witnesses after complying with the initial requirement.
4.9 If this requirement is not fulfilled, the proposed alibi evidence cannot be introduced without the leave of the court.
The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal has held that the prosecution is also entitled to cross-examine the defendant where
the defence does not comply with this requirement until the last available opportunity.
4.10 In murder trials, the defence is required to give notice of the defendant’s intention to raise the defence that he or she
is not guilty due to substantial impairment by abnormality of mind.
The defence is also required to disclose the names and addresses of proposed witnesses on this issue and particulars of their evidence.
There is a prescribed form for giving notice,
which must be given at least 35 days before trial.
If these requirements are not fulfilled, the evidence cannot be introduced without the leave of the court.
4.11 Similarly, if either party intends to lead evidence of tendency or coincidence, or first-hand hearsay evidence, that party must
generally give advance notice of that intention.
4.12 Legislation also requires that the prosecution serve a brief of evidence on the defendant for indictable offences in the Local
Court. Since 30 March 1998, this requirement has been extended to include most summary offences and indictable offences tried summarily.
Barristers’ and Solicitors’ Rules
4.13 The New South Wales Barristers’ Rules and the Law Society of New South Wales Solicitors’ Rules require that prosecutors
disclose to the defence as soon as practicable all relevant material, including the names and means of locating potential witnesses.
Disclosure is not required where it would seriously threaten the administration of justice or a person’s safety.
In addition, a prosecutor who reasonably believes that evidence which the prosecution intends to use may have been illegally or improperly
obtained must promptly inform the defence and make a copy of the evidence available to the defence.
4.14 The Rules do not empower the courts to impose sanctions for non-compliance. To enforce the Rules, an aggrieved person must lodge
a complaint with the Bar Association or Law Society. A disciplinary tribunal determines the complaint and is empowered to impose
sanctions if it determines that the lawyer is guilty of professional misconduct.
Prosecution Guidelines
4.15 The New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions has issued guidelines for the conduct of all prosecutions and appeals by
the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (“the DPP Guidelines”).
The DPP Guidelines operate subject to law and to the Barristers’ Rules and the Solicitors’ Rules.
4.16 The DPP Guidelines provide that prosecutors must make full disclosure to the defence of all facts and circumstances and the identity
of all witnesses reasonably to be regarded as relevant to any issue likely to arise at trial. This extends to the disclosure of any
statement by a witness that may be inconsistent with the witness’ intended evidence.
Tactical considerations are not to be taken into account in assessing what material will be disclosed to the defence. The overriding
interests of justice may require withholding of information. This will be rare and material should only be withheld with the approval
of the Director or Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions. Prosecutors should not disclose sensitive material to the defence without
first consulting with the police officer in charge of the case.
Where the prosecution intends to lead evidence which appears on reasonable grounds to have been illegally or improperly obtained,
the prosecutor must inform the defendant within a reasonable time.
4.17 The DPP Guidelines also require extensive disclosure by police in matters referred by the Commissioner for Police to the Director
of Public Prosecutions for prosecution. Police must notify the Director of Public Prosecutions of the existence of, and if requested
disclose, all documentation, material and other information, including concerning any proposed witnesses, which might be relevant
to either the prosecution or the defence.
4.18 The DPP guidelines do not prescribe conduct.
They do not have statutory force and do not empower the courts to impose sanctions for non-compliance.
Supreme Court Standard Directions
4.19 The Supreme Court has introduced Standard Directions for pre-trial disclosure in criminal trials.
Under the Standard Directions, criminal matters committed for trial were originally fixed for mention before the list judge one month
after the committal. Following the severe increase in the delay in hearing criminal trials in the Supreme Court, this now takes place
approximately six months prior to the expected trial date. At the mention, the prosecution tenders a draft Crown case statement,
which sets out the facts the prosecution proposes to prove at trial and the questions of law the prosecution considers likely to
arise, invites the defence to admit particular facts and identifies matters considered suitable for informal proof.
At the mention, the Court also ensures that the Crown brief (including witness statements) has been served on the defence.
4.20 At the listing callover, a timetable is set for disclosure of a list of proposed prosecution exhibits, copies of documentary
exhibits, and, if necessary, an amended Crown case statement. A date for delivery of a defence response to the Crown case statement
is also set. The defence response identifies facts which the defence will admit, additional questions of law identified by the defence,
additional facts which the defence asserts require proof, matters considered suitable for informal proof and proposed prosecution
exhibits which the defence objects to being tendered, stating the ground of objection. The Standard Directions also provide for disclosure
of all psychiatric reports in cases involving psychiatric issues.
4.21 The Standard Directions do not have statutory force, are not part of the rules of court and are made only by consent. There is
no penalty for non-compliance.
International law
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(“the Covenant”) does not expressly impose disclosure obligations in criminal trials. However, the Covenant requires
that those accused of committing criminal offences be guaranteed a fair trial, including adequate time and facilities for the preparation
of the defence and communication with counsel.
It has been suggested that this extends to access to prosecution material.
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
4.23 The common law pre-trial disclosure rules discussed in paragraphs 4.3 to 4.7 above apply throughout Australia. All Australian
also implemented compulsory general pre-trial disclosure regimes. This section of this paper discusses these various requirements.
4.24 Since 1993 in Victoria, a legislative pre-trial disclosure regime has operated in criminal trials in the County Court and the
Supreme Court.
This regime imposes mutual compulsory disclosure requirements, although a higher standard of disclosure is required of the prosecution.
The defence is required to respond to the presentment by indicating which elements of the offence are admitted. Thereafter, the timetable
for disclosure is set by the court at a pre-trial hearing. The prosecution must file in court and serve on the defence a case statement.
This includes a summary of the facts and inferences the prosecution will seek to prove at trial, copies of prosecution witness statements,
including expert witnesses, a list of exhibits the prosecution intends to produce, copies of documentary exhibits and statements
of law the prosecution intends to rely on. The prosecution must also give the defence a reasonable opportunity to inspect prosecution
4.25 The defence is required to file and serve a defence response replying to the matters raised in the prosecution case statement,
providing copies of expert witness statements and including statements of law the defence intends to rely on. The defence is not
required to disclose the identity of its witnesses, other than expert witnesses.
4.26 The consequences of non-compliance with the regime also differ for the prosecution and the defence. Non-compliance does not affect
the admissibility of defence evidence, but the prosecution is not permitted to introduce evidence which was not disclosed in accordance
with the regime, or departs from the disclosed prosecution case, without the leave of the court.
The trial judge is permitted to comment on non-compliance and the parties may also comment, with the leave of the court, having regard
to the relevance of the proposed comment and the likelihood of it producing a miscarriage of justice.
The court can also award costs against the parties and their legal representatives personally for unreasonable non-compliance with
the regime.
4.27 The defence is also required to disclose intended alibi evidence to the prosecution.
Notice must be given during the committal or in writing to the Director of Public Prosecutions on the day the defendant is committed
for trial, or, if no committal is held, on the day the presentment is served on the defendant. The particulars required are similar
to those required in New South Wales.
If this requirement is not fulfilled, the proposed alibi evidence cannot be introduced without the leave of the court.
The prosecution and the police are prohibited from communicating with proposed defence alibi witnesses in relation to the case, except
in the presence and with the consent of the defendant’s legal representative. Contravention of this requirement constitutes
4.28 One submission identified several problems with the operation of the Victorian regime, including inadequate funding of both the
Victorian Office of Public Prosecutions and Legal Aid, the inexperience of legal practitioners with the regime and the failure of
legal practitioners to accept the requirements of the regime due to a general culture of combat rather than co operation.
The Australian Institute of Judicial Administration has also concluded that there are considerable problems with the regime, including
defence exploitation of drafting deficiencies in the case statement, defence responses which consist of a global denial with no detail
whatsoever, the inability of unrepresented defendants to comply and judicial reluctance to impose sanctions for non-compliance.
Northern Territory, South Australia, Tasmania, Australian Capital Territory
4.29 Defence disclosure requirements also apply in respect of alibi evidence in trials for indictable offences in these jurisdictions.
The defence is required to give written notice of particulars of intended alibi evidence to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The particulars are similar to those required in New South Wales.
The period within which disclosure is required in these jurisdictions varies. In the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory, it is within 14 days of the committal. In South Australia, it is within seven days of the committal. In Tasmania, disclosure
is required within seven days of receiving notice of the requirement.
In the Northern Territory, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania, if this requirement is not fulfilled, the proposed alibi
evidence cannot be introduced without the leave of the court. In South Australia, leave is not required but non-compliance can be
the subject of comment to the jury.
Western Australia
4.30 Since 1993, criminal trials in the Supreme Court of Western Australia have been the subject of a disclosure regime implemented
Criminal Practice Rules
The prosecution is required to provide the defence with a statement of facts and propositions of law on which it intends to rely
and copies of prosecution witness statements.
4.31 The defence is required to provide disclosure by way of a statement indicating which facts alleged by the prosecution will be
admitted and which facts will be disputed, the legal grounds of any defence which will be relied on and copies of statements of any
expert witnesses who the defence proposes to call.
4.32 The trial judge is empowered to comment to the jury on non-compliance with any requirement of this regime, inviting the jury
to draw inferences which are adverse to the party in default.
4.33 In criminal trials for indictable offences, the defence is also required by legislation to disclose intended alibi evidence to
the prosecution.
Fewer particulars are required in Western Australia than in other Australian jurisdictions, including New South Wales.
Disclosure is required no later than 10 days before trial. If this requirement is not fulfilled, the court may adjourn the trial
to enable the prosecution to investigate the alibi or adjourn the trial and discharge the jury.
4.34 In criminal trials for indictable offences, the defence is required to disclose intended alibi evidence to the prosecution.
Disclosure is required in the form of written notice of particulars of the alibi to the Director of Public Prosecutions. The particulars
are similar to those required in New South Wales.
Disclosure is required within 14 days of committal. If this requirement is not fulfilled, the proposed alibi evidence cannot be introduced
without the leave of the court.
4.35 If either the prosecution or the defence intends to lead expert evidence at trial, they are required to give the other party
written notice of the name and finding or opinion of the expert, followed by a copy of the expert report, as soon as practicable
before the trial.
United Kingdom
4.36 All alleged offences in England, Wales and Northern Ireland into which an investigation has commenced since 1 April 1997 are
subject to a general, legislative pre-trial disclosure regime.
This regime imposes compulsory pre-trial disclosure on both the prosecution and the defence, although a higher standard of disclosure
is required of the prosecution. The prosecution is required to disclose any material to the defence which the prosecution considers
might undermine the prosecution case.
This is known as “primary disclosure”. Primary disclosure is required as soon as reasonably practical.
The obligation on the prosecution to provide primary disclosure to the defence continues until the conclusion of the trial.
4.37 In trials for indictable offences, where the prosecution undertakes primary disclosure, the defence is required to provide the
court and the prosecution with a defence statement setting out the general nature of the defence and the matters which the defence
will dispute, giving reasons. If the defence involves alibi evidence, particulars are required.
The defence statement must be supplied within 14 days of the defence receiving primary disclosure from the prosecution, although
the defence can apply to the court for an extension of this time limit.
4.38 The prosecution is required to disclose any additional undisclosed material which might reasonably be expected to assist the
case disclosed in the defence statement. This is known as “secondary disclosure”.
Where the prosecution does not provide secondary disclosure, but the defence has reasonable cause to believe that the prosecution
has material which might reasonably be expected to assist the defence case, the defence can apply to the court for an order for secondary
disclosure.
The regime requires unused prosecution material which is disclosed to the defence to be treated confidentially. Contravention of
this requirement is a contempt of court.
4.39 The court may stay the trial where it considers that the defendant has been denied a fair trial as a result of non-compliance
with prosecution disclosure obligations.
The court, or (with the leave of the court) the prosecution, is permitted to comment to the jury on non-compliance with the defence
disclosure obligations, and the jury is permitted to draw such adverse inferences as it considers appropriate. Departure from the
disclosed defence case and nominating inconsistent defences in the defence statement are both considered non-compliance with the
pre-trial defence disclosure regime.
However, a defendant cannot be convicted solely on the basis of non-compliance.
4.40 The legislation provides for a code of practice designed to ensure that all reasonable lines of inquiry in criminal investigations
are pursued and that material obtained in the course of investigations is recorded and disclosed to the defence.
4.41 One submission reported that this regime was generally supported by the vast majority of criminal barristers in England and Wales.
4.42 If either the prosecution or the defence intends to lead expert evidence at trial, they must provide a copy of the expert’s
witness statement to the other party as soon as possible.
In Magistrates’ Courts, the right to disclosure of expert evidence can be waived.
There is specific provision for non-disclosure due to the risk of intimidation of witnesses.
Evidence not disclosed in accordance with the requirements cannot be introduced without the leave of the court.
Serious fraud
4.43 In 1987, a separate scheme was established for the investigation, charging and trial of serious and complex fraud in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland.
This scheme empowers the trial judge to order that a preparatory hearing be held in relation to cases involving serious or complex
fraud. At the preparatory hearing, the trial judge can make orders for pre-trial disclosure by both the prosecution and the defence.
The prosecution can be ordered to supply the court and the defence with a case statement, setting out the principal facts and propositions
of law relied on by the prosecution, and the prosecution witnesses and exhibits.
4.44 If this is complied with, the judge can order the defence to supply the court and the prosecution with a defence response stating
the general nature of the defence and the propositions of law relied on by the defence, the principal matters in the prosecution
case statement which the defence disputes, and any objections taken by the defence.
4.45 The court, or (with the leave of the court) a party, can comment to the jury on non-compliance with these requirements or departure
from the disclosed case and the jury can draw such inferences as it considers proper.
In a submission to the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, the Serious Fraud Office argued that these sanctions were inadequate.
The Australian Institute of Judicial Administration has concluded that there are significant problems with the regime which are similar
to the problems identified with the Victorian pre-trial disclosure regime.
4.46 The Australian Institute of Judicial Administration and Nader have both recommended that a pre-trial disclosure regime be introduced
for complex trials in New South Wales.
REFORM OF COMPULSORY PRE-TRIAL DISCLOSURE
4.47 The main arguments for introducing a general compulsory pre-trial disclosure regime in New South Wales are that disclosure would
improve the efficiency of the criminal justice system and would be fairer to defendants and to the prosecution.
4.48 Compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure was recommended by the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure,
while both the Working Group on the Right to Silence
and the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
proposed mutual disclosure regimes. The New South Wales Law Reform Commission has also previously proposed mutual pre-trial disclosure.
Compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure
Arguments for disclosure
4.49 There are several critical decisions which the defendant is required to make before trial, the most fundamental being to decide
how to plead. It is argued that compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure enables the defendant to properly evaluate the evidence
in making this decision, ensuring that guilty pleas are based on the facts which can be proven. This is particularly important in
a system where most criminal charges are resolved by way of guilty plea.
4.50 The next major decisions required of the defendant who decides to plead not guilty relate to preparation of the defence. It is
argued that compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure would assist the defence to prepare for trial by ensuring that the defence
was fully aware of the prosecution case it was required to meet,
and by ensuring that the defence would have access to material which the prosecution held, but did not intend to use. The fairness
of the trial requires that the verdict be reached in the light of all relevant and admissible evidence. The defence is in the best
position to determine the relevance of such material to the defence case. However, it is extremely difficult for the defence to discover
the existence of, or obtain access to, this type of material unless the prosecution is compelled to disclose it.
O’Connor points out that the major miscarriages of justice revealed in England since the early 1990s resulted from non-disclosure
by the prosecution of material which was inconsistent with the prosecution case.
4.51 Another argument is that the police and prosecution have access to superior financial resources and investigations expertise
to defendants. Requiring the prosecution pre-trial disclosure would compensate for the unfairness created by this inequality of resources.
The Commission has previously recommended compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure on the basis that it redresses this imbalance
to some extent.
4.52 On the other hand, proponents of a mutual compulsory pre-trial disclosure regime justify compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure
on the basis of reciprocity. It is argued that compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure would encourage voluntary defence pre-trial
disclosure,
or that compulsory defence disclosure requirements are far more likely to work in practice if the requirements also apply to the
prosecution.
4.53 It is also argued that compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure would improve the efficiency of the criminal justice system
by discouraging defendants from contesting very strong prosecution cases.
Arguments against disclosure
4.54 One argument against compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure is that it would provide the defence with an opportunity to
tailor its case to meet the disclosed prosecution case, by fabricating evidence, procuring perjured testimony and intimidating prosecution
4.55 It is also argued that compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure rules would be misused by the defence to force the prosecution
to comb through large amounts of material as a tactic to delay the trial,
in the hope that the prosecution will be induced to withdraw the charges rather than have to disclose particular material,
or simply in order to conduct a fishing expedition for potential defence evidence or lines of argument.
4.56 It is also argued that disclosure of certain prosecution material would undermine the administration of justice. For example,
information which reveals the identity of undercover police officers or informants would jeopardise their effectiveness and may well
endanger their safety. Similarly, where the police suspect a defendant of involvement in organised crime, disclosure may jeopardise
police operations into other offences or offenders.
This problem can be addressed by providing for exemptions from disclosure, requiring limited disclosure which protects the sensitive
aspect of such information, imposing confidentiality obligations in relation to disclosed information, restricting access to sensitive
material to defence legal representatives and prosecuting perjury offences and offences relating to interference with witnesses.
However, there is always a risk that this type of material may be disclosed, even where protective measures are in place.
4.57 Another argument is that compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure would actually reduce efficiency because of the additional
preparation costs, the cost of counsel settling disclosure and the additional judicial resources required to resolve disputes about
disclosure.
Prosecution authorities require adequate resources in order to properly meet disclosure obligations. One submission emphasised that
this requires strong government commitment to provide financial support.
Compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure
Arguments for disclosure
4.58 Several submissions argued that compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure would improve the efficiency of the criminal justice
system by early identification of which issues were actually in dispute, so that the prosecution did not waste time and resources
preparing evidence in relation to issues which the defendant did not dispute. This would make estimates of trial lengths more accurate,
improving trial listing procedures. Resolving non-contentious issues before trial would also result in more efficient use of court
time, the time of counsel and less inconvenience to witnesses whose evidence was not in dispute. Adjournments in response to unexpected
developments in the course of the trial would be eliminated, also shortening trials. Finally, disclosure would discourage the pursuit
of weak prosecutions, reducing congestion in the court system by reducing the number of trials.
4.59 One submission also argued that since legislation and policy require considerable prosecution pre-trial disclosure, defence disclosure
would place the parties on a more level playing field,
although this argument is problematic in that it does not address the question of what level of disclosure is appropriate.
4.60 It is also argued that compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure would lead to more just trial outcomes by preventing the defence
from taking the prosecution by surprise at trial, leading evidence which the prosecution could not reasonably have anticipated and
did not have any opportunity to investigate. The Working Group on the Right to Silence concluded that in a “significant number”
of cases defence pre-trial disclosure would have prevented ambush defences.
It should however be pointed out that, for most cases, the issues to be raised are clear simply from the nature of the case itself
and it will only be infrequently that an experienced Crown prosecutor will be unaware of or be unable to anticipate a defence. The
real point here is that it may be a waste of time and resources to attempt to anticipate
defence which the circumstances might suggest.
4.61 The defendant will already be aware of the whole of the prosecution case and will have had adequate time for reflection and legal
advice before being required to provide disclosure. This position could not be more different from the position of the defendant
when questioned by police.
Arguments against disclosure
4.62 It is argued that requiring defence pre-trial disclosure would infringe several fundamental principles of our criminal justice
system. Requiring the defendant to provide information about the defence case before trial would be inconsistent with the principle
that the burden of proving the defendant’s guilt is on the prosecution, which is required to establish guilt without any assistance
from the defendant. Compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure might also operate in practice as a form of compulsion on the defendant,
inconsistent with the defendant’s privilege against self-incrimination. It is also argued that compulsory defence pre-trial
disclosure would be inconsistent with the presumption of innocence.
The Australian Institute of Judicial Administration has acknowledged that pre-trial defence disclosure would infringe these principles,
but considered that a disclosure regime was still justified on the basis of efficiency.
However, the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice concluded that compulsory pre-trial disclosure did not involve a breach of fundamental
principles, because the only difference between pre-trial disclosure and advancing a defence at trial was timing.
4.63 Another argument is that, like prosecution disclosure, compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure would impose an unacceptable burden
on defence resources.
The Working Group on the Right to Silence considered that any additional cost could well be offset by savings resulting from focusing
the defence on the real issues in the case.
One submission emphasised that legal aid organisations require adequate resources in order properly to meet disclosure obligations,
again relying on government commitment.
Other submissions argued that compulsory defence disclosure would amplify the effects of the unbalanced resources available to the
prosecution and the defence.
It is clear that it would be impossible for most unrepresented defendants to fairly and fully comply with compulsory defence pre-trial
disclosure.
4.64 Like compulsory prosecution disclosure, defence disclosure is criticised on the basis that it could lead to injustice by giving
the prosecution an opportunity to tailor its case in response to the disclosed defence, or intimidate defence witnesses, or fabricate
A related argument is that being contacted and questioned by police is itself an intimidating experience for many potential defence
witnesses. Potential witnesses who have a criminal history, particularly those on bail or parole, may feel extremely vulnerable to
the police.
Again, in response to this argument it is argued that these criticisms can be adequately addressed by the protective measures discussed
in paragraph 4.56 above. One submission argued that compulsory defence disclosure would promote less investigation by police in the
initial stages of the criminal justice system.
4.65 It is also argued that compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure may cause injustice because there may be reasons for departure
from the disclosed defence at trial which are not the responsibility of the defendant, including errors by the defendant’s
legal representatives, late briefing of counsel, different advice received by new solicitors or counsel, and changes in response
to adjustments to the prosecution case. It is argued that it would be unfair to impose sanctions on the defence for non-disclosure
in these circumstances.
4.66 Finally, compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure is criticised on the basis that it is likely to be ineffective. Research into
the limited existing defence disclosure requirements indicates judges are generally reluctant to impose sanctions for non-compliance
with these requirements. It is argued that there is no reason to expect that a general disclosure regime would be more rigorously
enforced by the judiciary.
OPTIONS FOR REFORM
4.67 The Commission tends to the view at this stage that the arguments in favour of pre-trial disclosure discussed in paragraphs 4.49-4.53
and 4.58-4.61 above justify the introduction of compulsory disclosure in criminal trials in the District Court and Supreme Court.
Despite the recent increase in the sentencing powers of the Local Court, the onerous nature of disclosure would not be appropriate
in relation to short, relatively uncomplicated summary proceedings in the Local Court.
Compulsory prosecution pre-trial disclosure
4.68 The limited common law prosecution pre-trial disclosure obligations are already augmented by professional duties. The Commission
considers that there is merit in the view that these duties require more formal recognition and reinforcement with appropriate sanctions.
A legislative regime, unlike the existing Supreme Court Standard Directions, would have the advantage of providing enforceable consequences
for non-compliance.
Material to be disclosed
4.69 The Commission tends to the view that the prosecution should be required to disclose its case and all relevant material which
does not form part of its case to the defendant before trial. The following information would need to be disclosed:
A summary of the conceptual nature of the prosecution case, including the acts alleged to be the foundation of the defendant’s
criminal liability and the facts which the prosecution will rely on to establish the elements of the offence.
The facts which the prosecution considers suitable for informal proof.
The facts which the prosecution invites the defence to admit.
A summary of the propositions of law which the prosecution intends to rely on at trial.
The names and addresses of all persons who are able to give relevant evidence, including persons whom the prosecution does not intend
to call as witnesses at trial. Where the person has made a statement, this would be required to be provided to the defendant. This
would include copies of statements made by the defendant, co-accused, and expert statements and reports. The fact that particular
prosecution witnesses have been given an indemnity would also be required to be disclosed. Copies of the criminal record of all persons
able to give relevant evidence at trial should also be provided to the defence.
A list of all exhibits the prosecution intends to produce at trial, and copies of all relevant documents, including documents which
the prosecution does not intend to produce as exhibits at trial. Where it is not practical to provide copies, the prosecution would
be required to give the defence an opportunity to inspect documents. The defence should also be afforded an opportunity to inspect
all relevant real and personal property, including items which the prosecution does not intend to produce as exhibits at trial, and
(subject to conditions ensuring their safekeeping) to conduct tests on such property.
In addition to disclosure of this specific information, there would be a residual requirement that the prosecution disclose any other
relevant information or object.
The existing disclosure requirements in relation to evidence of tendency, coincidence and first-hand hearsay would be retained.
4.70 The prosecution would be required to provide pre-trial disclosure before the defendant is required to elect the mode of trial
or plead to the charge, within a time frame to be established by Rules of Court.
4.71 The defence should be entitled to inspect evidence which the prosecution acquires after initial disclosure. Accordingly, the
obligation to disclose all relevant information to the defendant would continue throughout the trial.
Unrepresented defendants
4.72 Unrepresented defendants would be informed of the right to prosecution disclosure and the defence disclosure obligations when
first appearing before a court in connection with the charge. The extent of disclosure and its mode would need to be carefully controlled
by the trial judge.
Protective measures
4.73 The prosecution would have a discretion to decline to disclose specific material, to provide limited disclosure, or to require
that access to disclosed material be restricted to defence lawyers on the basis of the public interest in the circumstances of the
case. The fact that the prosecution has exercised these discretions should be disclosed to the defence, with reasons. This requirement
will ensure that the defence is aware of the existence of such material.
4.74 The courts would be empowered to review decisions by the prosecution to adopt these protective measures, and have the discretion
to make orders in relation to disclosure on application by the prosecution, the defence, any other person, or of its own motion.
Non-disclosure, limited disclosure or restricted access to disclosed prosecution material could be ordered. For example, where the
court was satisfied that disclosure would lead to the risk of intimidation of prosecution witnesses by the defendant or the defendant’s
associates, an order exempting the prosecution from disclosure of the material or restricting access to disclosed material to defence
lawyers would be available. Similarly, where disclosure would reveal the identity of a police informant or undercover police officer,
an order exempting the identifying material from disclosure may be appropriate. The courts would also have a residual discretion
where disclosure would undermine the administration of justice for other reasons.
4.75 Where the defendant was unrepresented, this would be taken into account by the court in determining whether to make orders in
relation to prosecution disclosure.
Confidentiality
4.76 The defence would be permitted to use the material in connection with the trial and also to the extent that the material has
been revealed in open court. Apart from these permitted uses, the defence would not be permitted to use or disclose the material.
Contravention of this requirement would constitute contempt.
Consequences of non-compliance
4.77 The prosecution would be prohibited from introducing evidence which was not disclosed as required, without the leave of the court.
Alternatively, the court could grant the defence an adjournment to enable it to prepare for unexpected prosecution evidence. The
trial judge would also be permitted to comment to the jury on the inferences which it was entitled to draw from non-disclosure. The
defence would also be entitled to comment to the jury, although perhaps the leave of the court should be required. Of course, the
extent of non-compliance and whether there is any justification in the circumstances of the case will be relevant. A voir dire, held
without the jury present, may be an appropriate forum for the trial judge to examine the reasons for departure from the disclosed
case and determine the consequences of non-compliance in the circumstances. The court should consider whether the prosecution applied
for any orders in relation to the material which was not disclosed, and the reasons for refusal of any such application.
4.78 The reason for this approach, rather than the prescriptive approach of automatically excluding evidence which was not disclosed,
is the Commission’s recognition of the need for flexibility in this context. The course of criminal trials is fluid, changing
as new facts and issues arise, which can completely change the context of the evidence before the court.
4.79 In many situations, it would be inappropriate to exclude evidence on the basis of non-disclosure where the relevance of the evidence
was not reasonably foreseeable before the trial. For example, in
the defendant was charged with several property offences. A prosecution witness, who had given a statement to police immediately
after the commission of the offences and testified at the committal hearing, claimed at trial that she had no recollection of the
relevant events. The Court of Criminal Appeal upheld the decision of the trial judge to grant leave to the prosecution to cross-examine
the prosecution witness on the basis that she was an unfavourable witness.
The unpredictable course of the prosecution evidence would make exclusion of the evidence ultimately given by the witness inappropriate
in this situation.
Compulsory defence pre-trial disclosure
4.80 The Commission is presently minded to accept that the arguments in paragraphs 4.58-4.61 justify an increase in the level of defence
pre-trial disclosure obligations. The main emphasis of the right to silence lies in a suspected person’s right to refuse to
answer questions during the investigative stage, without adverse inference being drawn against the suspect from the exercise of that
the need for which the Commission fully accepts at this stage notwithstanding the inroads which have been made in relation to that
right overseas. The importance of the right to silence after the defendant has been committed for trial does not, however, rest upon
the same basis as that which exists before the event. As Lord Mustill said in
R v Director of Serious Fraud Office; Ex p Smith
few will dispute that the curtailment of the right to silence is indispensable to the stability of society; the issue is one as to
where the line should be drawn, and the resolution of that issue must take into account the fact that the reasons for the right to
silence at different stages are themselves different. The privilege against compulsory pre-trial disclosure of the nature of the
defence case is of quite recent origin.
4.81 At this stage, the Commission raises three options for further consideration. Option 1 would require the defence to disclose
the expert evidence it intends to rely on at trial. Under option 2, the defence would be required to disclose expert evidence and
the intention to raise certain defences. Under option 3, the defence would be required to disclose both expert evidence and the nature
of the issues which will be litigated at trial.
Option 1: Disclosure of expert evidence
4.82 There have been many criticisms over the last few years at the increasing polarisation within the medical profession between
those doctors who give evidence for the prosecution and those who give defence evidence. In practice, the prosecution is already
obliged to provide the defendant with the reports of its experts so that defence counsel can obtain sufficient assistance from defence
experts in order to cross-examine the prosecution’s experts. As stated in paragraphs 4.68, the Commission considers that there
is merit in the view that this practice be reinforced by a legislative requirement. The Commission at this stage accepts that the
Crown (prosecuting as it does on behalf of the community) should be placed in a similar position in relation to the cross-examination
of the defendant’s experts. There cannot be a fair trial if the defence evidence is not properly tested. The Commission has
already stated the need for such disclosure in relation to the partial defence of substantial impairment by abnormality of mind (diminished
responsibility)
and Parliament has enacted this obligation.
Although substantial impairment by abnormality of mind is an affirmative defence in which the defendant bears the onus of proof,
there is no difference in principle so far as concerns the desirability of the prosecution being able to properly test other defence
expert evidence.
4.83 Under this option, the defence would be compelled to disclose the names and addresses of proposed expert witnesses, and copies
of expert reports upon which the defence proposed to rely at trial. This requirement is a logical step from the existing defence
disclosure requirements in relation to alibi evidence and the recently introduced requirement of disclosure of substantial impairment
by abnormality of mind, which require disclosure of material which is only within the knowledge of the defendant and which the prosecution
could not otherwise discover. This consideration applies equally to defence expert evidence.
4.84 Disclosure of the names and addresses of experts or copies of expert reports which the defence did not intend to use at trial
would not be required. The defence would not be required to disclose the identities of witnesses other than expert witnesses.
4.85 Disclosure of expert evidence by the defence would be required at least 35 days before the commencement of the trial, reflecting
the existing disclosure requirement for evidence of substantial impairment by abnormality of mind.
The prosecution would be subject to the same confidentiality obligations as the defence in relation to disclosed material.
4.86 The judge (and, with the leave of the court, the prosecution) would be permitted to comment that, in judging what weight should
be afforded to defence evidence which was not disclosed as required, or which was inconsistent with the disclosed defence evidence,
the jury should be permitted to take into account the non-disclosure or inconsistency. A voir dire, held without the jury present,
may be an appropriate forum for the trial judge to examine the reasons for departure from the disclosed case and determine the consequences
of non-compliance in the circumstances. However, it appears to the Commission that a defendant should not be able to be convicted
solely on the basis of an adverse inference drawn under the court’s powers to sanction non-compliance with compulsory disclosure
requirements.
Consideration will need to be given as to how best to guarantee this.
Non-disclosed evidence would not be admissible except with the leave of the court.
Option 2: Disclosure of expert evidence and the intention to raise certain ‘defences’
4.87 Under this option, the defence would be required to provide notice of the defendant’s intention to raise intoxication,
provocation, duress or self-defence, in addition to the existing notice requirements in relation to alibi and substantial impairment
by abnormality of mind defences. The Commission has already expressed the view that there are strong arguments in favour of compulsory
defence disclosure that the issue of provocation is to be raised.
4.88 The defence would also be required to disclose the expert evidence upon which it intended to rely at trial, as in option 1.
4.89 The consequences of non-compliance with the disclosure obligations raised in this option would be the same as the consequences
of non-compliance set out in option 1.
Option 3: Disclosure of the issues which will be litigated at trial and expert evidence
4.90 This option would require the defence to disclose the general nature of the issues to be raised at trial - whether by denial
of the elements of the charge or by way of exculpation. The Commission does not, at this stage, consider that the level of disclosure
proposed in this option should extend to specific responses to the particular facts and inferences listed in the Crown case statement.
For example, the defence would be required to disclose whether the defendant disputes that he or she did the physical act alleged
by the prosecution as an ingredient of the offence charged, whether the defence intends to challenge the admissibility of admissions
alleged by the prosecution to have been made, the general nature of the objection to be taken, and whether issues such as intoxication,
duress, self-defence or provocation are to be raised. This list is intended to be illustrative only and not exhaustive.
4.91 At this stage, the Commission does not accept that it would be appropriate that the defendant be compelled to provide the prosecution
with copies of the statements of proposed defence witnesses. The purpose of disclosure is not to qualify the prosecution’s
responsibility for proving its case, but to permit trials to proceed expeditiously and the prosecution to concentrate on the real
4.92 The Commission considers that restricting the required disclosure to the identification of issues recognises the very different
position between the prosecution and the defence so far as resources are concerned.
4.93 The principal justification for this option is the argument that the community (on whose behalf the Crown prosecutes) can no
longer afford the luxury of defendants simply putting the Crown to proof of its case (where there is no real reason to dispute much
of it) and having the right to raise issues for the first time during the trial itself when the Crown will have either no opportunity
or only an inadequate opportunity to investigate those issues. This is far less an incursion upon the right to silence than that
which Parliament has permitted by questioning under compulsory powers by various special investigative bodies.
The Commission does not at this stage support any extension of those powers generally in the investigative stage.
4.94 If compulsory pre-trial disclosure of the general nature of the defence is required, the defendant will not be personally interrogated
(the position of the unrepresented defendant is left to one side for the moment). The whole of the prosecution case will already
have been disclosed to the defendant at the time when such disclosure is required, even the statements of its witnesses. The defendant
will have had adequate time for reflection, with the benefit of legal advice, upon the material disclosed by the prosecution before
having to nominate the issues to be litigated at the trial. The position of the defendant at this stage could not be more removed
from that which he or she is in when being interrogated by the police. There is no legitimate prejudice suffered by the defendant
in requiring disclosure of the defence at this later stage. The only advantage which will be lost is that of surprise.
4.95 The defence would also be required to disclose the expert evidence upon which it intended to rely at trial, as in option 1.
4.96 The consequences of non-compliance with the disclosure obligations raised in this option would be the same as the consequences
of non-compliance set out in option 1.
4.97 Unrepresented defendants are a special case. Where the defendant is unrepresented, the obligation of disclosure should be imposed
upon him or her only by order of the court in the particular case, when the court will be in a position to investigate with the unrepresented
defendant whether modified disclosure would be appropriate. The fact that the absence of representation results from the defendant’s
own choice would be relevant to determining the extent of disclosure which would be appropriate.
4.98 A satisfactory regime of compulsory defence disclosure would require timely and adequate legal representation. It is very doubtful
whether, in legally aided cases, the significant additional burden of compliance with disclosure obligations could be adequately
undertaken having regard to the present level of funding. The likely prospect of increased numbers of unrepresented defendants is
a further significant obstacle to efficient trial processes. These issues must be resolved if real, as distinct from merely theoretical,
advances in efficiency can be made. It is likely that the extra cost of the provision of additional legal representation will ultimately
save costs in relation to the trial.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Maddison v Goldrick
[1976] 1 NSWLR 651
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
39 A Crim R 406
(1990) Tas R 256
Sobh v Police Force of Victoria
(1994) 1 VR 41;
Carter v Hayes
(1994) 16 SASR 451;
72 A Crim R 387.
R v Lawless
[1979] HCA 49
(1979) 142 CLR 659
26 ALR 161.
In Re Van Beelan
(1974) 9 SASR 163
at 248-249 per the Full Court;
(1981) 27 SASR 166
(1981) 28 SASR 134
4 A Crim R 171
at 186 per Wells J, Full Court;
Gouldham v R
[1970] WAR 119
at 122 per Virtue SPJ; at 133 per Wickham J.
R v Lawless
[1979] HCA 49
(1979) 142 CLR 659
26 ALR 161.
Jamieson v The Queen
60 A Crim R 68
, (prosecution did not disclose to defence that prosecution witness had been granted a limited immunity. On the facts, the trial had
not miscarried);
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60330/94, 21 June 1995, unreported) (prosecution failure to disclose psychiatric reports to defence
resulted in miscarriage of justice);
Carew v Carone
(1991) 5 WAR 1
(prosecution failure to disclose identity of witness to defence did not result in a miscarriage of justice on the facts);
Clarkson v DPP
[1990] VicRp 65
[1990] VR 745
; J Hunter and K Cronin,
Evidence, Advocacy and Ethical Practice
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1994) at 190.
Alistair v The Queen
(1984) 154 CLR 404;
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
39 A Crim R 406
; Hunter and Cronin at 190.
Principal Registrar of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Tastan
(1994) 75 A Crim R 498
at 503 per Barr AJ.
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
39 A Crim R 406
at 409 per Hunt J, with whom the other members of the Court agreed;
Attorney-General (New South Wales) v Stuart
(1994) 34 NSWLR 667
at 681 and 682-684 per Hunt CJ at CL with whom Studdert J agreed.
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
at 17 and 19;
39 A Crim R 406
at 410 per Hunt J, with whom the other members of the Court agreed;
Attorney-General (New South Wales) v Stuart
(1994) 34 NSWLR 667
at 681 per Hunt CJ at CL with whom Studdert J agreed.
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
39 A Crim R 406
at 409 per Hunt J, with whom the other members of the Court agreed.
. Hunter and Cronin at 190. Legal aid is available in this situation in murder cases.
. Hunter and Cronin at 199.
King v The Queen
[1986] HCA 59
(1986) 161 CLR 423
R v Saffron
(1988) 17 NSWLR 395
at 447-448.
R v Pearson
[1953] QWN 18
R v Devenish
[1969] VicRp 95
[1969] VR 737
at 739 per the Full Court;
In Re Van Beelan
(1974) 9 SASR 163
at 248-249 per the Full Court;
R v Russell-Smith
(1981) 35 ACTR 31
(1982) 29 SASR 592
5 A Crim R 315.
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
48 A Crim R 385
Petty v The Queen
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
[1991] HCA 34
55 A Crim R 322
[1991] HCA 34
102 ALR 129
at 132-133;
[1991] HCA 34
65 ALJR 625
at 627 per Mason CJ, Deane, Toohey, McHugh JJ;
[1991] HCA 34
(1991) 173 CLR 95
[1991] HCA 34
55 A Crim R 322
[1991] HCA 34
102 ALR 129
at 138-139;
[1991] HCA 34
65 ALJR 625
at 630 per Brennan J.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 405A, inserted by the
Crimes and Other Acts (Amendment) Act 1974
(NSW) s 8(a).
. There is English authority that where the English version of this requirement is not complied with, the proper course it to permit
the defence to provide late notice and to grant the prosecution an adjournment to enable the alibi to be investigated:
(1979) 69 Cr App R 229.
Lattouf v The Queen
(1980) 2 A Crim R 65
at 73-74 per Street CJ, with whom Moffit P and Cantor J agreed.
Crimes Act 1900
, 405AB(1).
Crimes Act 1900
, 405AB(2).
Crimes (General) Regulations 1995
(NSW) Schedule 1, form 4
Crimes (General) Regulations 1995
(NSW) r 4A.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 405AB(1).
Evidence Act 1995
Justices Act 1902
Division 1 subdivision 7A (indictable offences); Division 2 subdivision 6A (summary offences).
Law Society of New South Wales Solicitors’ Rules
(“Solicitors’ Rules”), r A66;
New South Wales
Barristers’ Rules
(“Barristers’ Rules”), r 66. The
Solicitors’ Rules
provide that disclosure is not required where the prosecutor reasonably believes that the threat could not be avoided by conditional
disclosure such as obtaining an undertaking from defence counsel not to disclose the material to the defendant or any other person:
r A66. Prosecutors must also consider whether non-disclosure could prejudice the defence and whether the charge to which the material
relates should be withdrawn or replaced with a lesser charge: r A66A.
Solicitors’ Rules
Barristers’ Rules
, r 67. Under the
Solicitors’ Rules
, the prosecutor must also inform the defence of the reasons for believing that the evidence may have been obtained illegally or improperly:
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession: Complaints Against Lawyers
(Report 70, 1993) at paras 2.19 and 2.20.
. Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, New South Wales,
Prosecution Guidelines
, December 1995, furnished pursuant to the
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1986
DPP Guidelines
, Introduction.
. The requirement of the
Solicitors’ Rules
that the means of locating prospective witnesses be disclosed (Rule A66) may be satisfied by making the witness available to the
defence where possible. Addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses will not generally be supplied to the defence.
DPP Guidelines
, Appendix D. See also
DPP Guidelines
, Guideline 7.
DPP Guidelines
, Guideline 14. See
Barristers’ Rules
(Rule 67) and
Solicitors’ Rules
(Rule A67); para 4.13.
DPP Guidelines
, Appendix D.
DPP Guidelines
, Introduction.
. Standard directions dated 25 March 1994. See also J Wood, “The Changing Face of Case Management: The New South Wales Experience”
Journal of Judicial Administration
121 at 140-142; H Figgis,
Dealing With Court Delay in New South Wales
(New South Wales Parliamentary Library Research Service Briefing Paper No 31/96, Sydney, 1996) at 20 and 27-30.
. Under a proposed practice note, the Crown case statement would be required to state the conceptual nature of the Crown case rather
than each fact the prosecution proposes to prove at trial.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Art 14(3)(b).
. S Bronitt and M Ayres, “The Administration of Criminal Justice and Human Rights Law: A Legal Practitioner’s Guide”
in D Kinley (ed),
Human Rights in Australian Law: Practice and Potential
(forthcoming, Federation Press, 1998) at 8; Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory,
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
(Vic) s 8, 9, 10.
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
(Vic) s 4, 11.
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
(Vic) s 15.
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
(Vic) s 15.
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
(Vic) s 19.
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 399A and 399B. This requirement is imposed separately from the general pre-trial disclosure regime:
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
(Vic) s 11(3)(c).
. See para 4.8.
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 399A.
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 399B.
Anatomy of Long Criminal Trials
(AIJA, Victoria, 1997) at 62-65; K Mack and S Roach Anleu,
Pleading Guilty: Issues and Practices
(AIJA, Victoria, 1995) at 125.
Criminal Code
(NT) s 331;
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 368A;
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) s 406;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
In South Australia, disclosure is not required if the substance of the alibi was disclosed at the committal.
. See para 4.8.
. Except for the offence of maintaining a relationship with a minor, where notice must be given after committal but before the close
of the prosecution case at trial.
. The Hon DK Malcolm AC, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Western Australia,
Criminal Code
(WA) s 636A.
. See para 4.8.
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 590A.
. See para 4.8.
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 590B.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng). The provisions of this Act are modified in their application to Northern Ireland: see s 79 and Schedule 4.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng) s 3, 13.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng) s 5. A defence statement can also be provided for offences which are tried summarily, but this is voluntary: s 6. Note that
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act
(Eng) s 74, 80 repeal the previous alibi evidence disclosure requirements in the
Criminal Justice Act 1967
(Eng) s 11.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng) s 5, 12;
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (Defence Disclosure Time Limits) Regulations 1997
(Eng) r 2-5.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng) s 17, 18.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng) s 10.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng) s 11.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng) s 23;
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(Eng) s 10.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (Code of Practice) (No 2) Order 1997
. The Hon DK Malcolm AC, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Western Australia,
Crown Court (Advance Notice of Expert Evidence) Rules 1997
Magistrates’ Courts (Advance Notice of Expert Evidence) Rules 1997
Magistrates’ Courts (Advance Notice of Expert Evidence) Rules 1997
(Eng) r 3(2).
Magistrates’ Courts (Advance Notice of Expert Evidence) Rules 1997
(Eng) r 3(4).
Magistrates’ Courts (Advance Notice of Expert Evidence) Rules 1997
Criminal Justice Act 1987
Criminal Justice (Serious Fraud) (Northern Ireland) Order
; see para 3.25.
Criminal Justice Act 1987
Criminal Justice Act 1987
Criminal Justice Act 1987
(Eng) s 10.
. G Santow, “Corporate Crime: Complex Criminal Trials — A Commentary” (1994) 5
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
274 at 287; M Aronson,
Managing Complex Criminal Trials: Reform of the Rules of Evidence and Procedure
(AIJA, Victoria, 1992) at 40.
Anatomy of Long Criminal Trials
at 55-56; Aronson at 40; Mack and Roach Anleu at 124-125; Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth),
Annual Report
(1992-1993) at 92; Santow at 287; see para 4.28.
. Aronson, chapter 2; J Nader
, Submission to the Honourable Attorney General Concerning Complex Criminal Trials
(1993) at 37-53.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
(London, 1981) at paras 8.12-8.23.
. Working Group on the Right to Silence
, Report of the Working Group on the Right to Silence
(London, 1989) at paras 92-116.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(London, 1993) at 84-100.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Procedure: Procedure from Charge to Trial: A General Proposal for Reform
(Discussion Paper 13, 1986) at 9-32;
Criminal Procedure: Procedure from Charge to Trial: Specific Problems and Proposals, Volume 1
(Discussion Paper 14, 1987) at paras 4.89-4.100.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at para 8.12; Mack and Roach Anleu at 87, 112.
at 2; New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at 95.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at para 8.18; New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at paras 4.2, 4.6, 4.7, 4.58,
4.59, 4.65, 4.66; “Disclosure and Disequilibrium” (Editorial) in
Criminal Law Review
at 586; Mack and Roach Anleu at 90; A Zuckerman, “Bias and Suggestibility: Is There an Alternative to the Right to Silence?”
in D Morgan and G Stephenson (eds),
Suspicion and Silence: The Right to Silence in Criminal Investigations
(Blackstone Press, London, 1994) at 118; P O’Connor, “Prosecution Disclosure: Principle, Practice and Justice”
Criminal Law Review
464 at 473.
. O’Connor at 464.
. O’Connor at 464; Mack and Roach Anleu at 87;
McIlkenny v The Queen
(1991) 93 Cr App R 287
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at para 4.66.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at para 8.23.
. Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 93.
. Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 93;
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 97; New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at paras 4.6, 4.60, 4.62-4.64;
Mack and Roach Anleu
at 87, 111-112;
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
(Vic) s 1; Nader (1993) at 37-38.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at para 4.70; O’Connor at 471. O’Connor notes that this argument is not
relevant in relation to material which the prosecution does not intend to use as evidence.
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
39 A Crim R 406
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 93.
. “Disclosure and Disequilibrium” at 589;
(1989) 16 NSWLR 14
39 A Crim R 406
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 93; New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at para 4.70; Committee of Inquiry into
the Enforcement of Criminal Law in Queensland,
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Enforcement of Criminal Law in Queensland
(1977) at paras 300-301; “Disclosure and Disequilibrium” at 585; Santow at 285.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at para 4.70; Mack and Roach Anleu at 112; “Disclosure and Disequilibrium”
at 585; Committee of Inquiry into the Enforcement of Criminal Law in Queensland at paras 300-301;
Crimes Act 1900
chapters 2 and 3.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 93.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 95; Corns,
Anatomy of Long Criminal Trials
at 53-54; Aronson at 61.
at 2; DS Shillington,
at 1; J Jarratt,
at 2; The Hon DC Malcolm AC, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Western Australia,
at 3-4; B Bright,
at 2; B Kennedy,
at 2; Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at para 8.12; Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 108; Royal Commission on
Criminal Justice at 97; New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at paras 4.2, 4.6, 4.60, 4.62-4.64, 5.10-5.14; Mack and Roach
Anleu at 87, 122; Corns,
Anatomy of Long Trials
at 112-113;
Crimes (Criminal Trials) Act 1993
(Vic) s 1; Nader (1993) at 37-38
Fraud Trials Committee
at para 6.72; J Fife-Yeomans, “Accused ‘Should Disclose Defence’”
The Australian
(24 March 1998) at 6; J Fife-Yeomans, “Lawyers Agree Silence no Longer Golden in Courtroom”
The Australian
(25 March 1998) at 4.
. J Jarratt,
. Working group on the Right to Silence at para 101 and see paras 20, 93; E Elms,
at 2; B Kennedy,
at 2; New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at para 5.11; Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at para 8.22; Royal Commission
on Criminal Justice at 97; see para 3.45. However, one submission argued that the defence was entitled to surprise the prosecution
at trial: R Williams,
. R Williams,
at 4; Marsdens, Attorneys, Solicitors and Barristers,
at 3; Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at paras 8.12, 8.20; Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 92;
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
at paras 4.64, 4.69, 5.1, 5.15; 5.42; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, dissent by Zander at 221; S Greer, “The Right to
Silence, Defence Disclosure and Confession Evidence” (1994) 21
Journal of British Law and Society
102 at 107 and 109; T O’Gorman, “Right to Silence”, paper presented at session 24 of the
Australian Legal Convention
, (Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997) at 24; Mack and Roach Anleu at 125; Corns,
Anatomy of Long Trials
at 112-113; G Black, “The Right Defence”
Legal Action
; S Greer and R Morgan (eds),
The Right to Silence Debate
(Bristol and Bath Centre for Criminal Justice, 1990) at 16 and 20; R Sallman,
Report on Criminal Trials
(AIJA, Victoria, 1985) at para 4.101.
. Mack and Roach Anleu at 125; Corns,
Anatomy of Long Trials
at 112-113.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 97-98.
. Working Group on the Right to Silence at paras 92, 102; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, dissent by Zander at 222-223; New
South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at para 4.67; Mack and Roach Anleu at 125.
. Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 108.
. A Arfaras,
at 3; B Hocking and L Manville,
at 20; Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 92.
Anatomy of Long Criminal Trials
at 63; Santow at 286.
. R Williams,
at 2; A Arfaras,
at 3; Working Group on the Right to Silence at para 92; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 98; New South Wales Law Reform Commission
(1987) at para 5.16; O’Gorman at 25.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at para 5.16.
. A Arfaras,
. Marsdens, Attorneys, Solicitors and Barristers,
at 3; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice at 100; Mack and Roach Anleu at 125.
. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, dissent by Zander at 222-223; Greer (1994) at 107 and 109; Mack and Roach Anleu at 125; New
South Wales Law Reform Commission (1987) at para 5.40; Corns
, Anatomy of Long Criminal Trials
at 53-55; Aronson at 61.
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60487/96, 10 June 1997, unreported).
Evidence Act 1995
. See, for example,
Lam Chi-ming v The Queen
[1991] 2 AC 212 at 221.
R v Director of Serious Fraud Office; Ex p Smith
[1993] AC 1
; [1992] 3 WLR 66.
R v Director of Serious Fraud Office; Ex p Smith
[1993] AC 1
at 31, 42; [1992] 3 WLR 66 at 74, 85 per Lord Mustill.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission
, Partial Defences to Murder: Diminished Responsibility
(Report 82, 1997) at para 3.102.
. See para 4.10.
. See para 4.10.
. See para 4.76.
[1995] 4 All ER 939 at 949; 3 WLR 818 at 829;
R v Condron
(England, Court of Appeal, 4 November 1996,
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60480/96, 3 June 1997, unreported) at 15-17.
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1997
(Eng) s 38(3).
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Partial Defences to Murder: Provocation and Infanticide
(Report 83, 1997) at para 2.160.
. See para 3.12.
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
5. The Right to Silence at Trial
History of this Reference (Digest)
5.1 In New South Wales, the defendant in criminal trials is entitled to refuse to give evidence. The judge and any party other than
the prosecution may comment to the jury if the defendant exercises this right, although there are restrictions on the nature of comment
which is permitted. The prosecution is prohibited from commenting. Although the right to silence at trial is widely recognised in
common law countries, the law in relation to comment on the exercise of this right varies. In some jurisdictions, both the judge
and the prosecution are prohibited from comment. In other jurisdictions, prosecution comment is prohibited but unrestricted judicial
comment is permitted. Other jurisdictions specifically permit the jury to draw very strong, although not unrestricted, adverse inferences,
and also permit the trial judge and the prosecution to comment to the jury on the defendant’s exercise of the right to silence
at trial. This chapter examines the right to silence at trial in New South Wales and other jurisdictions. The chapter also considers
the policy arguments for and against reform, and contains the Commission’s conclusion at this stage in relation to reform of
the right to silence at trial.
THE LAW IN NEW SOUTH WALES
5.2 In New South Wales, the defendant cannot be compelled to give evidence during a criminal trial, and is incompetent to give evidence
for the prosecution.
Evidence Act 1995
regulates the comment which can be made at trial on the fact that the defendant has exercised the right to remain silent at trial.
provides as follows:
Comment on failure to give evidence
(1) This section applies only in a criminal proceeding for an indictable offence.
(2) The judge or any party (other than the prosecutor) may comment on a failure of the defendant to give evidence. However, unless
the comment is made by another defendant in the proceeding, the comment must not suggest that the defendant failed to give evidence
because the defendant was, or believed that he or she was, guilty of the offence concerned.
(a) 2 or more persons are being tried together for an indictable offence; and
(b) comment is made by any of those persons on the failure of any of those persons to give evidence,
the judge may, in addition to commenting on the failure to give evidence, comment on any comment of a kind referred to in paragraph
5.4 The trial judge should raise with defence counsel, in the absence of the jury, the question whether a direction should be given
to the jury about the fact that the defendant has exercised the right to silence at trial. This gives defence counsel an opportunity
to suggest to the judge possible reasons for the defendant’s silence which would make an adverse inference unfair, and debate
the fairness of the direction.
5.5 Directions as to the inferences which the jury is able to draw from the defendant’s failure to testify must also conform
with common law requirements in relation to adverse inferences. At common law, adverse inferences may be drawn from a party’s
failure to give or call evidence where the evidence establishes a prima facie case, it could reasonably have been expected that the
party would lead the evidence, and the failure to lead the evidence is clearly capable of assisting the evaluation of the evidence
before the court.
Where it is reasonable to expect the defendant to have an explanation or contradiction to incriminating prosecution evidence, the
fact that the defendant remained silent at trial may make it easier for the jury to accept or draw inferences from the prosecution
5.6 The trial judge should remind the jury that the defendant is entitled to remain silent at trial and that the onus of proving the
defendant’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt is on the prosecution.
It is also usually appropriate for the trial judge to direct the jury that the defendant may have many reasons, unrelated to guilt,
for refusing to give evidence at trial. The judge may give examples of possible reasons.
There may be no facts peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant. The defence may choose to rely on deficiencies in the prosecution
case to establish that the burden of proof has not been discharged. The defence may be concerned about the defendant’s performance
under cross-examination.
The jury should also be directed that the defendant’s failure to give evidence cannot be treated as an admission of guilt by
5.7 A defendant facing multiple charges may have an answer to one charge which would involve making admissions in relation to other
charges. In this situation, the trial judge should draw a distinction between the different charges and direct the jury that the
significance of the defendant’s refusal to testify may differ for the different charges.
5.8 Although the leading High Court decision was a case where the case against the defendant was circumstantial, it is now clear that
judicial directions in these terms are not restricted to circumstantial evidence cases.
Section 20(2)
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) prohibits the prosecution from commenting on the defendant’s refusal to testify. There is authority that, in the course
of the final prosecution address to the jury, the prosecution is entitled to refer to the judicial directions given in relation to
the inferences available from the defendant’s refusal to testify. However, the prosecution must not imply that it is adopting
the judge’s comment. A high degree of caution is required by the prosecution in this situation.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
recognises the right not to be compelled to testify as an element of the right to a fair trial afforded to defendants in criminal
proceedings.
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
5.11 The right to silence at trial is recognised in all Australian jurisdictions and other common law countries. In Commonwealth and
Australian Capital Territory trials, the law is identical to New South Wales.
However, the law in relation to comment on the exercise of the right to silence at trial varies considerably within other Australian
South Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania
5.12 The right to silence at trial is expressly provided for by legislation in these jurisdictions.
As in New South Wales, the prosecution is expressly prohibited from commenting to the jury on the exercise of this right.
However, there is no statutory regulation of comment by the trial judge on the defendant’s exercise of the right to silence
at trial. Judicial comment is regulated by the common law.
Northern Territory, Victoria
5.13 The right to silence in these jurisdictions is also expressly provided for by legislation.
The defendant’s failure to give evidence must not be made the subject of comment by the trial judge or the prosecution.
5.14 In Queensland, both the trial judge and the prosecution are permitted to comment on the defendant’s failure to testify.
The type of comment permitted is regulated by the common law.
United Kingdom, Singapore
5.15 The right to silence at trial is also recognised in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Singapore.
In criminal trials in these jurisdictions, the court or jury is expressly permitted by legislation to draw “such inferences
as appear proper” from the defendant’s failure to give evidence, or refusal, without good cause, to answer any question
Both the trial judge
and the prosecution
are permitted to comment on the inferences which may be drawn from the defendant’s failure to testify.
5.16 A defendant is considered to have good cause for refusing to answer particular questions if he or she is entitled to claim privilege,
or if the court in the exercise of its discretion excuses the defendant from answering.
5.17 The court must be satisfied that the defendant is aware that he or she can give evidence and appreciates consequences of exercising
the right to silence.
Adverse inferences cannot be drawn where it appears to the court that the defendant’s physical or mental condition makes it
undesirable that he or she testify.
5.18 In the United Kingdom, the relevant legislation expressly states that the defendant cannot be convicted of an offence solely
on the basis of an adverse inference drawn from his or her exercise of the right to silence at trial.
5.19 The trial judge has a discretion to direct the jury not to draw adverse inferences from the defendant’s silence at trial.
However, it is only appropriate for the trial judge to exercise this discretion where there is an evidential basis or exceptional
factors in the case.
The Court of Appeal has held that the fact that the defendant participated in a police interview, or alternatively the fact that
the police did not interview the defendant, is no basis for the trial judge refusing to comment on his or her refusal to testify
5.20 The Criminal Division of the English Court of Appeal has approved a specimen direction to juries in relation to the inferences
available from the defendant’s refusal to testify.
5.21 The European Court of Human Rights has upheld the decision of a trial judge in Northern Ireland to draw very strong unfavourable
inferences from the defendant’s refusal to testify.
REFORM OF THE RIGHT TO SILENCE AT TRIAL
5.22 Arguments for reform of the law relating to the right to silence at trial focus on permitting unrestricted comment by the trial
judge, the prosecution, or both when the right is exercised. The arguments for and against reform are similar to the arguments for
and against reform of the right to silence when questioned by police discussed in chapter 3, although different considerations also
arise in the courtroom context.
Arguments for reform
5.23 The principal arguments for permitting unrestricted judicial and/or prosecution comment are that the right to silence at trial
is exploited by guilty suspects and that it is necessary to regulate the use made of silence by juries. It is also argued that the
argument that permitting comment on the exercise of the right to silence when questioned by police would operate as an unacceptable
form of compulsion on the defendant does not apply at trial.
Used by guilty defendants
5.24 Proponents of reform argue that an innocent person would take the opportunity at trial to express his or her innocence and to
contest the prosecution evidence. The right to remain silent at trial is exploited by guilty defendants.
The need to guide juries
5.25 Proponents of reform point out that juries will inevitably become aware of the fact that the defendant has not given evidence.
It is argued that New South Wales juries are aware that the defendant is entitled to testify, and will place too much weight on the
defendant’s silence unless guided by judicial direction.
One submission, from the Honourable Justice T Smith of the Supreme Court of Victoria, gave examples of trials where the jury asked
the judge whether any, and if so what, significance was to be attached to the fact that the defendant had not testified.
5.26 Harvey argues that juries hesitate to draw any inferences from the defendant’s silence without receiving judicial guidance.
However, it is not possible to assess the validity of this argument except by speculation, since in New South Wales juries do not
provide reasons for their decisions.
5.27 It has been suggested that it should be up to the defendant to decide whether to assume the risk that the jury will give too
much weight to his or her refusal to testify.
Differences between police interrogation and trial
5.28 One argument against reform of the right to silence when questioned by police is that defendants would feel compelled to answer
police questions if the trial judge was permitted to direct the jury that it could draw adverse inferences from refusal to answer
police questions.
This argument has also been raised in relation to the right to silence at trial. It is argued that the practical effect would be
to indirectly impose pressure on defendants to give evidence, even if there is no directly enforceable duty.
5.29 Proponents of reform of the right to silence at trial argue that this does not apply in the trial context as a result of several
important differences between the questioning of suspects by police and the defendant’s opportunity to testify at trial. First,
the right to silence at trial is exercised in a public forum, in the presence of the jury and an impartial trial judge, following
evidence admitted in accordance with appropriate rules and where propriety in questioning is ensured by the judge. Silence at trial
is less likely to be misreported or misinterpreted than in a police interrogation. Secondly, at trial, the defendant is aware of
the charge, the prosecution has established a prima facie case, and the whole prosecution case has been disclosed to and tested by
the defendant. This is to be contrasted to the situation where the defendant exercises the right to silence when questioned by police
who are still gathering evidence about the case, without necessarily knowing details of the charge or the other prosecution evidence.
Finally, at trial the defendant has had an opportunity to consider his or her defence and obtain legal advice. In this situation
the defendant is less likely to be vulnerable due to shock, confusion and inadequate preparation for questions than in the pre-trial
5.30 Several submissions argued that the prosecution should also be permitted in appropriate cases to comment to the jury on the defendant’s
failure to testify, arguing that, since defence counsel has an opportunity to anticipate and counter judicial comment during the
defence final address, fairness requires that the prosecution should also be permitted to comment during the prosecution final address.
One submission argued that prohibiting prosecution comment could also cause injustice to the defendant because the jury may disregard
judicial comment which is favourable to the defendant as the personal view of the trial judge if it is not balanced by prosecution
It is reasonable to think that a judge’s direction as to the use that might be made in an inculpatory sense of the defendant’s
silence might give it more significance than it rationally should have since it comes from the bench rather than the bar table.
5.31 It is also argued that the current prohibition on prosecution comment results in a waste of court resources in terms of appeals
and retrials where the prosecution accidentally comments on the defendant’s silence at trial.
Arguments against reform
5.32 The principal arguments against permitting unrestricted judicial and/or prosecution comment on the exercise of the right to silence
at trial are that there are many reasons for exercising the right which are consistent with innocence, that such reform would in
practice compel the defendant to testify, that it would be inconsistent with fundamental principles of the criminal justice system
and would have undesirable practical consequences at trial, by deflecting the jury into focusing on the possible reasons for remaining
silent, which must ordinarily remain largely conjectural.
Reasons for silence consistent with innocence
5.33 Several submissions challenged the argument that an innocent defendant would naturally choose to testify, arguing that there
are many valid tactical reasons for exercising the right to silence at trial which are consistent with innocence. The defendant may
be advised to remain silent to avoid cross-examination on prior convictions,
although the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) provides considerable protection to defendants from cross-examination on any negative aspect of character or misconduct on
the basis that it is relevant to credibility.
Similarly, the defendant may refuse to testify to avoid questioning in relation to other outstanding charges.
5.34 Defence counsel may advise the defendant to exercise the right to silence at trial because he or she would perform badly as a
witness: limited intelligence, education, language and communication skills, psychological coping with stress and anxiety may all
be relevant and reasonable considerations in this context. If the defendant does not testify, it will be very difficult to bring
these matters to the jury’s attention, leading to the distinct possibility that inappropriate or too much weight will be given
to the accused person’s silence.
One submission from the National Children’s and Youth Law Centre stated that defence lawyers will often advise defendants who
are children not to testify because of concerns about the child’s ability to perform as a witness, particularly under aggressive
cross-examination.
5.35 The defendant may also refuse to give evidence due to fear of repercussions against him or herself, family or associates.
The defendant may not remember the events in issue.
5.36 Until 1994, defendants had the option of giving unsworn evidence at trial. A defendant who elected to give unsworn evidence could
not be cross-examined. This protected the defendant from revelation of prior convictions. Unsworn evidence was also advised for defendants
who were assessed as being likely to perform badly as witnesses under hostile cross-examination. Several submissions argued that
the tactical importance of the right to silence has increased in New South Wales since the abolition of the option of giving unsworn
In 1985, the Commission recommended that unsworn statements be retained. More recently, the Commission recommended that the option
of giving evidence not subject to cross-examination be reintroduced for defendants with an intellectual disability.
Fundamental principles
5.37 Several submissions also argued that modifying the right to silence at trial would undermine the principles that the defendant
is presumed innocent and that the prosecution carries the burden of proof, which are fundamental to the criminal justice system.
It would be inconsistent with these principles to permit unrestricted judicial and/or prosecution comment to the jury on the adverse
inferences which it can draw from the defendant’s refusal to testify.
5.38 The High Court has responded to this argument, stating that the defendant who gives evidence is testifying in his or her own
favour, is not asked to give evidence for the prosecution, and is not even competent as a prosecution witness.
However, Palmer has criticised this analysis. Since the defendant no longer has the option of giving unsworn evidence, testifying
will expose the defendant to cross-examination, the object of which is clearly to obtain incriminating information.
5.39 Another argument is that if the trial judge or prosecution was permitted to comment to the jury on the defendant’s silence
at trial, in practice suspects would feel compelled to testify.
Procedural fairness at trial
5.40 It is argued that, if unrestricted comment on the exercise of the right to silence at trial was permitted, procedural fairness
would require that the defendant be given an opportunity to rebut any adverse inferences. This process could significantly increase
the length and complexity of the trial and result in the absurd situation of the defendant testifying to explain why he or she would
not be testifying.
OPTIONS FOR REFORM
Prosecution comment on silence
5.41 The Commission is considering whether the prosecution should be permitted in appropriate cases to comment on the defendant’s
failure to testify. Arguably, given that the defence presently has the opportunity to comment, this would provide the jury with a
balance of perspectives. If prosecution comment were permitted, the prosecution would be required to obtain the leave of the court
before commenting. A voir dire, held without the jury present, would be an appropriate forum for the trial judge to determine whether
leave should be given and, if so, to supervise the formulation of the proposed prosecution comment.
The fact that the defendant was unrepresented would be relevant to whether leave would be given. Requiring leave would protect the
defendant by ensuring that consideration was given to the possible reasons for the defendant’s silence consistent with innocence
and that the fundamental principles referred to in paragraphs 5.37 and 5.38 were upheld. At this stage, the Commission does not accept
that the prospect of prosecution comment, subject to these safeguards, would have the effect of making the defendant feel compelled
to testify. This option would require amendment of the
Evidence Act 1995
Court to ensure defendant aware of right to, and consequences of, silence
5.42 The Commission also presently considers that there is merit in the requirement in the United Kingdom legislation which requires
the court to be satisfied that the defendant is aware that he or she can testify at trial and appreciates the consequences of refusing
to testify.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60480/96, 3 June 1997, unreported) at 17 per Gleeson CJ, with whom the other members of the Court
agreed. Contra S Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
ed, Federation Press, 1997) at 38 (footnote 37).
. The Hon Justice T Smith,
R v Buckland
[1977] 2 NSWLR 452 (CCA);
Browne v The Queen
(1987) 30 A Crim R 278
(1992) 28 NSWLR 396
64 A Crim R 451
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
68 A Crim R 251
117 ALR 545.
For a discussion of the scope of
Weissensteiner
see E Stone, “Calling a Spade a Spade: The Embarrassing Truth About the Right to Silence”
Criminal Law Journal
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
at 227-229;
[1993] HCA 65
[1993] HCA 65
68 A Crim R 251
at 258-258;
[1993] HCA 65
117 ALR 545
at 552-553 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ,
[1993] HCA 65
178 CLR 217
at 235-236;
[1993] HCA 65
[1993] HCA 65
68 A Crim R 251
at 264-265;
[1993] HCA 65
117 ALR 545
at 558-559 per Brennan and Toohey JJ;
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60480/96, 3 June 1997, unreported) at 13-14 per Gleeson CJ, with whom the other members of the
Court agreed.
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
[1993] HCA 65
[1993] HCA 65
68 A Crim R 251
[1993] HCA 65
117 ALR 545
at 558 per Brennan and Toohey JJ.
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
[1993] HCA 65
[1993] HCA 65
68 A Crim R 251
at 258-259;
[1993] HCA 65
117 ALR 545
at 552-553 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ;
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60480/96, 3 June 1997, unreported) at 14 per Gleeson CJ, with whom the other members of the Court
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
[1993] HCA 65
[1993] HCA 65
68 A Crim R 251
at 258-259;
[1993] HCA 65
117 ALR 545
at 552-553 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ; Odgers (1997) at 38 (footnote 37).
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60480/96, 3 June 1997, unreported) at 13, 15 per Gleeson CJ, with whom the other members of the
Court agreed;
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
[1993] HCA 65
[1993] HCA 65
68 A Crim R 251
[1993] HCA 65
117 ALR 545
at 553 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ. This requirement is consistent with the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60480/96, 3 June 1997, unreported) at 18 per Gleeson CJ, with whom the other members of the Court
agreed. The defendant in this case was charged with ten counts of having intercourse with a person under the age of consent and one
count of rape. The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that evidence of a long relationship between the defendant and the
victim meant that “(i)t was quite possible that he had an answer to one of the charges but not to the others”: at 17
per Gleeson CJ.
(NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60480/96, 3 June 1997, unreported);
R v Demeter
(1995) 77 A Crim R 462
Van Wyk v The Queen
(Queensland, Court of Appeal, 16 December 1993, unreported);
R v Bint and Butterworth
(South Australia, Court of Criminal Appeal, 19 July 1996, unreported). Contr
Kanaveilomani v The Queen
[1995] 2 Qd R 642;
(1994) 72 A Crim R 492
; A Palmer, “Silence in Court — the Evidential Significance of an Accused Person’s Failure to Testify” (1995)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
(Supreme Court of New South Wales, No 70114/1994, Hunt CJ at CL, 22 April 1996, unreported).
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Art 14(3)(g);
Murray v United Kingdom
[1996] ECHR 3
(1996) 22 EHRR 29
; Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory,
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1910
(Tas) s 85(1)(a);
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1910
(Tas) s 85(1)(c);
Evidence Act 1906
. The leading case is
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
68 A Crim R 251
117 ALR 545.
Evidence Act 1939
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 399(1).
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) s 9(3);
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 399(3).
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
68 A Crim R 251
117 ALR 545.
Criminal Evidence Act (Northern Ireland) 1923
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 4(5);
Evidence Act 1898
(61 & 62 Vict.) s 1;
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 35(4);
Criminal Procedure Code
(Singapore) s 189, 196.
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 2(2), 4(1), (4);
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 35(1),(3);
Criminal Procedure Code
(Singapore) s 196. In the United Kingdom, this rule only applies to trials where the defendant is aged 14 and over. The English legislation
has been held to apply to a defendant aged 15 with a mental age of 9:
(1997) 2 All ER 1011, 1019.
Criminal Evidence Act (Northern Ireland) 1923
Evidence Act 1898
(61 & 62 Vict.) s 1.
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 168, Schedule 11.
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 4(6);
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 35(5);
Criminal Procedure Code
(Singapore) s 196(4).
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 4(2);
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 35(2). In Singapore, the defendant is called on by the court to give evidence:
Criminal Procedure Code
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 4;
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 35(1)(b);
Criminal Procedure Code
(Singapore) s 196(5). The trial judge will only have to consider whether the defendant’s mental or physical condition makes
it undesirable that he or she testify in rare cases, since usually in this situation the defendant is considered unfit to plead:
(1997) 2 All ER 1011, 1018-1019. Examples of conditions that make it undesirable that the defendant give evidence include schizophrenia
and epilepsy:
(1997) 2 All ER 1011, 1020;
Harkin and Gordon
(England, Court of Appeal, 16 January 1995, unreported) discussed in J Jackson, “Interpreting the Silence Provisions: The Northern
Ireland Cases”
Criminal Law Review
Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1988
(Eng) Art 2(4);
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
(Eng) s 38.
(1995) 4 All ER 939 at 944; 3 WLR 818 at 823-824.
Hamil v The Queen
(England, Court of Appeal, March 1991, unreported) discussed in Justice,
Right of Silence Debate: The Northern Ireland Experience
(1994) at 35. See also
(Northern Ireland, November 1993, unreported) discussed in Justice at 35;
(England, Court of Appeal, 14 December 1995, unreported).
(1995) 4 All ER 939 at 944-945; 3 WLR 818 at 824.
Murray v United Kingdom
[1996] ECHR 3
(1996) 22 EHRR 29.
. G Davies, “Justice Reform: A Personal Perspective” [Summer 1996]
New South Wales Bar Association News
5 at 10-11; K Marks, “‘Thinking Up’ About the Right to Silence and Unsworn Statements”
Law Institute Journal
at 361; CR Williams, “Silence in Australia: Probative Force and Rights in the Law of Evidence”
Law Quarterly Review
at 632; Justice Evidence Committee,
The Accused as a Witness
(London, 1968) at 3-5; cf paras 3.28-3.46.
. The Hon Justice T Smith,
at 1-2; Palmer at 144-145;
Weissensteiner v The Queen
[1993] HCA 65
(1993) 178 CLR 217
at 224-225;
[1993] HCA 65
[1993] HCA 65
68 A Crim R 251
[1993] HCA 65
117 ALR 545
at 550 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ, at
[1993] HCA 65
178 CLR 217
[1993] HCA 65
[1993] HCA 65
68 A Crim R 251
[1993] HCA 65
117 ALR 545
at 557-558 per Brennan and Toohey JJ; CR Williams at 652; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Evidence Volume 1
(Report 26, (Interim) 1985) at para 258; cf paras 3.55-3.60.
. The Hon Justice T Smith,
. Cf para 3.59.
. Justice Evidence Committee at 4; cf para 3.60.
. See para 3.75.
. I Dennis, “The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act — The Evidence Provisions”
Criminal Law Journal
at 10, 18; J Jackson, “The Right to Silence: Judicial Responses to Parliamentary Encroachment”
Modern Law Review
at 273; Jackson (1995) at 599; S Greer, “The Right to Silence: A Review of the Current Debate”
Modern Law Review
at 725; S Nash, “Silence as Evidence: A Common Sense Development or a Violation of a Basic Right?”
Criminal Law Journal
at 146 and 148.
. Dennis at 18; Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
(London, 1981) at para 4.64; Palmer at 142-143; Stone at 22-23. See paras 3.64, 3.67.
. R Miller,
at 3; DS Shillington,
at 1; M Tedeschi QC,
at 2; Justice Evidence Committee at 4-5.
. M Tedeschi QC,
. M Tedeschi QC,
. The Hon Justice T Smith,
at 2. The English Court of Appeal has held that avoidance of cross-examination in relation to prior convictions is not sufficient
reason to decline to comment on the defendant’s refusal to testify:
(1995) 4 All ER 939 at 944; 3 WLR 818 at 823.
Evidence Act 1995
(Northern Ireland, Kerr J, November 1993) cited in Justice at 30.
. The Hon Justice T Smith,
at 2; D Thiering,
at 1; Stone at 22.
. M Antrum,
R v Barkley
(Northern Ireland, November 1992) discussed in S Nash and S Solley, “Limitations on the Right to Silence and Abuse of Process”
Journal of Criminal Law
95 at 96; R Pattendon, “Inferences From Silence”
Criminal Law Review
at 607; Jackson (1995) at 601; Greer (1990) at 710 and 727; Justice at 21; G Nash, “The Right to Silence”
Victorian Bar News
; S Nash at 146; CR Williams at 637-638; Royal Commission on Criminal Justice,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(London 1993) at 56; cf para 3.65.
. D Birch, “Commentary on Napper”
Criminal Law Review
. The Hon Justice T Smith,
at 2; Marsdens, Attorneys, Solicitors and Barristers,
at 4; Stone at 22.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Unsworn Statements of Accused Persons
(Report 45, 1985); New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996) at paras 7.28 and 7.29. There is a strong view amongst the majority of Commissioners on this reference that the
right to give unsworn evidence should still exist in New South Wales.
. M Antrum,
at 2; J Gallagher,
at 3 and 5; L Davies,
at 6; Dennis at 10, 18; Jackson (1994) at 273 and 277; Jackson (1995) at 599; Greer (1990) at 725; Harvey; Justice at 5, 6, 19-22;
G Nash at 62, 64; S Nash at 148
Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure at paras 4.35 and 4.66; Australian Law Reform Commission,
(Report 38, 1987) at para 74; S Greer and R Morgan (eds),
The Right to Silence Debate
(Bristol and Bath Centre for Criminal Justice, 1990) at 20; cf paras 3.77 and 3.78.
Weissensteiner v The Queen
(1993) 179 CLR 217
at 245 per Gaudron and McHugh JJ (dissenting),
[1993] HCA 65
; 68 AJLR 23;
68 A Crim R 251
117 ALR 545.
. Palmer at 141.
. J Gallagher,
at 6; cf para 3.75.
. Australian Law Reform Commission (1985) at 259 and 260; cf para 3.79.
R v Condron
(England, Court of Appeal, 4 November 1996,
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
Antrum, Mr M, Director and Principal Solicitor, National Children’s and Youth Law Centre (21 November 1997)
Arfaras, Mr A (2 December 1997)
Bauer, Ms H, Director-General, New South Wales Department of Community Services (1 December 1997)
Bone, Magistrate C (6 January 1998)
Bright, Magistrate B (6 January 1998)
Clarke, Magistrate A (6 January 1998)
Cleary, Magistrate T (6 January 1998)
Cloran, Magistrate P (6 January 1998)
Corns, Dr C (14 November 1997)
Cramond, Chief Magistrate JMA (10 November 1997)
Davies, Mr L (30 December 1997)
Dixon, Dr D (12 November 1997) (“Submission 1”)
Dixon, Dr D (20 November 1997) (“Submission 2”)
Elms, Magistrate E (6 January 1998)
Gallagher, Mr J (18 December 1997)
Hocking, Ms B and Manville, Ms L (5 February 1998)
Jarratt, Deputy Commissioner J, New South Wales Police Service (23 February 1998)
Jones, Mr R (10 November 1997)
Kennedy, Magistrate B (6 January 1998)
Kerkyasharian, Mr S, Chair, Ethnic Affairs Commission (30 December 1997)
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory (19 March 1998)
Longo, Mr J, Australian Securities Commission (24 December 1997)
Malcolm AC, The Hon Chief Justice DK (11 November 1997)
Marsdens Attorneys, Solicitors and Barristers (10 November 1997)
Miller QC, Mr R, Director of Public Prosecutions, Queensland (25 November 1997)
Police Association of New South Wales (10 March 1998)
Rogers, Magistrate K (10 November 1997)
Shillington, Judge DS (12 December 1997)
Singh, Mr G, Intellectual Disability Rights Service Incorporated (26 November 1997)
Smith, The Hon Justice T (20 September 1997)
Tedeschi QC, Mr M (10 November 1997)
Thiering, Mr D, Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales (17 November 1997)
Williams, Ms R, Mt Druitt & Area Community Legal Centre (20 October 1997)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 41 (1998) - The Right to Silence
Select Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
ALGER, I, “From Star Chamber to Petty and Maiden: Police Attitudes to the Right to Silence”, paper presented at session
30th Australian Legal Convention
(Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997)
, Managing Complex Criminal Trials: Reform of the Rules of Evidence and Procedure
(AIJA, Victoria, 1992)
ARONSON, M, “Complex Criminal Trials: AIJA Report”
Australian Law Journal
ARONSON, M, “Some Comments on the Nader Report on Complex Criminal Trials” (1994) 5
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
ARONSON, M, and HUNTER, J,
Litigation, Evidence and Procedure
(5th ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1995)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Criminal Investigation
(Report 2 (Interim), 1975)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
(Report 26 (Interim), 1985)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
(Report 38, 1987)
BIRCH, DJ, “Commentary on R v Napper”
Criminal Law Review
BLACK, G, “The Right Defence”
Legal Action
PACE Ten Years On: A Review of the Research
(Home Office, London, 1997)
CHAYYA, M, “The Right to Silence Reignited: Vulnerable Suspects, Police Questioning and Law and Order in New South Wales”
Criminal Law Journal
COLDREY, J, “The Right to Silence Reassessed”
Victorian Bar News
COLDREY, J, “The Right to Silence: Should it be Curtailed or Abolished?” (1991) 20
Anglo-American Law Journal
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO THE ENFORCEMENT OF CRIMINAL LAW IN QUEENSLAND,
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Enforcement of Criminal Law in Queensland
Anatomy of Long Criminal Trials
(AIJA, Victoria, 1997)
CRIMINAL LAW AND PENAL METHODS REFORM COMMITTEE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Criminal Investigation
(Report 2, 1974)
CRIMINAL LAW AND PENAL METHODS REFORM COMMITTEE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Court Procedure and Evidence
(Report 3, 1975)
CRIMINAL LAW REVISION COMMITTEE,
Evidence (General)
(Report 11, London, 1972)
CRIMINAL PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE IN NEW SOUTH WALES, (Butterworths, loose leaf service)
DAVIES, G, “Justice Reform: A Personal Perspective” [Summer 1996]
New South Wales Bar Association Bar News
DENNIS, I, “The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act — The Evidence Provisions”
Criminal Law Review
“Disadvantaged in Court”
(2 October 1997)
“Disclosure and Disequilibrium” (editorial)
Criminal Law Review
DIXON, D, “Politics, Research and Symbolism in Criminal Justice: The Right of Silence and the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act
(1991-1992) 20-21
Anglo-American Law Review
DIXON, D, “The Myth of the Right to Silence”
Law in Policing: Legal Regulation and Police Practices
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997)
FIFE-YEOMANS, J, “Accused ‘Should Disclose Defence’”
The Australian
(24 March 1998)
FIFE-YEOMANS, J, “Lawyers Agree Silence No Longer Golden in Courtroom”
The Australian
(25 March 1998)
Dealing With Court Delay in New South Wales
(NSW Parliamentary Library Research Service Briefing Paper No 31/96, Sydney, 1996)
FINDLAY, M, “International Rights and Australian Adaptions: Recent Developments in Criminal Investigation”
[1995] SydLawRw 18
Sydney Law Review
FRAUD TRIALS COMMITTEE,
Fraud Trials Committee Report
(London, 1986)
GREER, S, “The Right to Silence: A Review of the Current Debate”
Modern Law Review
GREER, S, “The Right to Silence, Defence Disclosure and Confession Evidence” (1994) 21
Journal of British Law and Society
GREER, S and MORGAN, R (eds),
The Right to Silence Debate
(Bristol and Bath Centre for Criminal Justice, 1990)
GRIFFITH, G,
The Right to Silence
(NSW Parliamentary Library Research Service Briefing Paper No 11/97, Sydney, 1997)
HARRIS, T, “Ryan Calls for Court Overhaul”
The Australian
(29 May 1997)
HARVEY, D, “The Right to Silence and the Presumption of Innocence”
New Zealand Law Journal
(London, 1978)
HUNTER, J and CRONIN, K,
Evidence, Advocacy and Ethical Practice
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1995)
JACKSON, J, “Recent Developments in Criminal Evidence” (1989) 40
Northern Ireland Law Quarterly
JACKSON, J, “Curtailing the Right to Silence: Lessons From Northern Ireland”
Criminal Law Review
JACKSON, J, “The Right of Silence: Judicial Responses to Parliamentary Encroachment”
Modern Law Review
JACKSON, J, “Interpreting the Silence Provisions: The Northern Ireland Cases”
Criminal Law Review
Right of Silence Debate: The Northern Ireland Experience
JUSTICE EVIDENCE COMMITTEE,
The Accused as a Witness
(London, 1968)
KINLEY, D (ed),
Human Rights in Australian Law: Practice and Potential
(forthcoming, Federation Press, 1998)
LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
Solicitors’ Rules
MACDONALD, J, “AG Backs Review of Right to Silence”
(26 March 1998)
MACK, K and ROACH ANLEU, S,
Pleading Guilty: Issues and Practices
(AIJA, Victoria, 1995)
MARKS, K, “‘Thinking Up’ About the Right to Silence and Unsworn Statements”
Law Institute Journal
MASON, A, “Fair Trial”
Criminal Law Journal
MICHAEL, J and EMMERSON, B, “The Right to Silence”
European Human Rights Law Review
MORGAN, D and STEPHENSON, G (eds),
Suspicion and Silence: the Right to Silence in Criminal Investigations
(Blackstone Press, London, 1994)
MUNDAY, R, “Inferences From Silence and European Human Rights Law”
Criminal Law Review
NADER, J, Submission to the Honourable Attorney-General Concerning Complex Criminal Trials (1993)
NADER, J, “Shortening Complex Criminal Trials” (1994) 5
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
NASH, G, “The Right to Silence”
Victorian Bar News
NASH, S, “Silence as Evidence: A Commonsense Development or a Violation of a Basic Right?”
Criminal Law Journal
NASH, S and SOLLEY, S, “Limitations on the Right to Silence and Abuse of Process” (1997) 61
Journal of Criminal Law
NEASEY, F, “The Rights of the Accused and the Interests of the Community” paper presented at the
15th Australian Legal Convention
, (Brisbane, 16-22 July 1969)
NEW SOUTH WALES BAR ASSOCIATION,
Barristers’ Rules
(New South Wales)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
, Unsworn Statements of Accused Persons
(Report 45, 1985)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
, Criminal Procedure: Procedure from Charge to Trial: A General Proposal for Reform
(Discussion Paper 13, 1986)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
, Criminal Procedure: Procedure from Charge to Trial 1: Specific Problems and Proposals
(Discussion Paper 14, 1987)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
(Report 56, 1988)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
, Criminal Procedure: Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
, Scrutiny of the Legal Profession: Complaints Against Lawyers
(Report 70, 1993)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
, People With an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
, Review of
Section 316
Crimes Act 1900
(Discussion Paper 39, 1997)
NEW SOUTH WALES POLICE SERVICE,
Commissioner’s Instructions
O’CONNOR, P, “Prosecution Disclosure: Principles, Practice and Justice”
Criminal Law Review
O’GORMAN, T, “The Soundness of Silence”
The Australian
(21 August 1997)
O’GORMAN, T, “Right to Silence” paper presented at session 24 of the
30th Australian Legal Convention
(Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997)
ODGERS, S, “Police Interrogation and the Right to Silence”
Australian Law Journal
Uniform Evidence Law
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1997)
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS (NEW SOUTH WALES),
Prosecution Guidelines
PALMER, A, “Silence in Court — The Evidential Significance of an Accused Person’s Failure to Testify” (1995)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
PAPPS, N, “You Have the Right to Remain Silent — But Maybe Not For Much Longer”
Adelaide Advertiser
(21 January 1998)
PATTENDON, R, “Inferences From Silence”
Criminal Law Review
PHEASANT, B, “Right to Silence Comes Under Review”
Australian Financial Review
(14 November 1997)
RADZINOWICZ, L,
A History of English Criminal Law
(Stevens and Sons, London, 1948)
“Remaining Silent” (editorial)
(25 August 1997)
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE NEW SOUTH WALES POLICE SERIVCE,
Final Report
(Sydney, 1997)
ROYAL COMMISSION ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE
, Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(London, 1993)
ROYAL COMMISSION ON CRIMINAL PROCEDURE,
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
(London, 1981)
SALLMAN, R,
Report on Criminal Trials
(AIJA, Victoria, 1985)
SANTOW, G, “Corporate Crime: Complex Criminal Trials — A Commentary” (1994) 5
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
STONE, E, “Calling a Spade a Spade: The Embarrassing Truth About the Right to Silence”
Criminal Law Journal
TAN, A, “Adverse Inferences and the Right to Silence: Re-examining the Singapore Experience”
Criminal Law Review
VAN LEEUWEN, H, “AG Proposes New Rules for White Collar Trials
” Australian Financial Review
(28 February 1998)
WATSON, R, BLACKMORE, AM and HOSKING, GS,
Criminal Law (New South Wales)
(Law Book Company, loose leaf service)
WEINBERG, M, “The Right to Silence — Sparing the Judge From Talking Gibberish” paper presented at session 24 of
30th Australian Legal Convention
(Melbourne, 18-21 September 1997)
WHITTON, E,
Trial by Voodoo
(Random House, Milson’s Point, 1994)
WHITTON, E, “Privilege That Prevents Justice Being Done”
The Australian
(21 August 1997)
WIGMORE, J,
Evidence in Trials at Common Law
(MacNaughton Revision, Little Brown, Boston, 1961)
WILLIAMS, CR, “Silence in Australia: Probative Force and Rights in the Law of Evidence”
Law Quarterly Review
WILLIAMS, J, “Inferences from Silence” (1997) 141
WOLCHOVER, D and ARMSTRONG-HEATON, A, “Labor’s Victory and the Right to Silence — 1”
New Law Journal
WOLCHOVER, D and ARMSTRONG-HEATON, A, “Labor’s Victory and the Right to Silence — 2”
New Law Journal
WOOD, J, “The Changing Face of Case Management — The New South Wales Experience” (1995) 4
Journal of Judicial Administration
WOOD, J and CRAWFORD, A,
The Right to Silence — The Case for Retention
(Civil Liberties Trust, London, 1989)
WOODS, J, “Judge Calls for End of ‘Right to Silence’”
Courier Mail (Brisbane)
(24 April 1997)
WORKING GROUP ON THE RIGHT TO SILENCE,
Report of the Working Group on the Right to Silence
(London, 1989)
YEO, M, “Diminishing the Right to Silence: The Singapore Experience”
Criminal Law Review
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter