URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/CLRC/1998/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Simplification of the Copyright Act: Part 1 - Exceptions to the Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owners [1998] CLRC 13
Simplification of the
The Committee
The Expert Advisory Group
Abbreviations
Chapter 1 The Committee’s task
The terms of reference
International obligations
Course of the reference to date
Chapter 2 Consolidated recommendations
Chapter 6 Fair dealing: the Committee’s proposal
Chapter 7 Copying by libraries and archives
Chapter 8 Miscellaneous exceptions
Chapter 9 Copying for educational purposes
Chapter 10 Copying for people with disabilities
PART 1 - ROYALTY-FREE EXCEPTIONS TO COPYRIGHT
Section 1 Fair dealing
Chapter 3 International comparisons
Chapter 4 Fair dealing in Australia
Chapter 5 The US doctrine of ‘fair use’ and the UK ‘fair
Chapter 6 Fair dealing: the Committee’s proposal
Section 2 Further royalty-free exceptions
Chapter 7 Copying by libraries and archives
Chapter 8 Miscellaneous exceptions
PART II STATUTORY LICENCES
Chapter 9 Copying for educational purposes
Chapter 10 Copying for people with disabilities
Appendix A The Committee’s terms of reference and further matters for The terms of reference
Appendix B International obligations
Appendix C International comparisons
Appendix D Outline of Submissions on fair dealing
Appendix E Original submissions
Appendix F Fair dealing submissions
Appendix G Submissions received after the public forum
Appendix H Miscellaneous exceptions to exclusive rights submissions
Simplification of the
Exceptions to the Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owners
September 1998
© Commonwealth of Australia 1998
Requests to reproduce this document for commercial purposes should be
directed to the Manager, Legislative Services, AusInfo, GPO
Box 1920, Canberra
The Copyright Law Review Committee is a specialist advisory
body established in 1983 to inquire into and report to Government on specific
ISBN 0 642 20955 3
In 1983 the Federal Attorney-General established the Copyright Law Review
Committee as a specialist advisory body to report to government
on specific
From 1983 to 1995 the Committee was chaired by the
Hon. Justice IF Sheppard AO, a Judge of the Federal Court of
Australia and President
of the Copyright Tribunal. During that period the
Committee reported on eight references: the meaning of ‘publication’
; the use of copyright material by churches;
performers’ protection; moral rights; the importation provisions of the
Act; conversion
damages; journalists’ copyright; and computer software
protection.
In 1995 the Minister for Justice reconstituted the Committee and asked it to
advise on simplification of the
. Mr Peter Banki, formerly a member
of the Committee, was appointed Chairman. Following the 1996 federal election,
the Attorney-General
reviewed the structure and function of the Committee and
relocated its Secretariat to Canberra. In May 1996 Mr Banki resigned from
In September 1996 Professor Dennis Pearce was appointed Chairman of the
Committee. The other members of the Committee are Dr Andrew
Christie, Mr Chris
Creswell, Mr Malcolm Colless, Ms Victoria Rubensohn and Ms Rhonda Smith.
Expert Advisory Group
The Committee is assisted by a panel of experts who represent the interests
of the creators and users of copyright material. The current
members of the
Expert Advisory Group (EAG) are Ms Libby Baulch, Mr Tom Cochrane and Ms Anne
Fitzgerald. Mr Nicholas Hasluck QC AM
was also a member of the EAG until 31
December 1997, when he sought not to be reappointed.
Abbreviations
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Australian Book Publishers Association Ltd (now known as the Australian
Publishers Association)
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Council of Library and Information Services
Australian Council for Radio for the Print Handicapped
Australian Library and Information Association
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners Society
Australian Music Publishers Association Limited
Australian Publishers Association
Australasian Performing Right Association
Australian Recording Industry Association
Australian Society of Archivists
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee
Audio Visual Copyright Society
Berne Convention
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
Council of Australian University Librarians
Communications Law Centre
Expert Advisory Group
Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations
Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Ltd
hypertext mark-up language
Law Council of Australia
Library and Information Service WA
National Film and Sound Archive
National Library of Australia
Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd
Phonograms Convention
Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against
Unauthorised Duplication of their Phonograms
personal identification number
Royal Australian Institute of Architects
Rome Convention
Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms
and Broadcasting Organisations
Special Broadcasting Service
TRIPS Agreement
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
WIPO Copyright Treaty
World Intellectual Property Organisation
WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty
1 The Committee’s task
1.01 Following the
September 1996 appointment of Professor Pearce as Chairman of the Copyright Law
Review Committee, the Attorney-General
asked the Committee to reconsider its
terms of reference so as to focus on simplification of the legislation, having
full regard
to Australia’s international obligations, rather than conduct
a more general and wide-ranging review of copyright protection.
In December 1996
the Attorney-General announced revised terms of reference for the
Committee—see Appendix A.
terms of reference
1.02 This report deals with matters raised for the Committee’s
consideration in paragraph 1(a) of the terms of reference. The
Committee will
shortly produce a further report dealing with matters raised by the remainder of
the terms of reference, including
the exclusive rights comprising copyright,
categorisation of subject matter, and the outstanding matters identified by the
Convergence Group (CCG) in its 1994 report entitled
Highways to
1.03 Paragraph 1(a) asks that the Committee, having regard to
Australia’s international obligations as a member of the relevant
international conventions for the protection of copyright, to inquire into and
how to simplify the
to make it able to be
understood by people needing to understand their rights and obligations under
the Act, with particular attention
to simplification of the various provisions
and schemes that provide exceptions to the exclusive rights comprising
1.04 In September 1997 the Committee’s revised terms of reference were
further amended to include paragraph 1(ba). The new paragraph
requires that the
Committee examine how the exclusive rights comprising copyright, as redefined
under paragraph 1(b), could implement
the right of distribution provided for in
art. 6 of the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) Copyright
Treaty (the WCT)
and arts. 8 and 12 of the WIPO Performances and Phonograms
Treaty (the WPPT).
1.05 The following section summarises Australia’s international
obligations.
International
obligations
1.06 The rights accorded copyright owners under Australia’s Copyright
Act derive from a number of international agreements for
the protection of
intellectual property to which this country is a party. The permissible scope of
any statutory exceptions to those
rights must also be determined by reference to
the exceptions allowed for in those agreements.
1.07 For the purpose of considering permissible exceptions to the exclusive
rights of copyright owners the following international
agreements are
the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (the Berne
Convention);
the Rome Convention for
the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting
Organisations (the Rome
Convention);
the Convention for the
Protection of Producers of Phonograms against Unauthorised Duplication of their
Phonograms (the Phonograms
Convention);
the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the TRIPS
Agreement).
1.08 In December 1996 two new treaties were agreed to
at the WIPO Diplomatic Conference on Certain Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Questions held in Geneva. Those treaties are the WCT and the WPPT. Neither
treaty is yet in force since in each case 30 countries
must have deposited
instruments of ratification or accession for this to occur. Australia is yet to
sign or ratify the treaties,
so the obligations they contain do not apply to
Australia. The Committee understands, however, that the Government is
considering
whether Australia should become a party to the two new treaties. For
this reason, and pursuant to the requirement in the Committee’s
reference to have regard to ‘ongoing developments in the relevant
international copyright forums’, the Committee
considered the potential
impact of the treaties’ provisions—see Appendix B.
1.09 Australia is a party to the TRIPS Agreement, which incorporates the
requirements of the Berne Convention. The TRIPS Agreement
defines the scope of
permissible exceptions to the exclusive rights of authors at the international
level. Article 13 of the Agreement
provides as follows:
Members shall confine limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation
work and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right
1.10 The Berne Convention contains a similar provision in art. 9(2)
concerning the reproduction right and provision for a number of
other exceptions
to the reproduction and other rights in arts. 10, 10
(2)(b). It also allows the replacement of the broadcasting right and
the exclusive right of recording of musical works by non-voluntary
(2) and 13(1)).
1.11 The Committee notes the report of a study by the WIPO International
Bureau on the implications of the TRIPS Agreement for treaties
administered by
The study examined the relationship
between art. 13 of TRIPS and the various exceptions to authors’
rights permitted under
Berne. The Bureau commented,
None of the limitations and exceptions permitted by the Berne Convention
should, if correctly applied, conflict with the normal exploitation
of the work
and none of them should, if correctly applied, prejudice unreasonably the
legitimate interests of the right holder.
Thus generally and normally, there is no conflict between the Berne
Convention and the TRIPS Agreement as far as exceptions and limitations
exclusive rights are concerned.
1.12 The Committee agrees with these statements as an interpretation of the
relationship between the narrower limitations provided
for in Berne and those in
TRIPS. The Committee also notes that art. 2(1) of TRIPS provides that
nothing therein ‘shall derogate
from existing obligations that Members may
have to each other under ... the Berne Convention ...’ This suggests
that authors
from Berne Convention member countries remain entitled to the same
minimum level of protection, in any Berne Convention member country,
at the time that country assumed its TRIPS obligations.
1.13 Article 10 of the WCT and art. 13 of TRIPS are worded similarly.
The agreed statement at the Diplomatic Conference regarding
art. 10(2) of
the WCT was that it ‘neither reduces nor extends the scope of
applicability of the limitations and exceptions
permitted by the Berne
Convention’.
1.14 Accordingly, it is clear that the international consensus regarding the
interpretation of art. 10 of the WCT is that the limitations
allowed for go no
further than those already specified in the Berne Convention. If Australia
becomes a party to the WCT it would
appear that it would be bound to confine any
limitations to those already permitted under Berne and could go no further.
1.15 The rights granted to performers, producers of phonograms, and
broadcasting organisations under the Rome Convention, the TRIPS
Agreement and
the Phonograms Convention are all expressed to be subject to the exceptions
allowed under the Rome Convention and it
is those exceptions that currently
apply. If, however, the Government were to decide that Australia should become a
party to the
WPPT it appears it would no longer be open to Australia to provide
for the specific classes of exceptions listed in art. 15(1) of
Convention, since art. 16 of the WPPT confines the permissible exceptions
to those allowed under the three-step test in
the TRIPS art. 13.
of the reference to date
1.16 During 1997 the Committee published a series of short issues papers
inviting submissions on areas of relevance to its simplification
reference. The
papers considered more specific matters relating to the scope and form of
protection, as well as the exclusive rights
and the exceptions provided under
the Act. Five papers were published:
Simplification of the Fair
Dealing Provisions of the
Copying by Libraries and
Archives under the
Copying for People with
Disabilities under the
Educational Institutions and
Copying under the
Legal Deposit of Copyright
Material under the
1.17 On 28 April 1997
the Committee, in conjunction with the Attorney-General’s Department, held
a day-long public forum in
Sydney on access to copyright materials. The aim was
to facilitate public discussion of matters arising from the five papers. Over
100 people attended the forum, many of whom represented peak copyright industry
bodies and user organisations. The Committee invited
those attending the forum
to make further submissions to it on the matters discussed at the forum. The
Committee considered those
submissions, and the submissions it had received
before the forum, in formulating this report.
1.18 The Committee wrote to interested parties on 17 November 1997, seeking
further submissions concerning the miscellaneous exceptions
in the Act not
referred to in its issues papers. The submissions received on this subject were
also taken into account in the drafting
of this report.
1.19 It should be noted that this report does not examine the issues relating
to the legal deposit of copyright material under the
Act: this matter is not
directly relevant to the Committee’s consideration of paragraph 1(a) of
its terms of reference. These
issues will, however, be examined in a further
Committee report, to be published shortly.
1.20 On 30 April 1998 the Attorney-General and the Minister for
Communications, the Information Economy and the Arts announced the
Government's
decision on the ‘Digital Agenda’ copyright reforms. The Digital
Agenda reforms implement many of the proposals
contained in a discussion paper
jointly published in 1997 by the Attorney-General’s Department and the
Department of Communications
and the Arts.
centrepiece of the Digital Agenda reforms is a new broadly based,
technology-neutral right of communication to the public. The
new right will
apply to works made available on the Internet and other online services, as well
as works transmitted or broadcast
to the public. It has broad application,
applying to works, sound recordings, cinematograph films and broadcasts. It will
and extend the existing technology-specific transmission-type rights;
that is, the wireless broadcast right and the limited cable
diffusion right.
1.21 In drafting this report, and pursuant to paragraph 2(a) of its terms of
reference, the Committee had regard to the Government’s
proposed reforms,
as just described. In particular, it examined how the simplified exceptions to
the exclusive rights of copyright
owners would apply to the proposed right of
communication to the public. The Committee has partly reserved its comment in
to the impact of the Digital Agenda reforms on the exceptions connected
with copying for educational purposes. It considers that
it would be
inappropriate for it to set out, in this report, the detail of a compulsory
licence for digital copying when the Government
has now stated that it proposes
to deal with the matter.
1.22 In drafting this report the Committee also took account of the
Amendment Bill 1997
and the Copyright Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1997. In
particular, it examined the impact of Schedules 1, 6 and 10 of the former Bill.
The Committee also took account of Items 1, 2 and 3 of Schedule 1 to
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill 1997 in connection with
amendments to the
regarding references to professional advice by a
‘trade mark attorney’.
2 Consolidated recommendations
6 Fair dealing: the Committee’s proposal
Simplification
of fair dealing
2.01 The Committee recommends that the fair dealing provisions of the
be simplified by
consolidating the current fair
dealing provisions
single section;
absorbing the
provisions relating to acts done for the purpose of professional advice in
relation to subject matter other than works
(ss. 104(b)
(c)) within
fair dealing;
removing the fair dealing
provisions that specifically apply to external students
(ss. 40(1A)
removing the provisions that
require sufficient acknowledgment in relation to fair dealings for the purpose
of reporting news
(ss. 42(1)(a)
adopting a modified
quantitative test
(s. 40(3)).
[paragraph 6.29]
Committee recommends that the proposed fair dealing provision, and the details
of the modified quantitative test, remain
in the Act. [paragraph 6.31]
of fair dealing purposes
2.03 The Committee recommends the expansion of fair dealing to an open-ended
model that specifically refers to the current exclusive
purposes—such as research or study
), criticism or
), reporting news
professional advice
—but is not confined to those purposes.
[paragraph 6.35]
application of considerations determining ‘fairness’
2.04 The Committee recommends that the non-exclusive set of factors that are
currently considered in relation to ‘a dealing
by way of copying’
with a work for the purpose of research or study
generally to all fair dealings. [paragraph 6.44]
quantitative test
2.05 The Committee recommends that its analysis be taken into account in the
next stage of the Government’s consideration of
the Digital Agenda.
[paragraph 6.66]
test—‘prescribed portion’
2.06 The Committee recommends that the quantitative test, and the concept of
a ‘reasonable portion’, as it is currently
called, be treated
separately from the concept of a ‘fair dealing’ since there is no
requirement for recourse to the
criteria of ‘fairness’. The
Committee therefore
the structure of the new fair
dealing provision reflect this distinction and that the quantitative test be
removed from ‘fair
dealing’ and drafted as a separate stand-alone
provision on permitted free copying;
‘reasonable portion’ be renamed a ‘prescribed portion’,
to distinguish it more clearly from the general
principle of fair dealing.
[paragraph 6.68]
2.07 Additionally, the Committee recommends that
the provision just described expressly prohibit the serial copying of
10 per cent
portions. [paragraph 6.69]
2.08 In the light of the inherent difficulties that exist in the extension of
the quantitative test to all subject matter, including
material in the digital
environment, the Committee recommends that the operation of the quantitative
test be defined exhaustively
and be specifically limited to published literary,
dramatic and musical works in printed form. [paragraph 6.71]
2.09 The Committee therefore recommends the insertion of the word
‘printed’ before the terms ‘periodical publication’
‘published edition’ (see the discussion of the definition of
‘prescribed portion’ in paragraph 6.145).
[paragraph 6.72]
Application
of the modified quantitative test to all dealings
2.10 With the exception of two members, the Committee recommends that the
current limitation on the application of the quantitative
test to a dealing
‘by way of copying’ be removed, thereby allowing the quantitative
test to apply to
all dealings
with printed published literary, dramatic
or musical works, or adaptations of such works, for the purpose of research or
study. [paragraph
2.11 In dissenting from the foregoing recommendation one Committee member
recommends the extension of the quantitative test to all
dealings except those
that involve the reproduction of copyright material from hard-copy form to
digital form. The other dissenting
Committee member recommends that the
quantitative test remain limited to dealings ‘by way of copying’.
[paragraph 6.78]
2.12 If the recommendation to apply the quantitative test to all dealings is
not adopted, the Committee (with the exception of the
two dissenting members)
recommends that the term ‘reproduction’ be used instead of the term
‘copying’, so
as to ensure application of the test to the widest
possible range of reproductions. [paragraph 6.86]
Application
of fair dealing to all exclusive rights
2.13 With the exception of one member, the Committee recommends that the
proposed fair dealing model apply to all exclusive rights
subsisting in
of the Act does now. The majority of the Committee
therefore recommends that the new fair dealing model apply to the
Government’s
proposed broadly based, technology-neutral right of
communication to the public, if the new right is enacted. [paragraph 6.87]
2.14 The dissenting Committee member recommends that the proposed fair
dealing provision apply to all dealings except the electronic
reproduction,
transmission and making available on the Internet and other online services of
2.15 With the exception of one member, the Committee reaffirms its
recommendation in its 1995
Computer Software Protection
report that
electrocopying not be excluded from applying to dealings for the purpose of
research or study. [paragraph 6.92]
conducting dealings on behalf of others
2.16 The Committee recommends that, in principle, the dealing with copyright
material by a person on behalf of another should not
be excluded from being a
fair dealing if it can be found to be ‘fair’ having regard to the
relevant criteria. [paragraph
dealing by enrolled external students
2.17 The Committee recommends that
(1B) not be included
in the proposed fair dealing provision and that they therefore be repealed.
[paragraph 6.111]
Restoration
of the word ‘private’ before 'study or research'
2.18 The Committee recommends
that the word ‘private’ not
be re-inserted before the phrase ‘study or research’ in relation to
fair dealing
for the purpose of ‘research or study’
). [paragraph 6.117]
Limitations
on fair dealings
The Committee recommends
that the Act be amended so as to
include reference to cinematograph films in the definition of ‘sufficient
acknowledgment’
to achieve compliance with Australia’s international
obligations under arts. 10(3) and 14
(1) of the Berne Convention.
[paragraph 6.120]
2.20 The Committee recommends that a specific provision be maintained in the
Act (similar to the current
) to comply with art. 10(3)
of the Berne Convention or, alternatively, that the moral rights provisions be
appropriately amended in
relation to dealings conducted for the purpose of
criticism or review. [paragraph 6.122]
2.21 The Committee recommends that
ss. 42(1)(a)
removed from the Act and that reliance be placed on the new moral rights
provisions to effect compliance with art. 6
(1) of the Berne
Convention. [paragraph 6.126]
2.22 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be expanded to
include literary, dramatic and artistic works and cinematograph films.
[paragraph 6.132]
2.23 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be expanded to
include reporting the news by means of photography. As a matter of drafting, the
Committee also recommends
that the provision be recast into a simple statement
rather than remain in the double negative form in which it currently appears.
[paragraph 6.134]
dealing for the purpose of professional legal advice
2.24 With the exception of one member, the Committee recommends that all uses
of copyright material for the purpose of professional
legal advice fall within
fair dealing and therefore be subject to the fairness requirements if they are
not to be infringements.
The dissenting Committee member does not agree that
‘all uses’ should include the reproduction or supply of material
electronically. [paragraph 6.138]
2.25 The Committee considers that direct reference to the terms
‘giving’ and ‘seeking’ professional legal
unnecessary. It recommends that both related activities be covered by a general
reference to a dealing with copyright material
‘for the purpose of
professional advice by a legal practitioner, patent attorney or trade mark
attorney’ (see subsection
(1) of the prototype provision in paragraph
6.143). [paragraph 6.139]
2.26 The Committee regards the phrase ‘or in the course of’
of the Act) as unnecessary: activities that fall within this
phrase would be covered by the broad phrase described in paragraph 6.139.
The Committee therefore
that the phrase be removed.
[paragraph 6.140]
7 Copying by libraries and archives
libraries and archives provisions needed at all?
2.27 The Committee recommends that provisions regulating the making of
royalty-free copies of copyright material by libraries and
archives remain in
the Act, but in a simplified form. [paragraph 7.12]
division of library and archives provisions between
and IV of the Act
2.28 The Committee recommends that the library and archives provisions be
amended so that the copying of whole works or parts of works
and subject matter
other than works for users and other libraries and archives is treated
consistently (subject to a dealing with
a prescribed portion being confined to
printed published works). [paragraph 7.21]
Definitions
of ‘library’ and ‘archives’
2.29 The Committee recommends that all provisions in the Act permitting
royalty-free copying by libraries (currently
and 110B) apply to all libraries, whether or not they are conducted
for profit. [paragraph 7.28]
2.30 Subject to the recommendation that all provisions in the Act permitting
royalty-free copying by libraries apply to all libraries,
whether or not they
are conducted for profit, being adopted, the Committee recommends that
of the Act be repealed. [paragraph 7.30]
2.31 The Committee recommends that the term ‘library’ remain
undefined in the Act. [paragraph 7.33]
2.32 The Committee recommends that references to specific archival
institutions in paragraph (a) of the definition of ‘archives’
of the Act be removed. [paragraph 7.36]
2.33 The Committee recommends that all provisions in the Act permitting
royalty-free copying by archives apply to all archives, whether
or not they
derive a profit. [paragraph 7.38]
2.34 The Committee recommends that the current definitions of
‘archives’ in
(4) of the Act be removed.
[paragraph 7.41]
declaration system
2.35 The Committee recommends that the requirement for declarations to be
made by both users and librarians and archivists when libraries
and archives
make copies of copyright material be removed from
, 51A and 110B
of the Act. [paragraph 7.49]
2.36 Subject to acceptance of the recommendation that the requirement for
declarations be removed from the Act, the Committee recommends
(5) be repealed. [paragraph 7.51]
by libraries and archives for users
Expansion of the
purposes for which libraries and archives can copy
2.37 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be repealed and that
copying by libraries and archives for users be governed by the proposed fair
dealing provision and
the proposed quantitative test. [paragraph 7.59]
2.38 The Committee recommends that libraries and archives be permitted to
perform copying for users in all instances where users would
be permitted to
make the copy for themselves under the proposed fair dealing provision or under
the proposed quantitative test. [paragraph
purpose is the relevant purpose in applying exceptions
2.39 With the exception of two members, the Committee recommends that, where
a library or archives conducts a dealing by way of copying
on behalf of a user
under the proposed fair dealing provision, the user’s purpose be regarded
as the relevant purpose in ascertaining
the ‘fairness’ of the
dealing. [paragraph 7.64]
2.40 One dissenting Committee member supports the foregoing on the condition
that dealings by way of copying by libraries and archives
under the proposed
fair dealing provision do not include the electronic reproduction of copyright
material or dealings conducted
for profit. [paragraph 7.65]
2.41 The other dissenting member recommends that no exception to the
principle stated in the
case apply to a dealing by way of
copying by a library or archives on behalf of a user under the proposed fair
dealing provision.
[paragraph 7.66]
2.42 With the exception of one member, the Committee recommends that a
library or archives be able to conduct a dealing by way of
copying under the
quantitative test on behalf of a user in response to a verifiable request by a
user stating that the copy is for
the purpose of their own research or study and
that they have not previously been supplied with a copy of the same article or
work or the same part of the article or other work, as the case may be, by
a library or archives. [paragraph 7.71]
2.43 The dissenting Committee member supports the foregoing recommendation on
the condition that dealings by way of copying by libraries
and archives under
the proposed quantitative test do not include the electronic reproduction of
for profit. [paragraph 7.72]
Application of the
restrictions to the proposed fair dealing provision
2.44 With the exception of two members, the Committee recommends that
sections that maintain the mandatory effect of the current
(5) of the Act be excluded from the proposed fair dealing provision. The
dissenting Committee members recommend that the effect of
(5) be retained in the Act. [paragraph 7.79]
Application of the
restrictions to the proposed quantitative test
2.45 The Committee recommends that the mandatory effect of the current
be included as part of the proposed quantitative test. The
Committee further recommends that a library or archives be able to conduct
dealing by way of copying under the quantitative test on behalf of a user on a
cost-recovery basis only. [paragraph 7.82]
Specificity of a
user’s request and copying samples for users
2.46 The Committee recommends that no special provision be introduced into
the Act to permit a library or archives to give effect
to a remote user’s
request to copy unspecified works on a specified subject rather than with
respect to a particular work.
Copying by libraries and archives for remote users
should be regulated by the principles of fair dealing. [paragraph 7.93]
by libraries and archives for other libraries or archives
2.47 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be repealed and that
copying by libraries and archives that was previously done under
governed by the proposed fair dealing provision and the proposed quantitative
test. [paragraph 7.97]
2.48 Two members of the Committee recommend that this be subject to the
condition that the proposed fair dealing provision be drafted
to restrict
copying by libraries and archives for other libraries and archives in ways
similar to that now provided for in
(7A) of the Act.
[paragraph 7.98]
2.49 The Committee recommends that the mandatory effect of the current
of the Act be included as part of the proposed quantitative test.
[paragraph 7.99]
of works, sound recordings and cinematograph films for preservation
2.50 Subject to its recommendation in paragraph 7.136 in relation to copying
for the preservation of unpublished works, the Committee
recommends that
s. 51A of the Act be repealed. Two members of the Committee recommend that
this be subject to the inclusion in the
Act of a section that maintains the
mandatory effect of the current s. 51A(4) as part of the proposed fair
dealing provision. [paragraph
2.51 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be repealed.
Copying currently regulated by this provision should instead be regulated by the
proposed fair dealing provision.
[paragraph 7.113]
2.52 The Committee recommends that the provisions of the Act that currently
allow copying of unpublished materials by libraries and
archives be amended to
permit the copying of those materials for the purpose of public display.
[paragraph 7.116]
2.53 A majority of the Committee recommends that no change to the Act be made
to permit libraries or archives to copy broadcasts without
the permission of the
for the purpose of preservation
of the copyright materials embodied in that
article (including the broadcast), copying by the library or archives should be
One member of the Committee is of the view that an archives such as
the National Film and Sound Archive should be able to make copies
of broadcasts
with a view to preserving the national heritage in sound and vision. [paragraph
2.54 The Committee recommends that s. 110B of the Act be repealed.
Copying of audiovisual items for the purpose of preservation should
determined by the general principles of fair dealing. [paragraph 7.122]
2.55 Two members of the Committee recommend that this be subject to the
inclusion in the Act of a section that maintains the effect
of s. 110B(3)
as an additional, mandatory requirement to the proposed fair dealing provision.
[paragraph 7.124]
of illustrations accompanying articles and other works
2.56 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be repealed. Copying
currently permitted under this provision should be regulated by the proposed
fair dealing provision.
[paragraph 7.130]
and publication of unpublished works, sound recordings or cinematograph films
held in libraries or archives
2.57 The Committee recommends that
remain in the Act, but
in a simplified form. [paragraph 7.133]
2.58 The Committee recommends that copying for the purpose of preservation be
of the Act. [paragraph 7.136]
2.59 The Committee recommends that the requirement in
that an unpublished work not be copied until 75 years have elapsed since the
work was made be removed from the provision.
[paragraph 7.144]
2.60 Two members
of the Committee recommend that a mandatory
requirement be inserted in
, stating that libraries and archives
cannot make a charge that exceeds the cost of making and supplying a copy to a
user when providing
copies to a user who has made a request under this
provision. [paragraph 7.146]
2.61 The Committee recommends that no change be made to
so as to permit the publication of previously unpublished photographs or
engravings that are
incorporated in a literary, dramatic or musical
work. [paragraph 7.151]
2.62 The Committee recommends that the heading of
be amended to
read ‘Publication of unpublished works kept in libraries and
archives’. [paragraph 7.153]
2.63 The Committee recommends that the purposes for which unpublished sound
recordings and cinematographs films may be copied, as
extended to include for the purpose of preservation. [paragraph 7.155]
2.64 The Committee recommends that no change be made to the period of
protection given to unpublished sound recordings and cinematograph
of the Act. [paragraph 7.159]
2.65 The Committee recommends that a provision be included in the Act to
regulate the publication of unpublished sound recordings
and cinematograph
films. This provision should be modelled on
[paragraph 7.161]
by parliamentary libraries
2.66 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be
amalgamated. The majority of the Committee recommends that this section provide
that the copyright in works or subject
matter other than works
infringed by anything done, for the sole purpose of assisting a person who is a
member of an Australian parliament in the performance
of their duties, by an
authorised officer of a library with the principal purpose of providing library
services for members of an
Australian parliament. A member of the Committee does
not agree that ‘anything done’ should include the reproduction
supply of material electronically. [paragraph 7.168]
digital environment
and archives making digital copies of materials held in their
collections
2.67 The majority of the Committee recommends that no special provision be
included in the Act to permit libraries and archives to
digitise copyright
material held in their collections for the purpose of making digital copies
available for browsing by users. [paragraph
2.68 One member of the Committee recommends that libraries and archives be
given a separate right to digitise works and subject matter
other than works
held in their collections for the purpose of making digital copies available for
browsing by users, but only where
the copyright material being digitised is not
in digital form
within a reasonable time at an ordinary
commercial price. [paragraph 7.185]
copies made on machines installed in libraries and archives
2.69 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be extended to
apply where any copyright material in the collection of a library or an archives
is accessible via a computer
terminal made available to users. [paragraph
2.70 The Committee recommends that the prescribed notice under
advise the user of the copyright owner’s rights and the possible legal
consequences arising from any unauthorised exercise
of the copyright
owner’s rights. [paragraph 7.194]
8 Miscellaneous exceptions
Organisational
problems in relation to the miscellaneous exceptions provisions
2.71 The Committee recommends that all miscellaneous exceptions provisions be
located in one part of the Act. It further recommends
that the provisions be
organised within the ‘Miscellaneous exceptions’ part in terms of the
exclusive rights of copyright
to which they relate. [paragraph 8.06]
Reproductions
and other acts done for the purpose of judicial proceedings
2.72 A majority of the Committee recommends the retention of
(a) of the Act. It further recommends that the two provisions be
combined. [paragraph 8.18]
copy of a computer program
2.73 The Committee reaffirms its recommendations in the
Computer Software
report concerning
of the Act. [paragraph 8.23]
Reproduction
of writing on approved label for containers for chemical product
2.74 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be
combined. [paragraph 8.27]
Reproduction
of works and other copyright subject matter for the purpose of
broadcasting
2.75 Subject to any recommendations it makes in relation to the application
of the sections as a result of its consideration of matters
identified by the
CCG as requiring review, the Committee
recommends the retention of
of the Act as stand-alone provisions; it further
recommends that the three provisions be combined. [paragraph 8.32]
reproductions and publication and transmission by diffusion service of artistic
2.76 The Committee recommends the repeal of
and, as a necessary consequence,
and 69. [paragraph 8.43]
Reproduction
of part of artistic work in later work
2.77 The Committee recommends the retention of
of the Act.
[paragraph 8.48]
Reconstruction
of buildings
2.78 The Committee
recommends the repeal of
of the Act.
[paragraph 8.51]
or recording of broadcasts for private and domestic use
2.79 Subject to any recommendations it makes when it examines
the Act as part of its consideration of the simplification of the exclusive
rights of copyright owners, the Committee recommends
the retention of
as a stand-alone provision. [paragraph 8.58]
Reproductions
of editions of work
2.80 The Committee recommends the retention of
of the Act as a
stand-alone provision. [paragraph 8.61]
Reproduction
of statutory instruments and judgments
2.81 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be retained and be
amended to include published editions of prescribed works; it further recommends
be amended accordingly. [paragraph 8.68]
Performances
in respect of literary or dramatic works
2.82 The Committee recommends the retention of
of the Act as a
stand-alone provision. Subject to any recommendations it makes with respect to
as a result of its consideration of matters identified by the CCG
as requiring further review, the Committee recommends the retention
section as a stand-alone provision. [paragraph 8.74]
Performances
of works and sound recordings at places where people reside or sleep or in
respect of a club or other non-profit organisation
2.83 Subject to any recommendations it makes with respect to
of the Act as a result of its consideration of outstanding matters
identified by the CCG, the Committee recommends the retention
of those sections
as stand-alone provisions. [paragraph 8.81]
performance of certain broadcasts
2.84 Subject to any recommendations it makes with respect to
(3) of the Act as a result of its consideration of outstanding matters
identified by the CCG, the Committee recommends the retention
of those two
sections as stand-alone provisions. [paragraph 8.86]
performance of recordings that originate overseas
2.85 The Committee recommends the retention of
of the Act as a
stand-alone provision. [paragraph 8.91]
performance of old news film
2.86 The Committee recommends the retention of
of the Act as a
stand-alone provision. [paragraph 8.94]
performance of works contained in old films
2.87 The Committee recommends the repeal of
of the Act.
[paragraph 8.97]
Retransmission
of broadcast
2.88 The Committee recommends no change to
of the Act, in
either its current form or that proposed by the Government in its recent
announcements in connection with the provision.
[paragraph 8.100]
Importation
of books and published editions
2.89 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be
combined. [paragraph 8.106]
of musical works
2.90 The Committee recommends that there be no change to Division 6 of
of the Act. [paragraph 8.108]
of record embodying film soundtracks
2.91 The Committee recommends the retention of
of the Act as a
stand-alone provision. [paragraph 8.111]
of copyright material for the services of the Crown
2.92 The Committee reaffirms the recommendation in its
Computer Software
report in relation to
of the Act but otherwise
recommends the retention of that section as a stand-alone provision. [paragraph
9 Copying for educational purposes
2.93 The Committee recommends that the Act be recast to
group together all provisions
relating to educational
institutions;
reduce the duplication in
and VB by combining the provisions referred to in Table 2 with
appropriate modifications and including them in a separate part or
division of
transfer material relating to
collecting agencies to regulations. [paragraph
of ‘educational institution’
2.94 The Committee recommends that the Act be amended by omitting the
definition of ‘educational institution’ from
repealing s. 10A. [paragraph 9.15]
Performance
of works or other subject matter in the course of educational
instruction
2.95 The Committee recommends that no change be made to the scope of
of the Act. [paragraph 9.19]
of works in collections for use by places of education
2.96 The Committee recommends that
of the Act be repealed.
[paragraph 9.23]
of works and broadcasts for educational purposes
2.97 The Committee recommends that no change be made to
Act. [paragraph 9.31]
licence under
('Subject matter other than works')
2.98 The Committee makes no recommendation for any exceptions from the
operation of the licence scheme in
of the Act. [paragraph 9.35]
2.99 The Committee recommends that Division 4 of
of the Act be
repealed. [paragraph 9.37]
licence under
2.100 The Committee recommends that educational institutions be permitted to
use all copyright material in digital form pursuant to
a statutory licence
requiring the payment of a royalty. [paragraph 9.43]
artistic works
2.101 The Committee recommends that no change be made to s. 135ZM of the
Act. The operation of the section should, however, be kept
under review. The
section should be repealed if appropriate arrangements are made between the
parties to provide compensation to
owners of artistic copyright in works.
[paragraph 9.57]
published editions
2.102 The Committee recommends that no change be made to s. 135ZH of the
Act. [paragraph 9.60]
10 Copying for people with disabilities
by print–handicapped radio licensees
2.103 The Committee recommends that s. 47A of the Act apply in respect
of sound broadcasts and other sound
transmissions and the making
available to the public of programs and materials, but only if the sole purpose
of the service or program
is to communicate with people described in
s. 47A(11)(b). The provisions relating to record keeping, inspection and
licence-fee determination
should be retained. [paragraph 10.09]
of works for handicapped readers and copying of copyright material for
intellectually handicapped people
General issues
2.104 The Committee recommends that the provisions for copying for
handicapped readers and intellectually handicapped people remain
identifiable in
the Act and not be merged with the fair dealing provisions. [paragraph
2.105 The Committee recommends that the current schemes for copying for
handicapped readers and intellectually handicapped people
be combined into a
provision that deals with copying for people with print and intellectual
disabilities. [paragraph 10.18]
Definition of a
handicapped reader
2.106 The Committee recommends the recasting and extension of the present
definition of a handicapped reader to include people who
have ‘perceptual
or other disabilities that limit their ability to follow a line of text or that
affect their
concentration’. The Committee also recommends that a
specific reference to people with ‘cognitive disabilities’
included. [paragraph 10.26]
2.107 The Committee recommends the further extension of its proposal for a
recast definition to people who, ‘because of insufficient
literacy or
language skills, cannot comprehend written material’. [paragraph
2.108 The Committee recommends that for the purposes of the Act a
‘person with a print disability’ be defined as
a person without
a person whose vision is
severely impaired;
a person who is
unable to hold or manipulate books or to focus or move their eyes;
a person who has perceptual, cognitive
or other disabilities that limit their ability to follow a line of text or that
affect their
concentration;
who because of insufficient literacy or language skills cannot comprehend
written material. [paragraph
of formats covered by a licence
2.109 The Committee recommends that the right to reproduce works and other
be extended to
include making a reproduction in any appropriate format. [paragraph 10.33]
Use that may be made of material copied
2.110 The Committee recommends that the current provision requiring that
copies may be used only for research, study or self-instruction
be removed,
provided that no charge is made beyond the direct cost of making such copies.
[paragraph 10.36]
Destruction of
master copy
2.111 The Committee accepts the general view that master copies need not be
destroyed and recommends accordingly. It also agrees that
a remuneration notice
should be required in respect of master copies. [paragraph 10.38]
2.112 The Committee recommends that institutions be allowed to charge on a
cost-recovery basis for their services, provided those
charges are limited to
incurred in making and supplying the copy. [paragraph
Availability of
commercial copy
2.113 The Committee recommends retention of the requirement under the
statutory licence that the person making the copy be satisfied
that a copy of
the work in the desired format is not available in a reasonable time at an
ordinary commercial price. [paragraph 10.42]
2.114 The Committee recommends that production standards for reading
materials for people with print disabilities not be incorporated
in the Act.
[paragraph 10.45]
Section 69 of the
New Zealand
2.115 Having regard to the differences between the
Australian and New Zealand copyright legislation and the general level of
for the merger of the schemes in the Australian
Committee recommends that the present framework in the Australian Act be the
starting point for combining the two schemes. [paragraph
2.116 The Committee recommends that, should its recommendation for the
combination of the two schemes be adopted, the revised scheme
provision for people with hearing disabilities. If the Government decides
against merging the two schemes, the Committee
recommends that provision
nonetheless be made for people with hearing disabilities. [paragraph 10.50]
Use of broadcasts
by institutions assisting intellectually handicapped people
2.117 The Committee recommends that, should its recommendation for the
combination of the two schemes be adopted, a provision to replace
of the Act be included in the revised scheme. [paragraph 10.52]
ROYALTY-FREE
EXCEPTIONS TO COPYRIGHT
1 Fair dealing
3 International comparisons
In considering simplification of the fair dealing provisions in the
, the Committee examined the copyright legislation of a
number of countries. This chapter briefly considers this legislation as it
relates to the principle of fair dealing.
3.01 The free use of copyright material is called ‘fair dealing’
in the United Kingdom and in UK-derived legislation (such
as Australian and New
Zealand legislation); it is called ‘fair use’ under US law. In other
legislation it is described
as ‘restrictions’ on or
‘exceptions’ to rights.
3.02 In considering simplification of the various limitations to the rights
of copyright owners, including the fair dealing scheme
in the Australian Act,
the Committee examined the copyright legislation of a number of countries: the
United States, the United Kingdom,
New Zealand, France, Germany, Canada, and
Denmark and Finland (see Appendix C).
3.03 Of the legislation examined, it was found that only the US legislation
contains an open-ended fair use scheme; the other countries
have opted for a
closed set of specific exceptions, which is similar to the current approach in
3.04 The Committee also found that—apart from Australia—the
United States and New Zealand were the only countries of those
considered whose
legislation implements a general statutory test of ‘fairness’ to
determine whether or not exceptions
to copyright owners’ exclusive rights
apply. Under s. 40(2) of the Australian Act, ‘fairness’, in
relation to a
‘dealing by way of copying’ for the purpose of
research or study, is determined by reference to a non-exclusive set of
(see paragraph 4.08).
3.05 Section 107 of the US
provides for a set
of non-exclusive factors to be considered in determining whether or not a
particular use is a ‘fair use’.
The Australian guidelines under
s. 40(2), which apply to fair dealing for the purpose of research or study,
are similar to the factors
included under s. 107 of the US Act. The notable
difference between the US and Australian set of factors is the existence of
s. 40(2)(c)
of the Australian Act, which has no counterpart in the US
legislation. Section 40(2)(c) provides for a court to consider ‘the
possibility of obtaining the work or adaptation within a reasonable time at an
ordinary commercial price’.
3.06 The New Zealand
includes under s. 43(3) a
set of factors that are very similar to the factors found under s. 40(2) of
the Australian Act. The Committee
notes, however, that under the New Zealand Act
the list appears to be drafted as an
set of factors. This must
be contrasted with the Australian and US legislation, which provides for a
list of considerations.
3.07 The Committee found that none of the countries examined provided for a
general quantitative test for fairness similar to that
found under s. 40(3)
of the Australian Act. The international comparison was therefore of no
assistance in determining how the Australian
quantitative test could be applied
to copyright material in the digital environment.
3.08 The Australian fair dealing exceptions appear to give users greater
rights to copy than those applicable in the United Kingdom,
New Zealand and
Canada. Among other limitations to fair dealing not found in the Australian Act,
s. 29 of the UK
of the New Zealand Act, and s. 27(2)(a) of the Canadian Act refer to a fair
dealing in relation to research and/or ‘
study’. This
limitation of ‘private’ before the word ‘study’ was
removed from the Australian Act following
Further limitations to fair dealing
found in the UK and New Zealand Acts and not found in the Australian Act are
discussed in Appendix
3.09 A varied international approach exists in relation to the exceptions
providing for decompilation of computer programs for the
interoperability. The Committee found that the US, Canadian and New Zealand
specific exceptions that allow this
activity. Case law has, however, established that under the US Act decompilation
may be considered
in some cases to be a fair use. The UK Act, whilst
specifically providing that it is not a fair dealing to decompile
(s. 29(4)(a)),
allows for decompilation as a separate exception under
s. 50B. The legislation of Germany (art. 69(e)), France (art. L.122-6-1),
Denmark (art. 37) and Finland (art. 25k) permits the decompilation of a computer
3.10 The German, Danish and Finnish legislation specifically provides for the
protection of the moral rights of copyright owners whilst
applying the
exceptions (described as ‘limitations’) to owners’ economic
4 Fair dealing in Australia
This chapter provides an overview of the fair dealing provisions in
Australia’s
. First, it considers the basic
application of the provisions in terms of the subject matter of copyright and
exclusive rights comprising
provisions as they relate to fair dealing for the purpose of research or study,
criticism or review, reporting news, and giving professional advice. Included in
this examination is a consideration of the factors
to be taken into account in
determining what is a fair dealing. The chapter also examines the quantitative
test to be applied in
determining what is a fair dealing in relation to the
copying of a published literary, dramatic or musical work for the purpose of
research or study. Finally, the main judicial decisions relating to the
operation of these provisions are discussed.
4.01 Under Australia’s Copyright Act a range of statutory limitations
to the exclusive rights of copyright owners may be raised
in answer to a claim
of infringement of copyright. The most important of these is the statutory
limitation of ‘fair dealing’,
which allows the free copying and use
of copyright material without formality. Strictly speaking, fair dealing is not
a defence to
infringement; rather, it defines the boundaries of copyright
owners’ rights.
4.02 Under the Act the doctrine of fair dealing is confined to four
research or study (ss. 40 and
criticism or review (ss. 41
reporting of news
(ss. 42 and 103B);
professional
advice given by a legal practitioner or patent attorney
(s. 43(2)).
4.03 Sections 40 to 43 apply fair dealing to
works and ss. 103A to 103C apply the limitation to an ‘audio-visual
which is defined in s. 100A as ‘a sound recording, a
cinematograph film, a sound broadcast or a television broadcast’.
formulation is based on the distinction that currently exists in the Act between
‘works’ (Part III) and ‘subject
matter other than works’
4.04 What particular acts constitute a fair dealing are not defined in the
Act; with the exception of one member, the Committee is
of the view that fair
dealing can apply broadly to all the exclusive rights subsisting in the
particular subject matter that falls
within the exception. The Committee
majority notes that use of the expression ‘a dealing by way of
copying’ in ss. 40(2)
and 40(3) does not operate to limit fair
dealing for the purpose of research or study (s. 40(1)) to the copyright
owner’s right
of reproduction.
s. 43(2), which provides for fair dealing for the purpose of giving
professional advice by a legal practitioner or patent
attorney, should be
interpreted similarly (notwithstanding the reference in the heading of
reproduction
for purpose of ... professional
advice’, which, as a matter of statutory interpretation, must give way to
the text of s. 43(2)).
For these reasons the Committee majority takes the
view that fair dealing applies to the exercise of all rights.
4.05 The Committee majority considers that this broad application of the fair
dealing provisions to all exclusive rights is consistent
with Australia’s
international obligations under the Berne Convention and TRIPS (see Appendix
dealing for research or study
4.06 Section 40(1) of the Act provides, ‘A fair dealing with a
literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or with an adaptation
literary, dramatic or musical work, for the purpose of research or study does
not constitute an infringement of the copyright
in the work.’
Section 103C(1) is in similar terms in relation to dealings with
‘audio-visual items’ (see paragraph 4.03).
4.07 The relevant provisions of the Act relating to research or study are
expanded by a non-exclusive set of factors to be taken into
determining whether a dealing is fair (ss. 40(2) and 103C(2)).
4.08 Section 40(2) provides,
For the purposes of this Act, the matters to which regard shall be had, in
determining whether a dealing with a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic
work or with an adaptation of a literary, dramatic or musical work, being a
dealing by way of copying the whole
or a part of the work or adaptation,
constitutes a fair dealing with the work or adaptation for the purpose of
research or study
(a) the purpose and character of the dealing;
(b) the nature of the work or adaptation;
(c) the possibility of obtaining the work or adaptation within a reasonable
time at an ordinary commercial price;
(d) the effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or value of, the
work or adaptation; and
(e) in a case where part only of the work or adaptation is copied—the
amount and substantiality of the part copied taken in
relation to the whole work
or adaptation.
Section 103C(2) is in similar terms in relation to dealings with
‘audio-visual items’.
4.09 Section 40(2) is based on a recommendation in the Franki report that the
concept of ‘fair dealing’ be retained in
The recommendation was based
substantially on principles developed in the case law. The Franki Committee also
made brief reference
to the then yet-to-be-enacted s. 107 of the US
(s. 22), passed by the Senate and before a Committee of the House of
Representatives.
It is reasonable to assume
that the factors referred to under s. 40(2) are also relevant in
determining the fairness of a dealing
for purposes other than research or study:
both the principles in the case law and the factors described under s. 107
of the US Copyright
Act are not limited to a specific purpose.
4.10 As part of its recommendation, the Franki Committee commented on why the
matters now in s. 40(2) do not provide specific guidance
as to what is a
fair dealing for the purposes of research or study:
We see section 40 as being a section mainly directed to the acts of an
individual, and there are so many factors which may have to
be considered in
deciding whether a particular instance of copying is ‘fair dealing’,
that we think it is quite impracticable
to attempt to remove entirely from the
Court the duty of deciding the question whether or not a particular instance
constitutes ‘fair
4.11 The determination of what is a fair dealing in relation to the copying
of a work for the purpose of research or study is assisted
by a quantitative
test provided under s. 40(3) of the Act, which provides that, subject to
certain qualifications, the copying of
the whole or part of an article in a
periodical publication or the copying of not more than a ‘reasonable
portion’ of
a work or adaptation is deemed to be fair, notwithstanding the
factors to be taken into account in determining fairness under s.
4.12 A ‘reasonable portion’ is defined non-exhaustively in
s. 10(2) of the Act. The definition provides that a copy will
‘reasonable portion’ if the pages copied, in relation to a published
edition of a literary, dramatic or musical
(a) do not exceed, in the aggregate, 10% of the number of pages in that
edition; or
(b) in a case where the work is divided into chapters exceed, in the
aggregate, 10% of the number of pages in that edition but contain
only the whole
or part of single chapter of the work.
4.13 In relation to ‘audio-visual items’, s. 103C does not
provide a quantitative test equivalent to that provided for
under s. 40(3).
4.14 It should be noted that s. 40(3) applies primarily to published
literary musical and dramatic works through the reference to
a ‘periodical
publication’ (s. 40(3)(a)) and a ‘reasonable portion’
(s. 40(3)(b)) of ‘a published edition’(s.
discussed, the definition of ‘reasonable portion’ under
s. 10(2) is non-exhaustive and so a ‘reasonable
portion’ in
regard to an unpublished work is possible under the Act. In the case of dealings
with more than a ‘reasonable
portion’, there is no express mention
in the Act of what weight (if any) is to be given to the fact that the work is
unpublished.
Whether or not a work is published would, however, probably be
considered under ss. 40(2)(b), 40(2)(c) and 40(2)(d).
4.15 The Copyright Act contains no definition of the term ‘research or
De Garis v Neville Jeffress Pidler Pty Ltd
Beaumont J adopted the
Macquarie Dictionary
definitions of
‘research’ and
and other cases
have consistently held that it
is the purpose of the person making the dealing, rather than the ultimate use to
which the material
is put, that is relevant when assessing whether the dealing
can be regarded as a fair dealing for the purpose of research or
4.16 Before 1980 the word ‘study’ was qualified by the adjective
‘private’. The
deleted the word
‘private’ from s. 40(1) in accordance with a recommendation
made by the Franki Committee. The CLRC noted
Simplification of the Fair
Dealing Provisions
that copyright
owners generally have pressed for the restoration of the word
‘private’ before ‘study’ and
that concerns were
expressed that the section permitted commercial organisations to engage in
extensive copying on the basis that
they are engaging in research (see Appendix
D, paragraphs 29 to 36, for an analysis of the responses the Committee received
4.17 The Franki Committee considered that the limitation was intended to
distinguish use of material for private study from use for
instruction, but it regarded the distinction as artificial and difficult to
maintain. It stated,
It is clear that the photocopying of material is of considerable assistance
in enabling teachers and students to prepare material
for classroom use, and
that it is difficult to maintain a distinction between private study and other
educational purposes. So long
as the photocopying for educational use is
qualified, for the purposes of s. 40, by the requirement of fair dealing,
we think that
the removal of the limitation to private study will not prejudice
owners of copyright.
4.18 The Australian courts are yet to decide a case that determines whether
copying and other such use of copyright material for the
purpose of commercial
research and development could be regarded as falling within the doctrine of
fair dealing. In 1991 Denis Rose
QC, then Chief General Counsel of the
Attorney-General’s Department, prepared an advice in which he stated that
could well confine ‘research’ to activities for the
purpose of increasing knowledge in the community as a whole—by
for instance, with research in a government department for the purpose of
advising ministers on proposed legislation or
research by a manufacturing
company for the purpose of improving its products. This must be contrasted with
the position in New Zealand,
where Blanchard J incidentally expressed the view,
in the decision of
Television New Zealand v Newsmonitor Services
, that a fair dealing for the
purpose of research could be something with a commercial end in view. It also
appears that in the United
Kingdom, commercial research is covered under an
equivalent provision.
dealing for criticism or review
4.19 Under s. 41 of Australia’s Copyright Act, a fair dealing with
a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or with an
adaptation of such a
work other than an artistic work does not constitute an infringement of the
the purpose of criticism or review of that
work or of another work. Similarly, s. 103A provides that a fair dealing
with an audiovisual
item does not constitute an infringement of the copyright in
the item or any work or other audiovisual item included in the item
if it is for
the purpose of criticism or review.
4.20 In compliance with the requirement of art. 10(3) of the Berne Convention
the application of both provisions is subject to ‘sufficient
acknowledgment’ of the work being made. A sufficient acknowledgment in
relation to a work is defined under s. 10(1) as an acknowledgment
identifying the work by its title or other description and, subject to certain
conditions, identifying the author. It should be noted
that Australia’s
in relation to subject matter
other than works.
4.21 Unlike fair dealing for the purpose of research or study, there are no
guidelines as to what constitutes fair dealing for the
purpose of criticism or
review. It is necessary to refer to the case law, although the factors described
in s. 40(2) are probably
also relevant in determining
‘fairness’ (see paragraph 4.09). The origins of this exception were
explained by Lord Hatherley
Chatterton v Cave
Books are published with an expectation, if not a desire, that they will be
criticised and reviewed, and if deemed valuable, that
parts of them will be used
as affording illustrations by way of quotation or the like, and if the quantity
taken be neither substantial
nor material, if ... a fair use only be made of the
publication, no wrong is done and no action can be
4.22 This principle was adopted by the Federal Court of Australia in the
4.23 The meaning of ‘criticism or review’ has been considered in
a number of cases. In
Commonwealth of Australia v John Fairfax & Sons
it was held that the work must be used for genuine criticism or review
and cannot be published under the pretence of
Sillitoe v McGraw-Hill Book
Co (UK) Ltd
held, however, that it is not necessary that criticism or review
be the sole purpose of the dealing, provided there is a substantial
criticism or review.
case Beaumont J held that the
Macquarie Dictionary
definition of the
terms applied.
dealing for reporting news
4.24 Under s. 42(1) of the Act a fair dealing with a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work, or with an adaptation of such a
work other than an
artistic work, does not constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work
if done for the purpose of, or
associated with, reporting news.
4.25 The fair dealing can involve reporting news through the following
a newspaper, magazine or similar
periodical provided that a sufficient acknowledgment of the work is made
(s. 42(1)(a));
by means of
broadcasting or in a cinematograph film (s. 42(1)(b)), provided that, in
the case of a musical work, the playing of the
work forms part of the news being
reported (s. 42(2));
by means of
transmission to subscribers to a diffusion service (s. 42(3)).
4.26 A similar exception is provided for in s. 103B, which
applies fair dealing for the purpose of reporting news to an ‘audio-visual
item’ (see paragraph 4.03).
4.27 The meaning of ‘news’ was considered in
Commonwealth of
Australia v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
, where Mason J incidentally observed
that ‘news’ was not restricted to current events and could relate to
long-term reviews
or commentary.
Beaumont J accepted the
Macquarie Dictionary
definition of ‘news’ and found that ‘news’ included a
report of any recent event or situation, the report
of events published in a
newspaper or journal, or on radio, television or other medium, information and
events considered suitable
for reporting, and information not previously
dealing for the purpose of giving professional advice
4.28 Under s. 43(2) of the Act a fair dealing with a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work does not constitute an infringement
of copyright in the
work if it is for the purpose of the giving of professional advice by a legal
practitioner or patent attorney.
4.29 It should be noted that the limitation does not have a ‘fair
dealing’ counterpart in relation to audiovisual items.
Sections 104(b) and
104(c) provide for a broader limitation, however, in relation to subject matter
other than works. The limitation
covers all acts done for the purpose of the
giving of professional advice by a legal practitioner or patent attorney or for
the purpose
of or in the course of the giving of advice by such a person. The
limitation is not subject to a ‘fairness’ requirement
and therefore
is not described as a ‘fair dealing’.
4.30 Ultimately the question of fair dealing is, in all cases, a matter of
fact and impression, which is to be determined by the
This is limited in relation to fair
dealing for the purpose of research or study by application of the quantitative
test under s.
40(3) of the Act, which deems the copying of up to a
specified amount of a work to be a ‘fair dealing’ notwithstanding
the factors described in s. 40(2) (see paragraph 4.11).
5 The US doctrine of ‘fair use’ and the UK ‘fair
dealing’ provisions
The focus of this chapter is s. 107 of the US Copyright Act, which
provides the foundation for the doctrine of ‘fair use’.
The chapter
considers the main similarities with and differences between s. 107 and
fair dealing provisions such as ss. 40(2) and
40(3) of the Australian
. It also briefly considers the rationale behind the
‘fair use’ doctrine. The chapter then examines each of the factors
as being relevant to the determination of what is a fair
dealing in the United States. It considers the way the US courts have applied
the factors and, by way of comparison, the application of these factors by the
Australian and UK courts.
5.01 The US ‘fair use’ doctrine prescribed by s. 107 of the
provides a useful starting point for considering
rationalisation of the Australian fair dealing provisions.
5.02 Section 107 of the US Act provides as follows:
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a
] including such use by
reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that
section, for purposes such
as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching
(including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not
infringement of copyright. In determining whether the use made of a work in
any particular case is a fair use the factors to be considered
(1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a
commercial nature or is for non-profit educational purposes;
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work;
(3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for, or value of, the
The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair
use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the
above factors.
5.03 The fair use doctrine is an ‘equitable rule of
Therefore no general
definition is possible and each case is decided on its facts by reference to the
non-exclusive set of factors
provided under s. 107. This produces the most
significant difference between the US fair use limitation and the Australian
fair dealing
provisions: the Australian Act currently confines fair dealing to a
specific set of purposes. The US approach would be consistent
with art. 10 of
the yet-to-be-adopted WCT
(see Appendix B), which was agreed to on the
It is understood that the provisions of Article 10 permit Contracting Parties
to carry forward and
appropriately extend
into the digital environment
limitations and exceptions in their national laws which have been considered
acceptable under the Berne
Convention. Similarly, these provisions should be
understood to allow Contracting Parties to
devise new exceptions
limitations that are appropriate in the digital network
environment.
[emphasis added]
5.04 As noted, the US factors are similar to the guidelines in s. 40(2)
of the Australian Copyright Act, which apply to fair dealing
only for the
purpose of research or study. The notable difference between the US and
Australian sets of factors is the existence
of s. 40(2)(c) of the
Australian Act, which has no counterpart in the US provision. Section 40(2)(c)
provides for consideration by
the court of ‘the possibility of obtaining
the work or adaptation within a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial
5.05 It is important to note that the legislative history of the US Copyright
Act suggests that the availability of a work to the
potential user is an
important factor in determining fair use. US Senate report no. 94-473 stated
that a key, although not necessarily
determinative, factor in fair use is
whether the work is available. If the work is out of print and unavailable for
purchase through
normal channels the user may have more justification for
reproducing it than in the ordinary case, but the existence of organisations
licensed to provide photocopies of out-of-print works at reasonable cost is a
factor for a court to consider.
5.06 In can be concluded therefore that, although s. 107 of the US Act
does not specifically include a factor similar to s. 40(2)(c)
Australian Act, the availability of a work is still a vital factor in the
determination of what is regarded as fair use. It
should be noted, however, that
the factor described in s. 40(2)(c) is more specific than the US approach
since it examines the availability
of a work ‘within a reasonable time at
an ordinary commercial price’. Nevertheless, it could be argued that the
qualification is implicit in an analysis of the US approach and thus
the availability factor in both countries is very similar.
5.07 The US Act does not include an overall quantitative test similar to that
found under s. 40(3) of the Australian Act, which applies
notwithstanding
the factors to be taken into account in determining fairness under
5.08 An analysis of the rationale behind the doctrine of fair use was made in
the case of
American Geophysical Union v Texaco Inc
, where Judge Jacobs
(dissenting) warned,
Nowhere in the case law is there support for the proposition that the
monopoly granted by copyright is designed to ensure the holder
economic return; rather, the law’s purpose is to balance competing
interests—assuring the author of a fair
return, while permitting creative
uses that build upon the author’s work ...
5.09 This analysis should, however, be contrasted with that of the majority
judgment, where Judge Newman held that the purpose of
the creative activity of authors by the provision of a special reward. Judge
Newman stated that the fair
use doctrine tempers the protection of copyright by
allowing the use of limited amounts of copyright material in some
circumstances.
5.10 It would appear to the Copyright Law Review Committee that the rationale
described in the minority judgment is closer to the
justification for the fair
dealing limitation under the Australian Act. The fair dealing provisions of the
Australian Act in relation
to works and cinematograph films are consistent with
the Berne Convention and TRIPS (see Appendix B, paragraphs 4 to 10 and 22 to
24). At the outset of the negotiations that led to the Berne Convention it was
stated that ‘limits to absolute protection are
rightly set by the public
The fair dealing
provisions might therefore be described as prescribing instances in which it is
considered that the ‘public
interest’ should prevail over the
private interests of authors.
purpose and character of the use
5.11 In examining the purpose and character factor in fair use, the concept
of ‘transformity of use’—the distinction
‘productive’ and ‘reproductive’ uses—is a matter
the US courts have held to be central to a
proper analysis of fair
The concept is pivotal to a US
court’s investigation under this factor because it assesses the value
generated by the secondary
use and the means by which such value is generated.
To the extent that the secondary use involves merely an untransformed
duplication,
the value generated by the secondary use is little more than or the
same as the value associated with the
5.12 An untransformed copy or ‘reproductive use’ is likely to be
used for the same purpose as the original, whereas a
‘productive’
use makes some contribution of new intellectual value and thus promotes the
advancement of the arts and
has therefore been held that a use merely for the same ‘intrinsic
purpose’ as the original seriously weakens a claim
In contrast, if the secondary use adds
something new with a further purpose or different character, the value generated
goes beyond
the value of the original and the promotion of the arts and sciences
is furthered.
The US Supreme Court has held
that, although ‘a transformative use is not absolutely necessary for a
finding of fair use ...
the more transformative the new work, the less will be
the significance of other factors, like commercialism, that may weigh against
finding of fair use’.
5.13 The unproductive or uncreative nature of the use was referred to in the
Australian Federal Court decision in the
, whilst analysing the US case law in
relation to fair dealing for the purpose of reporting news.
The UK courts
have often referred to a similar principle—that a mere republication or
commercially competing edition of a work
cannot be justified under the guise of
fair dealing.
5.14 In examining the factor of the purpose and character of the use, the US
courts inquire into whether the use is of a commercial
nature or is not for
profit. If a copyright work is infringed for commercial purposes, there is a
presumption of unfair use and,
if the presumption is not rebutted, fair use
The essence of the distinction
between whether a use is for commercial or non-profit purposes is not whether
the work is solely for
monetary gain but whether the user stands to profit from
exploiting the copyrighted material without paying the customary
Similarly, the UK courts may be
reluctant to regard a dealing as fair if the activity in question is commercial
exploitation to the
economic detriment of the copyright
The Australian courts have held that
the motive with which the material is copied will therefore be a relevant
consideration in the
assessment of
5.15 The Australian courts are yet to decide a case that determines whether
the reproduction of copyright material for the purpose
of commercial research
and development falls within the doctrine of fair dealing for the purpose of
research or study (s. 40—see
paragraph 4.18).
5.16 The commercial use of a work is but one factor the US courts use in
determining fair use; other elements, such as educational
purposes, can outweigh
the commercial use. In the case of
Maxtone-Graham v Burtchaell
commercial nature of a defendant author’s unauthorised publication of
verbatim quotations from the plaintiff’s copyrighted
book did not preclude
a finding of fair use.
The educational
elements of the defendant’s use far outweighed the commercial aspects of
his work. But an educational purpose
does not necessarily lead to a finding of
fair use: in the case of
Association of American Medical Colleges v
it was held that the use of test questions in a commercial course
to prepare students to take a test was not fair
; further, in the case of
Encyclopedia Britannica Education Corp v Crooks
it was held that, even
though films were copied and distributed for educational purposes, the fair use
limitation was inapplicable
because the volume of copying and the extent of
distribution were unreasonable.
of the copyright work
5.17 In determining fair use, the amount of protection a work may receive
varies with the nature of the work.
example, the US Supreme Court held that factual works may be used by others more
freely than fictional works, although a user
may not take more copyrighted
material from a factual work than is needed to convey the
Using this approach, a broader use
of informational works is permitted under fair use, whereas creative,
imaginative and more novel
works are entitled to a high degree of
protection.
Unpublished
5.18 In the case of
Harper & Row Publishers v National Enterprises
the US Supreme Court held that ‘under ordinary circumstances, the
author’s right to control the first public appearance
undisseminated expression will outweigh a claim of fair
In a separate case, the Second
Circuit Court of Appeals held that unpublished works ‘normally enjoy
complete protection against
copying any protected
expression’.
In 1992 the US Congress
responded to concern that as a result of these decisions a rule might have been
created prohibiting the fair
use of unpublished
: legislation was enacted to amend
s. 107 of the US Act through the insertion of ‘The fact that a work
is unpublished shall
not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is
made upon consideration of all the above factors.’
5.19 The amendment was not intended to alter the weight currently given by
the courts to the unpublished nature of a work in the fair
use analysis. The
general fair use principles set out in the case of
Harper & Row
therefore still apply. The US Senate stated that application of the fair use
doctrine to unpublished works is narrowly limited since,
although the work is
unavailable, this is the result of a deliberate choice on the part of the
5.20 In the UK decision of
Hubbard v Vosper
the Court held that
whether the work was unpublished, or the extent to which the work had been
circulated even if it had not been
‘published’ within the meaning of
, was a relevant consideration in an evaluation
of a claim of fair dealing.
In a subsequent
case this statement was approved: it was held that, although unpublished
material was not outside the fair dealing
doctrine, the unpublished status of
the work would be a very important
consideration.
5.21 This position was referred to with approval by the Australian High Court
Commonwealth of Australia v
, where it was stated that the
absence of consent, express or implied, for the circulation of an unpublished
work for the purposes
of criticism or review would ordinarily be an important
factor in deciding whether there had been a fair
5.22 It would appear therefore that the Australian courts take an approach
similar to that of the US courts when considering this
amount and substantiality of the use
5.23 The third element for consideration specified in the fair use limitation
is ‘the amount and substantiality of the portion
used in relation to the
of the proportion copied
in relation to the whole, most decisions appear to be
based on whether the taking was
substantial.
of the work copied
5.24 Fair use has been rejected on the ground that a copyrighted work was
copied in its entirety.
But the mere fact
that the entire work has been copied is not a bar to the finding of a fair
The fact that an entire work has been
copied does, however, militate against such a
5.25 In the UK case of
Hubbard v Vosper
LJ, concluded that the whole of a work could be copied and yet still be
justified as a ‘fair dealing’.
On the other hand, in the Australian case of
it was held that to
copy the whole of a work for reward as part of a commercial news-clipping or
media-monitoring service was not,
in the circumstances of that case, a
‘fair dealing’.
Substantiality
of the portion used
5.26 In the case of
Harper & Row Publishers Inc v Nation Enterprises
the US Supreme Court held that the use in an article of verbatim extracts
from unpublished memoirs was substantial because the extracts
were the most
powerful parts of the memoirs’ most interesting and moving chapters and
formed the article’s dramatic focus.
In another case reference was made to whether or not the quotation took the
heart of the book.
5.27 A similar issue was considered in
Hubbard v Vosper
Lord Denning MR held,
It is impossible to define what is a fair dealing. It must be a question of
degree. You must first consider the number and extent
of quotations and extracts
... Next you must consider the proportions ... Other considerations may come to
mind also. But after all
is said and done, it must be a matter of
impression.
5.28 The concept of ‘a matter of impression’ is also applicable
to the Australian law: the general principles described
Hubbard v Vosper
have been adopted by the Federal Court.
effect of the use on the potential market for and value of the work
5.29 Although the US Copyright Act is silent about how much weight should be
given to each of the fair use factors, the US Supreme
Court, in the case of
Harper & Row Publishers v National
Enterprises
, declared that the effect
of an unauthorised use of a copyrighted work on the potential market for or
value of the copyrighted work
is ‘the single most important element of
The US Senate noted that
the effect of the use on the potential market for or value of a work must be
judged in conjunction with
the other three criteria. A use that supplants any
part of the market for a copyrighted work is, however, generally an infringing
5.30 In determining whether marketability has been impaired, US courts have
examined whether the unauthorised use supplanted or displaced
the market for the
A presumption of harm to
the potential market is created where the defendant copied the copyright
material for commercial purposes.
goodwill has also been held to impair the marketability of copyrighted works: it
has been held that a copyright owner can
be damaged because the goodwill derived
from their works would be diluted through confusing repetitions of the
In photocopying cases, the
substantial adverse impact on the potential market will in general be evidenced
by losses in sales or
subscriptions.
5.31 In the United Kingdom, interpretation of this factor in relation to fair
dealing, although not regarded as the single most important
element, is similar
to that of the US courts. The general principle employed is that, where the use
made of the material is a use
that competes with the original copyright
material, the courts will be more reluctant to regard the dealing as
5.32 Under the Australian fair dealing provisions, assessment of what
constitutes a ‘fair dealing’ includes examining
the effect of the
dealing on the value of the copyright material
(s. 40(2)(d)
). The value of the material might depend on the
existence of statutory licences that allow for remunerated use. For example,
of what is a fair dealing for research or study under s. 40 of
the Australian Act must now take into account the existence and effect
statutory licence for multiple copying by educational
institutions.
5.33 The main difference between the US doctrine of ‘fair use’
and the Australian doctrine of ‘fair dealing’
is that the US
exception is open ended and is not confined to a specified range of purposes. If
it were adopted in Australia, a fair
use limitation as found under the US Act
could result in a wider range of purposes being regarded by the court as falling
fair dealing.
5.34 Another important difference is that the fair use exception makes no
reference to a general quantitative test similar to that
provided for in
s. 40(3) of the Australian
. The US model is therefore not
useful in providing an example of how
could be applied to works in
digital form.
5.35 It has been found that although the factor described in s. 40(2)(c)
of the Australian Act—namely, ‘the possibility
of obtaining the work
or adaptation within a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial
price’—is not included in the
set of factors in s. 107 of the
US Act, the availability of a work is still regarded as an essential element in
the determination
of the ‘fairness’ of a use in the United States.
5.36 Interpretation of the common factors used by the courts in the
determination of what is regarded as a ‘fair use’
dealing’ appears to be based on similar principles. The overriding
principle—that ultimately the question
of fair dealing is ‘a matter
of impression’, which is to be determined by the
—would appear to apply equally
to the ‘fair use’ doctrine.
6 Fair dealing: the Committee’s proposal
This chapter sets out the Committee’s proposal for a revised fair
dealing provision that simplifies the current provisions and
application of fair dealing principles in the digital environment. The
limitations of the current provisions as they apply
to new technology are
examined, and several changes are proposed:
consolidation of the current fair
dealing provisions in a single provision;
expansion of fair dealing to an
open-ended model that specifically refers to, but is not limited to, the current
exclusive set of
application of the ‘fairness’ factors to all fair dealings.
The Committee makes a number of other recommendations aimed at
simplifying and extending the current fair dealing provisions. They
among other things,
changes to the provisions relating
to external students;
fair dealing for
the purposes of criticism or review, reporting news and giving professional
legal advice.
The chapter discusses the Committee’s
proposal for a new quantitative test and the relationship of both fair dealing
and the new quantitative test to the proposed right of communication
to the public recently announced by the Government.
An example of a prototype provision that could be used to implement the
Committee’s recommendations is also provided.
6.01 Paragraph 1(a) of the Committee’s terms of reference directs it to
report on simplifying the
, paying particular attention
to the exceptions to the exclusive rights comprising copyright. Much of the
present complexity in the
fair dealing provisions and the miscellany of other
provisions and schemes that provide for exceptions to copyright owners’
exclusive rights is due to the fact that they operate on the basis of a
particular technology or in relation to dealings with copyright
materials in a
particular material form. Technological developments will no doubt continue, and
they will probably affect copyright
owners and users in ways that are and will
remain unpredictable.
6.02 When considering simplification of the fair dealing provisions, the
Committee sought to achieve a model that is structurally
simpler than the
existing provisions and is also sufficiently flexible to accommodate the
challenges posed by technological developments.
The particular aspect of the
fair dealing provisions that caused the Committee the greatest difficulty is the
so-called quantitative
test in s. 40(3) of the Act and the associated
definition of a ‘reasonable portion’ in
Application of the existing
test to copyright materials in digital form has proved particularly
6.03 The Committee’s approach was to adapt the existing fair dealing
provisions to give them more general application so that
they can operate
effectively in the digital environment and in response to future technological
developments. As noted in paragraph
1.20, the Committee had regard to the
Government’s recent decision on the ‘Digital Agenda’ copyright
reforms, which
it announced on 30 April 1998. The centrepiece of the reforms is
a new broadly based, technology-neutral right of communication to
the public.
The new right will apply to works made available on the Internet and other
online services, as well as works transmitted
or broadcast to the public. It
will replace and extend the existing technology-specific transmission-type
rights; that is, the broadcast
right and the limited cable diffusion right.
6.04 Most importantly, for the purpose of this report, the Committee notes
the Government’s decision that the fair dealing limitation
should apply to
the new right of communication to the public and the digital environment
generally. In this regard the Committee
notes the Government’s decision
that the quantitative test should apply to literary, dramatic and musical works
form where they have been published in hard-copy form.
6.05 In relation to the quantitative test the Committee considered two
approaches. The first involved an examination of each type
of copyright subject
matter and the formulation of specific exceptions tailored to the particular
subject matter. The second approach—which
acknowledged the difficulties in
quantifying copyright materials in digital form as well as the inherent
limitations of the existing
concept of a ‘reasonable
portion’—was to leave dealings with copyright materials (other than
published literary,
dramatic and musical works, or adaptations of such works, in
printed form) to be determined in accordance with the general fair dealing
principles.
6.06 After careful consideration of the alternatives the Committee reached
the view that the latter approach is the most suitable.
Its strengths are that
it is technology neutral and avoids the use of specific provisions to deal with
specific cases. This should
lead to legislation that is simpler and less likely
to need constant revision to keep pace with technological developments.
6.07 The Committee is strongly of the view that an approach that seeks to
deal with each specific case is undesirable. First, it cannot
be comprehensive
in its coverage because it is not possible to predict new uses to which the
technological developments may give
rise (or how they will affect copyright
owners and users). Second, each new circumstance that needs to be dealt with
simply adds
to the complexity of the legislation. The Committee also considers
that the present quantitative test in s. 40(3) of the Act suffers
limitations that make it unsuitable for application to all copyright materials,
particularly, those in digital form. Once these
limitations are recognised, and
having regard to the Committee’s terms of reference (which direct it to
advise on simplifying
the Act), the only choice is to leave dealings with these
materials to be determined in accordance with the general principles of
6.08 Ultimately, the Committee adopted a model that is concise, sufficiently
flexible to accommodate new uses that may emerge with
future technological
developments, but also contains enough detail to provide valuable guidance to
both copyright owners and users.
The Committee’s model is not limited to
an exclusive set of purposes such as govern the extent of fair dealing as it
applies. The Committee considers that the removal of such a limitation
will provide greater flexibility by allowing courts to determine
the existence
of additional purposes that are regarded as falling within fair dealing. Only
this approach will enable fair dealing
to be adapted to changing technology and,
in particular, will move fair dealing into the digital environment. The
Committee’s
recommended model simplifies the existing plethora of fair
dealing provisions and addresses the real limitations of the current provisions,
which are that they are inflexibly linked to specific purposes and are difficult
to apply to new technologies.
6.09 In reaching its conclusion, the Committee took account of the open-ended
US ‘fair use’ doctrine. The Committee acknowledges
that the US model
has had some influence on the application in Australia of the extended fair
dealing doctrine that it is recommending.
It recognises, however, that the
applicability of the US fair use doctrine is qualified by factors germane to the
United States—for
further discussion, see Appendix C, paragraphs 10 to
13—and would expect Australian courts to develop law appropriate to
conditions. It is reasonable to surmise that with time an Australian
jurisprudence on the scope of the extended fair dealing doctrine
will develop.
6.10 The Committee’s recommendations in this chapter provide a means
for the current fair dealing provisions to be simplified
and extended into the
digital environment. The Committee proposes the following changes:
consolidation of the current fair
dealing provisions—ss. 40, 103C, 41, 103A, 42, 103B and
43(2)—in a single
expansion of fair dealing to
an open-ended model that specifically refers to the current exclusive set of
purposes— research
or study (ss. 40 and 103C), criticism or review
(ss. 41 and 103A), reporting news (ss. 42 and 103B) and professional
advice (s. 43(2))—but
is not confined to those purposes;
general application of the
non-exclusive set of factors provided for in s. 40(2) to all fair dealings.
The result of these three changes is to introduce a provision
akin to but more precise than the open-ended US ‘fair use’
(s. 107 of the US
The Committee further proposes the following:
creation of a new quantitative test
based on s. 40(3) of the Australian Act. As a result of the
Committee’s recommendations,
the new test
be specifically limited in
operation to published literary, dramatic and musical works or adaptations of
such works in printed form,
exhaustively through reference to a ‘prescribed portion’ that
reflects the limits currently described in relation
to a ‘reasonable
portion’ (s. 10(2)),
applied to all dealings for the purpose of research or study rather than
dealings by way of copying only (not supported by one
member of the
Committee),
be inserted in the Act as a
stand-alone provision separate from the new fair dealing
operate as a simple deemed
exception notwithstanding the factors described in s. 40(2)—as is
also the current position in relation
application of the
‘fairness’ requirements (s. 40(2)) to acts done for the purpose
of professional legal advice in relation
to subject matter other than works
through the absorption of ss. 104(b) and 104(c) into the fair dealing
removal of the fair dealing
provisions that apply specifically to external students (ss. 40(1A) and
removal of the provisions that
require sufficient acknowledgment in relation to fair dealings for the purpose
of reporting news (ss.
42(1)(a) and 103B(1)(a)) on the basis that the
proposed moral rights provisions will require such acknowledgment.
6.11 Paragraphs 6.143 and 6.144 describe an example of a
prototype provision that could be used to implement these changes.
Justification
6.12 The Committee considers it appropriate to extend the current fair
dealing provisions into the new digital environment. It is
attracted to the
recommended approach for the following reasons.
It continues to build on existing
jurisprudence that has developed around the current fair dealing
provisions.
It is consistent with
Australia’s current international obligations and with the spirit of the
yet-to-be-adopted WCT
It strikes a fair balance between
the competing interests of copyright owners and users and describes the limits
to copyright owners’
rights in a manner that maximises the public
It simplifies the Act.
It is not limited to an exclusive set
of purposes and therefore offers greater flexibility in allowing courts to
determine new circumstances
to which fair dealing can apply in response to
changing technology.
It provides
greater certainty in the determination of ‘fairness’ through the
general application of the non-exclusive
set of considerations (under
s. 40(2)) to all fair dealings.
preserves the valuable guidance provided by the quantitative test under
s. 40(3) through a new test expressly confined to dealings
for the purpose
of research or study of published literary, dramatic or musical works, or
adaptations of such works, in printed
on existing jurisprudence
6.13 An advantage of the recommended approach is that it does not abandon the
case law that has developed in relation to fair dealing.
The Committee considers
this will provide a solid basis on which the recommended fair dealing provision
can be interpreted and will
allow for greater certainty in the application of
the new provision.
International
obligations
6.14 The Committee considers its recommended approach is consistent with
art. 9(2) of the Berne Convention
art. 13 of TRIPS
Australia’s
other international obligations (see Appendix B). The
Committee also considers that, although the new fair dealing model is not
to an exclusive set of purposes, the model’s application is still
confined to
certain special cases
do not conflict with the normal
exploitation of the work
do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate
interests of the right holder
view is supported by the fact that the similar US ‘fair use’
provision, which also is not limited to an exclusive
set of purposes, has not
been challenged by member countries of the Convention.
6.15 In the Committee’s view the recommended approach is in the spirit
of art. 10 of the yet-to-be-adopted WCT. Article 10 was
agreed to on the
basis of an understanding that
... the provisions of Article 10 permit Contracting Parties to carry forward
and appropriately extend into the digital environment
limitations and exceptions
in their national laws which have been considered acceptable under the Berne
Convention. Similarly, these
provisions should be understood to permit
Contracting Parties to devise new exceptions and limitations that are
appropriate in the
digital network
environment.
The Committee considers that the recommended new fair dealing model is one
such appropriate extension into the digital environment.
public interest
6.16 The prescription of fair dealing involves the broad balancing of
competing goals so as to maximise the public interest. Among
those competing
goals are rewarding creators, increasing investment by copyright industries, and
maintaining access to copyright
Although the public interest is an elusive concept and one on which agreement is
virtually impossible, the Committee considers that
a fundamental component of
maximising the public interest is allowing the free flow of knowledge, ideas and
information. As Sir Anthony
Mason, former Chief Justice of the High Court of
Australia, stated, such a free flow of information is vital to the political,
intellectual,
economic and social life, as well as the education, of all
Australians.
The Committee recognises,
however, that even where copying is being carried out in pursuit of a socially
desirable objective, it
does not follow that it should be permitted if it would
unreasonably prejudice the economic rights or other legitimate interests
6.17 In order to maximise the public interest, the Committee (with the
exception of one member) concluded that fair dealing should
not be limited in
its application to copyright material in ‘traditional’ forms. Such a
limitation would prevent the users
of copyright material taking full advantage
of developments in digital technology and would constrain the free flow of
information.
This majority approach is also consistent with the view stated at
the outset of the negotiations that led to the Berne Convention—that
‘limits to absolute protection are rightly set by the public
6.18 The Committee is aware that digital technology has the potential for
allowing copyright owners, through their respective collecting
societies, to
monitor and license the individual uses of copyright material in a way that was
not previously possible. It also is
aware that this has created new markets for
the use of copyright materials, both whole and in part.
6.19 The Committee majority does not consider, however, that this new
capacity to monitor and license uses of copyright materials
justifies a
limitation on the application of fair dealing so as not to apply to copyright
material in the digital environment. On
the contrary, the majority believes that
the fair dealing provisions are needed to ensure the free use of copyright
material in the
digital environment for purposes that are socially desirable,
especially given that digital technology has the potential to restrict
so as to enforce voluntary licensing agreements.
6.20 Changes in technology have led the Copyright Agency Limited (CAL) to
argue that copying that took place under the fair dealing
provisions and that
was previously regarded by rights holders and users as a subsidiary use is
now—through the advent of paper-based
reproduction and, more recently,
digital reproduction and dissemination of substantial portions of
works—perceived by authors
and publishers as a main
(Appendix D provides an analysis
of the submissions the Committee received on the question of fair dealing.) The
Committee considers
that this matter has been partly dealt with through the
introduction of statutory licence schemes (such as the scheme under Part
the Act, which was introduced in response to photocopying). Such schemes may
restrict the operation of fair dealing where there
is a potential overlap
between a statutory licence and a fair dealing limitation in relation to the
activity covered.
The extension of
statutory licence schemes to include digital reproduction and electronic
distribution would presumably have a similar
effect on the operation of fair
6.21 CAL argued that any digital copying, if allowed to take place without
remuneration, will substantially adversely affect the markets,
or potential
markets, of copyright owners.
It suggested
that a solution to the problems generated by changes in technology, which would
ensure fair remuneration, would be to
replace the fair dealing provisions
with voluntary licences. It argued further that if voluntary licences are not
used a statutory
licence scheme similar to that set out in Part VB of the Act
should be implemented. Finally, CAL submitted that if neither voluntary
statutory licences are used an alternative is the imposition of a levy on
copying equipment such as photocopiers, scanners and
personal computers.
6.22 With the exception of one member, the Committee rejects CAL’s
submission for a scheme of remuneration to replace the free
use of copyright
material under the fair dealing provisions. Although the Committee recognises
that the existence of a statutory
licence may affect the operation of fair
dealing, the majority of the Committee does not agree that such schemes should
be expanded
so as to substitute for fair dealing. The majority considers that
the replacement of fair dealing with remuneratory use would clearly
6.23 The Committee majority notes and agrees with the counter-argument put
forward by the Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee that
the basis for the fair
dealing principle is unaltered by the technology applying to the form of the
expression that is the object
protection.
Submissions from publishers
assert that in the digital environment all possible uses of copyright materials,
including the use of
short extracts, will potentially be the subject of
commercial exploitation and for this reason the scope of fair dealing should be
constrained
—this view is also
supported by the Committee member in the minority. The majority of the Committee
agrees in principle, however,
with the submission by the Australian Council of
Library and Information Services, which stated that in the interests of all
Australians
it is essential that a market in words and sentences, as seems to be
advocated by some copyright owner representatives, be avoided
and that the use
of short extracts be considered fair.
Committee notes, though, that uses of such extracts as are a substantial part of
the copyright material would have to fall within
fair dealing before they were
an exception to copyright.
6.24 The Committee notes CAL’s argument that a position often put
forward to justify the fair dealing provisions is that it
is impossible to
monitor or collect remuneration for copying and that because of changes in
technology this justification no longer
applies. In support of this argument,
CAL makes reference to the Franki report, which stated in relation to
photocopying under the
fair dealing provisions, ‘... we consider there are
insuperable practical difficulties in obtaining permission from, and in
remuneration to, the copyright owners in these
circumstances.’
Importantly, however,
CAL failed to acknowledge that this statement was qualified by the sentence that
immediately precedes it:
... we are satisfied that
as a matter of principle
a measure of
photocopying should be permitted without remuneration, for purposes such as
private study, to an extent which at least
falls within the present limits of
‘fair dealing’.
The majority of the Committee agrees with the Franki Committee on this
6.25 The Committee also notes comments made by the US Working Group on
Intellectual Property Rights in its 1995 report
Intellectual Property and the
National Information Infrastructure
(the US White Paper). The Working Group
considered that the development of technological measures for tracking the use
of copyright
materials might lead to a reduced scope for the application of fair
use principles.
6.26 This approach differs from to that taken by the majority of the
Committee. As stated in paragraphs 6.18 and 6.19, the Committee
considers that
the technological means of monitoring and licensing (except in the instance of
statutory licensing) should not have
an impact on application of the fair
dealing provisions. The Committee majority notes that the Working Group appears
to take a position
that leans towards striking the balance in favour of
relation to the application of fair use to the National Information
Infrastructure, ‘The Working Group rejects the notion that
owners should be taxed—apart from all others—to facilitate the
legitimate goal of “universal
6.27 In this regard the Committee agrees with Kurtz, who stated that there is
no ‘tax’ in issue and copyright owners have
never been entitled to
an unlimited scope of rent
The Working Group’s
comment also seems to be at odds with the understanding of the international
community, as reflected in
the relevant copyright conventions. The preamble to
the 1996 WCT sets out the international community’s recognition of the
need to ‘... maintain a balance between the rights of authors and the
larger public interest, particularly education, research
and access to
information, as reflected in the Berne Convention ...’
Simplification
6.28 In developing its new model for simplified fair dealing provisions, the
Committee was mindful of its terms of reference, which
direct the Committee to
report on simplifying the Act but do not give it a mandate to undertake a
wholesale review of the Act or
recommend significant changes to the policy
underpinning the law as it currently stands. In simplifying the Act, however,
the Committee
necessarily had to take account of a broad range of policy
considerations. It also had to have regard to the challenges posed by
development of digital technology. In doing so, the Committee sought to
preserve, as appropriate, the policy reflected in the
fair dealing provisions.
Accordingly, in formulating its revisions to the fair dealing provisions, it
sought to simplify the existing
framework and expression, maintain and
accommodate special policy considerations and, at the most basic level, ensure
that the provisions
continue to operate to balance the legitimate interests of
both creators and users of copyright materials.
Recommendation
6.29 The Committee recommends that the fair dealing provisions of the
be simplified by:
consolidating the current fair
dealing provisions
single section;
absorbing the
provisions relating to acts done for the purpose of professional advice in
relation to subject matter other than works
(ss. 104(b)
(c)) within
fair dealing;
removing the fair dealing
provisions that specifically apply to external students
(ss. 40(1A)
removing the provisions that
require sufficient acknowledgment in relation to fair dealings for the purpose
of reporting news
(ss. 42(1)(a)
adopting a modified
quantitative test
(s. 40(3)).
6.30 There was discussion about whether or not the details of the provisions
relating to fair dealing should be placed in the regulations
to the Act.
Although there was some support for this approach, the Committee considers that
access to the legal principles described
in the fair dealing provisions would
not be improved by requiring reference to both the Act and the regulations.
Recommendation
6.31 The Committee recommends that the proposed fair dealing provision, and
the details of the modified quantitative test, remain
in the Act.
6.32 The recommendation in paragraph 6.31 reflects the important role
that the Committee considers fair dealing plays within our system
of copyright.
This would not be recognised by placing the fair dealing provision, or its
detail, in subordinate legislation. The
Committee’s approach implements
the task described in paragraph 1(a) of its terms of reference in that it is
more likely that
users and owners of copyright material will be able to
understand the operation of fair dealing if they need to refer to only one
legislative instrument.
flexibility
6.33 The recommended model is not limited to an exclusive set of purposes
such as are regarded as currently falling within fair dealing.
Committee’s view the removal of such a limitation will provide greater
flexibility by allowing courts to determine the
existence of additional purposes
that are regarded as falling within fair dealing. The Committee considers that
this approach will
enable fair dealing to be adapted by the courts to changing
technology and will move the application of fair dealing into the digital
environment. The recommended approach would therefore answer the criticism that
the current fair dealing provisions are inflexibly
linked to specific purposes
and are difficult to apply to new
technologies.
6.34 The Committee notes that the adoption of an open ‘fair use’
approach was generally supported by copyright users and
criticised by copyright
owners. Although its recommendation would take the Act in the direction of the
US ‘fair use’
doctrine, by preserving the existing elements of fair
dealing it would still be a more precise and recognisable concept than
Recommendation
6.35 The Committee recommends the expansion of fair dealing to an
open-ended model that specifically refers to the current exclusive
purposes—such as research or study (ss. 40 and 103C), criticism or
review (ss. 41 and 103A), reporting news (ss. 42
and 103B) and
professional advice (s. 43(2))—but is not confined to those
application of considerations determining ‘fairness’
6.36 Under the Committee’s recommended model, the non-exclusive set of
factors that are currently considered in relation to
‘a dealing by way of
copying’ with a work for the purpose of research or study (s. 40(2)
of the Act) would be applied
generally to all fair dealings. The Committee notes
that this should not make a major change to the current operation of fair
since these factors have been derived primarily from the case law and
already apply broadly to all fair dealings
(see also paragraph 4.09). The Committee considers, however, that explicit
application of the factors described under s. 40(2) to
all fair dealings
will provide greater predictability in the determination of fairness, through
the provision of a non-exhaustive
set of considerations to which reference must
6.37 The Committee understands that the factors in both the US fair use and
Australian fair dealing provisions were introduced to
provide guidance to the
courts in their analysis of ‘fairness’. They were not designed to
provide a comprehensive framework
from which the fairness of a dealing could be
mechanically determined. On this point the Franki Committee stated,
... there are so many factors which have to be considered in deciding whether
a particular instance of copying is ‘fair dealing’,
that we think it
is quite impracticable to attempt to remove entirely from the Court the duty of
deciding the question whether or
not a particular instance constitutes
‘fair dealing’.
6.38 The Copyright Law Review Committee agrees with the Franki Committee on
this point. It also agrees with the comments made in the
US White Paper, where
it is stated that when applying fair dealing to the National Information
Infrastructure, the ‘... courts
will have to engage in the same type of
fact-intensive analysis which typifies fair use litigation and frustrates those
“bright lines” clearly separating the lawful from the
6.39 The US White paper also makes another important point:
The inability of our common law system to provide guidance covering every
possible permutation of behaviour is not necessarily a weakness.
By permitting
courts to reach decisions on a case-by-case basis, our system permits both
necessary gap-filling and jurisprudential
evolution without requiring repeated
pleas to Congress for additional
elaboration.
6.40 The Committee is at odds with the statement, made in relation to the
four factors of s. 107 of the US
, that ‘The
demonstrates the almost
infinite elasticity of each of the four factors and their concomitant inability
to resolve difficult
questions.’
6.41 It considers that the statement does not recognise the true nature of
fair use (and fair dealing) in that it is designed to be
flexible and cannot be
rigidly crystallised into a set of common law principles or a statutory
instrument. The Committee’s
understanding reflects the comments of Lord
Denning, when he said, among other things, ‘It is impossible to define
‘fair dealing’. It must be a question of
degree ...’
6.42 The Committee disagrees with the submissions of some broadcasters that
the introduction of such factors would be more likely
to increase the level of
confusion, by disturbing reasonably well established judicial principles. As
stated, the Committee considers
that the general application of the factors to
all fair dealings will provide greater predicability in the determination of
Further, the Committee considers that, rather than disturbing the
judicial principles, the proposed model will provide further statutory
recognition of them.
6.43 CAL submitted that the consideration of whether or not a dealing with a
work is for the purpose of including the work in an electronic
be specifically included as a factor in the determination of the
‘fairness’ of a dealing. Although the
Committee regards this factor
as important, it does not consider it necessary to include it as an additional
factor. To proceed down
this path would return the Act to the particularity for
which it has been justly criticised: the Committee’s recommendations
intended to overcome this deficiency. Rather, the Committee’s view is that
its consideration should fall either within
the currently specified factors,
such as ‘the purpose and character of the dealing’
(s. 40(2)(a)) and ‘the effect
of the dealing on the potential market
for, or value of, the copyright material’ (modified s. 40(2)(d)), or
within the court’s
residual discretion to take into account any other
relevant matter (that discretion arising by virtue of the non-exhaustive nature
of the specified factors).
Recommendation
6.44 The Committee recommends that the non-exclusive set of factors that
are currently considered in relation to ‘a dealing
copying’ with a work for the purpose of research or study (s. 40(2))
be applied generally to all fair dealings.
quantitative test
6.45 The current quantitative test (under s. 40(3) of the Act) applies
to dealings ‘by way of copying’ with published
literary, dramatic
and musical works for the purpose of research or study. It provides valuable
guidance in relation to the copying
of such works in printed form. As noted in
paragraph 4.12, the current test is open-ended: the definition of
‘reasonable portion’
(under s. 10(2)) to which the test refers
is not exhaustive.
6.46 As mentioned in paragraph 6.04, the Government has announced its
intention that the quantitative test be applied to literary,
dramatic and
musical works in digital form where they have been published in hard-copy form.
The Committee understands that a ‘reasonable
portion’ of the work in
digital form is to be determined by reference to the corresponding published
hard copy. Where a hard
copy is not ‘conveniently available’ the
user may copy a ‘reasonable portion’ of the digital work by running
a word count to determine what is 10 per cent of the work.
6.47 The Committee notes the submissions from various copyright users that
the quantitative test should be extended to all copyright
material, including
material in digital form. Particularly strong advocates of such an approach are
libraries and educational institutions,
which recognise the administrative
benefit that would be gained if the test were to be extended. In contrast,
interest groups representing
it currently stands and are therefore opposed to any extension of the test to
forms of copyright material and to formats other than print.
6.48 The Committee is not opposed in principle to extension of the
quantitative test to materials in digital form if this can be achieved
manner consistent with its terms of reference. The Committee gave detailed
consideration to how the present quantitative test
might be extended to the
digital environment. It recognised the value to users of there being an
ascertainable portion of a work
that might be copied without infringing
digital environment
a quantitative test could not work outside the print medium.
The reasons for this are set out in paragraphs 6.53 to 6.66.
6.49 The Government’s proposal appears to reflect the Comittee’s
conclusion. In effect, the proposal is a pragmatic attempt
to extend fair
dealing to works in digital form, in a manner that seeks to avoid the
difficulties inherent in this approach. This
has been done by limiting
permissible fair dealing to only those cases where reference can be had to a
published hard-copy version
of the work. The Committee understands that this
limitation has a further purpose, which is to prevent the quantitative test from
applying to digital databases that have not been published in hard-copy
6.50 Before turning to an analysis of the quantitative test’s
application to the digital environment, it is helpful to look
more closely at
the present form and effect of s. 40(3), which seeks to quantify, in
respect of literary, dramatic and musical works,
dealings that are
to be fair. Significantly, the scope of this provision is quite narrow. It
provides for dealings with works or adaptations, other
than those that comprise
an article in a periodical publication, to be fair only if the copying is of no
more than a ‘reasonable
portion’. A ‘reasonable portion’
is in turn defined in s. 10(2).
definition of ‘reasonable portion’ applies only to published
editions of literary, dramatic and musical works and
refers to various
quantities. The quantities used are ‘an edition of not less than 10
pages’, ‘10% of the pages
in that edition’ and ‘the
whole or part of a single chapter of the work’.
6.51 Unlike the limitations inherent in the quantitative test, fair dealing
permitted under s. 40(2) provides a much more adaptable
Section 40(2)(e) requires a fair dealing to be judged having regard to
‘the amount and substantiality of the part
copied taken in relation to the
whole work or adaptation’. This test is far more flexible in that it
requires a user and, in
the case of a dispute, the court, to weigh up not only
the quantity but also the quality of the material copied in determining whether
the dealing is fair. In contrast with the situation under s. 40(3), both
factors are considered together. The quantity alone of the
used is not determinative; indeed, the quantity cannot be specified if the
factor for consideration under s. 40(2)
is to work and have broad
application.
6.52 It is important to note that, where a dealing by way of copying with a
published literary, dramatic or musical work for the purpose
of research or
study falls outside the scope of the quantitative test, the dealing may still be
regarded as a fair dealing when assessed
against the non-exclusive factors set
out in s. 40(2).
associated with extension of the quantitative test
6.53 The Committee found that the nature of the copyright materials not
currently within the scope of s. 40(3) and the characteristics
current digital environment do not allow for the establishment of an extended
quantitative test that is simple and workable
and provides an appropriate level
of guidance and certainty. The Committee notes that the users of copyright
materials themselves
acknowledge the difficulty of applying the guidelines to
the digital environment.
6.54 The Committee identified the following problems in relation to extension
of the quantitative test:
an absence of discrete units of
measurement with which to apply a quantitative test to material in digital form;
the large numbers of separate
a lack of distinction that often
exists between different copyright works in digital
the difficulty of applying of any
quantitative test to subject matter other than published literary, musical or
dramatic works.
of measurement
6.55 As the test currently applies to published literary, dramatic and
musical works in printed form, a convenient unit of measurement
existed: the printed page. In the electronic environment, however, a similar
unit of measurement is difficult to define.
The traditional ways in which
information has been organised, such as pages, chapters, articles and books, are
in most cases irrelevant.
A new structure has evolved where information is
organised through files, folders, web pages, web sites and databases, and this
does not readily lend itself to a uniform unit of measurement
available to a user.
6.56 The Committee considered a number of different units for the measurement
of a literary, musical or dramatic work in electronic
form. It examined the use
of words, the size (as measured, for example, in bytes) of the file (or files)
used to store the work,
the time to download the file (or files) used to the
store the work, and the number of standard-sized pages of standard-sized text
used to describe the work as displayed by a computer. The Committee found that
reference to these entities could not provide an appropriate
measurement.
6.57 For example, the Committee found the use of words as a unit of
measurement to be problematic. First, musical works are not described
Second, much electronic information, such as low-level programming code and the
data associated with a computer program,
is not expressed in words. Third, there
are technological limitations relating to current software: Internet browsers
such as Internet
Explorer and Netscape, which are commonly used to access
it seem that they are likely to incorporate such a facility. The Committee
acknowledges that it would be possible, in some cases,
for text-based works to
be downloaded by a user and for a word count to be performed using another
application program (such as a
word-processing package). It notes, however, that
to download (reproduce) an entire work for the purpose of conducting a word
may not itself be a fair dealing.
6.58 In relation to the use of the size of a file used to store the work, the
Committee encountered two problems. First, the user
would need to have some
means of knowing the total size of the file that contained the work as well as
the size of the portion intended
for reproduction. Second, the size of the file
may not be directly proportional to the useful information contained within the
especially where the work consists of a number of different data types
(for example, where the work consists of text in which there
are embedded
digital images
6.59 Similar problems were identified when the Committee examined the time to
download a file used to store the work as a unit of
measurement. First, the user
would have to have some means of knowing the total time taken to download the
file that contained the
work and the time to download the material they wished
to reproduce. Second, the time to download a file is generally related to
size of the file; thus, the time to download the file may not be directly
proportional to the useful information contained within
the file, for the
reasons just explained. Further, the speed of data transfer across the period
taken to download a file could fluctuate
dramatically according to network
traffic. Finally, the time to download a file may not be a relevant
consideration as technology
improves and the downloading of information becomes
virtually instantaneous.
6.60 The Committee also encountered problems when considering a unit of
measurement based on the number of standard-sized pages of
standard-sized text
used to describe the work as displayed by a computer. The main problem was that
the test involved an estimation
of the total number of pages in the work and the
total number of pages in the portion intended for reproduction. The Committee
that this may not be a problem in relation to some software (used to
display, for example, literary works) such as word-processing
applications,
which provide the user with information on the number of pages in a digital
work. The Committee understands, however,
that different software applications
do paginate identical materials differently. The Committee also notes that the
most common language
currently used to display information on the Internet
(HTML, or hypertext mark-up language) does not divide the information displayed
into standard-sized pages but divides it into ‘web pages’ of
variable sizes.
6.61 Another problem that arises when applying the quantitative test to
large electronic
quantities (millions) of separate copyright
materials in digital form. Such
they possess a sufficient
degree of originality, in addition to satisfying the
other requirements of the Act.
6.62 Given therefore that an electronic database may contain millions of
separate items of copyright material and that a whole database
can itself be
classified as a literary work, a problem exists if the quantitative test is
applied to a database in the same way as
it would be applied to any other
literary work. Taken in the extreme, the application of the quantitative test to
a database would
include hundreds of thousands of separate copyright items
(10 per cent of a large database) incorporated in the database. The
notes that reproduction of such items would be possible only if the
test inoperative.
of distinction between works
6.63 A further problem concerns the lack of distinction that often exists
between separate works in digital form. For example, a single
web page may
contain a number of embedded works created by separate authors. The problem that
therefore arises is identifying what
should be regarded as the
‘work’ for the purpose of applying the quantitative test beyond its
current field of operation
under s. 40(3).
Application
to subject matter other than published literary, musical or dramatic
6.64 Finally, a problem exists in the general application of the quantitative
test to artistic works, sound recordings, cinematograph
films and broadcasts.
For example, application of a meaningful test to a non-linear cinematograph film
such as a computer game
, a multimedia
work, an artistic work, or a continuous broadcast would be very difficult. The
Committee considers that the level of
guidance and certainty found under the
current quantitative test could never be achieved in relation to such subject
6.65 The Committee notes the Government’s decision that the
quantitative test should be applied to literary, dramatic and musical
digital form where they have been published in hard-copy form (see paragraph
6.46). The Committee acknowledges the desirability
and clear public benefit of
an extension of the quantitative test to literary, dramatic and musical works in
digital format. On the
basis of the evidence, submissions and information
available to it, however, the Committee is unable to conclude that it is
practicable
to apply the test to works in digital form.
Recommendation
6.66 The Committee recommends that its analysis be taken into account in
the next stage of the Government’s consideration of
the Digital
test—‘prescribed portion’
6.67 As noted in paragraph 6.50, the current application of the quantitative
test is that of a simple deeming provision, providing
that a dealing that falls
within the parameters of s. 40(3) of the Act shall be taken to be a
‘fair dealing’. In the
Committee’s view it is important to
recognise that s. 40(3) and the definition in s. 10(2) operate
independently of the criteria
of fairness in s. 40(2). Section 40(3)
represents a pragmatic approach to dealing with the copying of a limited class
of materials
in limited circumstances. The provision is a legislative compromise
between the convenience of simple certainty and the need to avoid
prejudice to the legitimate interests of copyright owners in the limited
circumstances of the provision’s operation.
Indeed, it is the limited
circumstances of its operation—namely, research and study in combination
with a specified quantity—that,
in the Committee’s view, provide the
necessary elements for the provision’s operation to be considered fair.
Nonetheless,
the Committee strongly believes that it would be incorrect to
maintain the specific compromise effected by s. 40(3) within the proposed
open-ended fair dealing model because, as mentioned, s. 40(3) does not
require consideration of the fairness criteria in s. 40(2).
Recommendations
6.68 The Committee recommends that the quantitative test, and the concept
of a ‘reasonable portion’, as it is currently
called, be treated
separately from the concept of a ‘fair dealing’ since there is no
requirement for recourse to the
criteria of ‘fairness’. The
Committee therefore
the structure of the new fair
dealing provision reflect this distinction and that the quantitative test be
removed from ‘fair
dealing’ and drafted as a separate stand-alone
provision on permitted free copying;
‘reasonable portion’ be renamed a ‘prescribed portion’,
to distinguish it more clearly from the general
principle of fair
6.69 Additionally, the Committee recommends that the
provision just described expressly prohibit the serial copying of
10 per cent
6.70 As noted in paragraph 6.48, the Committee considered how the existing
concept of a ‘reasonable portion’ might be
extended to the digital
environment. It found that it was not possible to develop a test of broad
application in a manner consistent
with its terms of reference to advise on the
simplification of the Act. It is clear, however, that in the limited area where
present definition of a ‘reasonable portion’ operates it serves
a useful purpose.
Recommendations
6.71 In the light of the inherent difficulties that exist in the extension
of the quantitative test to all subject matter, including
material in the
digital environment, the Committee recommends that the operation of the
quantitative test be defined exhaustively
and be specifically limited to
published literary, dramatic and musical works in printed form.
6.72 The Committee therefore recommends the insertion of the word
‘printed’ before the terms ‘periodical publication’
‘published edition’ (see the discussion of the definition of
‘prescribed portion’ in paragraph 6.145).
6.73 The Committee recognises that the current quantitative test provides
valuable assistance to, and is regularly relied on by, copyright
Appendix D, paragraph 13). It notes that the recommended changes are not
designed in any way to limit the operation of
the current test as it applies to
published literary, dramatic and musical works in printed form.
6.74 The Committee considers that insertion of the word
‘printed’, as described in paragraph 6.72, would remove the
possibility
of an argument being raised that the term ‘periodical
publication’ or the term ‘published edition’, might
to include some literary, dramatic and musical works in digital form. Despite
the terms of s. 88, dealing with the nature
of copyright in published
editions of works, such an argument appears to be possible given the broad
wording of s. 92, dealing with
published editions of works in which
of a literary, dramatic
or musical work.
6.75 The Committee is of the view that the scope of application of the
quantitative test should be defined exhaustively so as to avoid
the possibility
of judicial interpretation extending the test beyond published literary,
dramatic and musical works in printed form.
If that were done, reference to a
‘reasonable portion’ would no longer be appropriate since under the
proposed test a
court should not have the discretion to determine what was
‘reasonable’. Any copying or other use that fell outside the
and that is argued to be a fair dealing would be assessed by reference to the
factors (modified s. 40(2)) used in the determination
‘fairness’.
6.76 The Committee notes that the term ‘reasonable portion’, as
defined in s. 10(2), is also referred to in other provisions,
copying by libraries and archives for users (s. 49(5)(b)), copying by
libraries and archives for other libraries or archives
(s. 50(7A)(b)(ii)),
and multiple copying of works by educational institutions (s. 135ZL(2)).
Paragraphs 7.73 to 7.82 and 7.96 to
7.99 provide further discussion of the
term ‘reasonable portion’ as it applies to copying by libraries and
Application
of the modified quantitative test to all dealings
Recommendations
6.77 With the exception of two members, the Committee recommends that the
current limitation on the application of the quantitative
test to a dealing
‘by way of copying’ be removed, thereby allowing the quantitative
test to apply to
all dealings
with printed published literary, dramatic
or musical works, or adaptations of such works, for the purpose of research or
6.78 In dissenting from the foregoing recommendation one Committee member
recommends the extension of the quantitative test to all
dealings except those
that involve the reproduction of copyright material from hard-copy form to
digital form. The other dissenting
Committee member recommends that the
quantitative test remain limited to dealings ‘by way of
6.79 In making the recommendation in paragraph 6.77, the Committee (with the
exception of one member) acknowledges that the proposed
test would have only
limited application to some of the exclusive rights, such as publication and
public performance, because of
the requirement that the dealing be for
‘research or study’.
6.80 The Committee notes the Government’s recent decision to implement
a broadly based, technology-neutral right of communication
to the public as a
result of its consideration of the proposals contained in the WCT and the WPPT.
With the exception of one member,
the Committee considers that extension of the
quantitative test to this new right would not unreasonably prejudice the
interests of copyright owners. It also considers that such an
approach is necessary to ensure effective use of new technology, including
sending of material over electronic communication networks such as the Internet.
6.81 With the exception of two members, the Committee considers that the
modified quantitative test should permit the scanning of
an article in a printed
periodical publication, or a ‘prescribed portion’, into digital form
and its subsequent transmission
to another person in the course of research or
study. To come within the exception, the transmission must be for the purpose of
or study by the person making the transmission. For instance, such a
dealing may arise when a researcher, for their own purpose of
research or study,
scans a printed chapter from a published book (being a ‘prescribed
portion’) and transmits it to colleagues
to discuss a theory expressed in
the chapter. Such a dealing would otherwise be an infringement of the copyright
owner’s right
of reproduction in the literary work, in addition to an
infringement of the proposed right of communication to the public (once such
right is introduced), unless it constituted a ‘fair dealing’ under
the proposed fair dealing model (see paragraph 6.143).
Unlike the new
quantitative test, the test currently in s. 40(3) is limited to instances
where a printed work is being ‘copied’.
For this reason it does not
apply in relation to other dealings.
6.82 Further, the majority of the Committee notes that a consequence of the
recommendation in paragraph 6.77 (that the quantitative
test apply to all
dealings) is that the proposed test would allow for the scanning of an article
in a printed periodical publication,
or a ‘prescribed portion’, into
digital form and the subsequent placing of that material in a database to be
made available
to specific users. To come within this exception, such a dealing
with the copyright material must be for the research or study purpose
person making the material available
For instance, such a dealing may
arise if a student, for the purpose of their own research or study, scans an
article in a printed
periodical publication and places it on a web site in
order to conduct a survey on a particular matter expressed in the article.
Again, such an activity would otherwise be an infringement of the copyright
owner’s right of reproduction and the Government’s
proposed right of
communication to the public, unless it constituted a ‘fair dealing’
under the proposed fair dealing
model (see paragraph 6.143).
6.83 The Committee notes that the majority recommendation is at odds with the
arguments raised by organisations representing copyright
owners. The Australian
non-digitised material must be
done with the permission of the copyright owner.
It argued that the creation of electronic databases without permission or
or both, was likely to conflict with the normal exploitation of the
work or at least prejudice the legitimate interests of the copyright
The ACC argued further for the
confinement of the quantitative test to dealings by way of copying when it
submitted that the term
‘copy’ should be interpreted as meaning a
limited subset of acts involving reproduction. It proposed that the term
did not include the creation, duplication or printing of
materials in digital form.
6.84 The exact distinction between the terms ‘copying’ and
‘reproduction’, as used in the Act, is unclear.
The Act does not
provide any real assistance other than suggesting under s. 10(1) that an
‘infringing copy’ of a work
means a reproduction of the
Professor Ricketson states that,
whilst it is clear that ‘reproducing’ a work means
‘copying’ it, the former
term is more neutral and potentially
In the case of
(Football) Ltd v William Hill (Football) Ltd,
Lord Reid (whilst analysing
the terms from a slightly different perspective) held that reproduction meant
More recently, in the case of
Skybase Nominees Pty Ltd and Another v Fortuity Pty Ltd,
Justice Hill
appeared to use the term ‘copied’ as a synonym for
‘reproduced’.
6.85 The precise scope of the terms ‘reproduction’ and
‘copying’ would, in relation to the application of
a quantitative
test, become an academic question if the test were to be expanded to include all
dealings. The Committee notes that
the exercise of the right of reproduction
under the new quantitative test should also include reproductions as specified
21 of the Act.
Recommendation
6.86 If the recommendation to apply the quantitative test to all dealings
is not adopted, the Committee (with the exception of the
two dissenting members)
recommends that the term ‘reproduction’ be used instead of the term
‘copying’, so
as to ensure application of the test to the widest
possible range of reproductions.
Application
of fair dealing to all exclusive rights
Recommendations
6.87 With the exception of one member, the Committee recommends that the
proposed fair dealing model apply to all exclusive rights
subsisting in
therefore recommends that the new fair dealing
model apply to the
Government’s proposed broadly based, technology-neutral right of
communication to the public, if the new
right is enacted.
6.88 The dissenting Committee member recommends that the proposed fair
dealing provision apply to all dealings except the electronic
reproduction,
transmission and making available on the Internet and other online services of
6.89 The majority of the Committee is of the view that such an approach is
consistent with Australia’s international obligations
yet-to-be-adopted WCT and WPPT.
6.90 The majority of the Committee considers that application of fair dealing
to the proposed rights is necessary if fair dealing
is to be effective in the
digital environment. For example, a fair dealing for the purpose of reporting
the news should be capable
of applying to copyright material that has been
incorporated in an ‘electronic newspaper article’ that has been made
available on the Internet. Such a dealing would otherwise be an infringement of
the proposed copyright owner’s right of communication
to the public, which
will apply to works made available on the Internet and other online services. A
fair dealing for the purpose
of criticism or review should apply to extracts of
a recently published work that has been incorporated in an electronic article
and transmitted to the public via an electronic network. Such a dealing would
again otherwise infringe the copyright owner’s
proposed right of
communication to the public, which includes the transmission of works to the
6.91 The Committee majority therefore rejects CAL’s submission that
fair dealing should not be applicable as an exception to
any proposed right of
communication to the public or to the proposed transmission
Recommendation
6.92 With the exception of one member, the Committee reaffirms its
recommendation in its 1995
Computer Software Protection
report that
electrocopying not be excluded from applying to dealings for the purpose of
research or study.
6.93 The Committee notes that the fact that a dealing results in the use of a
work in digital form could be raised as a consideration
weighing against
regarding the dealing as fair. It recognises the greater potential for access
to, and therefore the value of, copyright
material held in digital form,
especially if such material is accessible via an electronic network. The fact
that the copyright material
has been transmitted to the public or made digitally
available would be specifically relevant to considerations such as the purpose
and character of the dealing and the effect of the dealing on the potential
market for the copyright material. The majority of the
acknowledges, however, that such dealing is capable of being considered fair, as
in the example provided in paragraph 6.90.
conducting dealings on behalf of others
6.94 The ability of a person to conduct a fair dealing on behalf of another
is not specifically dealt with in the Act. The closest
the Act comes to dealing
with this issue is in the provision of the exceptions relating to the copying of
of a library on behalf of users who require the
copy for the purpose of research or study (see paragraph 7.52). It must be noted
that such dealings fall only within the specific exceptions for libraries and
are not generally regarded as fair dealings. The Act
does not, however,
expressly limit librarians to copying under these library-specific exceptions.
The Committee notes the
case, which held that the relevant
purpose when determining whether a dealing is fair is that of the person
actually undertaking the
light of this decision the Committee considers that under the current fair
dealing provisions a librarian could copy on behalf
of a user only if the
librarian’s actual act of copying was regarded as being for one of the
specified purposes, as well as
fair. This is discussed further in paragraphs
7.61 to 7.72, and a recommendation to change this situation is set out at
6.95 The situation can be compared with that in the UK, where s. 29(3)
of the UK Act provides (in relation to fair dealings for the
purpose of research
and private study) that copying by a person on behalf of another is allowed
under certain conditions. The section
states that copying by a person other than
a researcher or student is not a fair dealing if,
in the case of a librarian, he or
she exceeds the copying limitations that apply to librarians (as set out in
ss. 38, 39 and 40 of
in any other case, the person
doing the copying knows or has reason to believe that such copying will result
in copies of substantially
the same material being provided to more than one
person at substantially the same time for substantially the same purpose.
6.96 The Australian case law also does not provide any clear
guidance as to the extent to which a person can act on behalf of another
reliance upon the fair dealing exception. As noted by the
, in the case of
Ltd v Haines
McLelland J
considered a hypothetical example of a teacher who appointed himself agent of
every member of the class and made multiple
copies for the purpose of classroom
study of more than a reasonable portion of the work. The judge took the view
that such a dealing
would be unlikely to be a fair dealing. This conclusion,
however, as noted by the ACC
primarily on the assessment of fairness having regard to the operation of a
statutory licence rather than any general rule
that would preclude a person
conducting a fair dealing on behalf of another.
6.97 In the New Zealand case of
Longman Group Ltd v Carrington Technical
Institute Board of Governors & Anor
it was held that the language of the
exception that authorised the reproduction of works in the course of educational
instruction
of the New Zealand
did not preclude the use of the exception by a person on behalf of
It must be noted, however, that
the exception was not a fair dealing.
6.98 The proposed fair dealing model is not limited to an exclusive set of
purposes and is therefore sufficiently flexible to allow
for the inclusion of
dealings for new purposes (see paragraph 6.33). The Committee considers that the
proposed open-ended model should
not exclude dealings whereby a person acts on
behalf of another, provided that such dealings are regarded as being fair when
against the non-exclusive set of factors described in
section (2) of the proposed fair dealing provision (see paragraph 6.143).
the Committee (with the exception of one member) is of the opinion that
such dealings should not exclude activities where a person
conducts a dealing on
behalf of another on a for-profit basis. The commercial nature of the dealing
would be examined by a court
in its consideration of the factor ‘the
purpose and character of the dealing’ (see section (2)(a) of the
proposed provision
in paragraph 6.143). The Committee notes that, in applying
the general fair dealing principles, the fact that the purpose of the
commercial would weigh against the finding of a fair dealing (see paragraphs
5.14 to 5.16). The dissenting member of the
Committee is of the view that a
person should be able to conduct a fair dealing on behalf of another only on a
cost-recovery basis.
6.99 The Committee majority considers that under the new open-ended fair
dealing model it would be open to a court, in assessing the
fairness of a
dealing where a person acted on behalf of another, to consider whether the
purpose of the person for whom the dealing
was conducted was recognised as being
fair, such as for the purpose of research or study. For example, a court could
take into consideration
the fact that a person who provided a commercial copying
service to students provided such a service on the understanding that the
material copied was for the purpose of each student’s own research or
study. The Committee majority notes that this approach
is consistent with the
principle stated in the
case (see paragraph 6.94) since that
decision was based on the current fair dealing model, which is limited to an
exclusive set of
purposes, whereas the suggested approach is based on an
open-ended model.
6.100 The Committee is of the view that a special exception should be made to
the principle stated in the
case in relation to copying by a
library or an archives on behalf of a user under the proposed fair dealing
provision (see paragraphs
7.61 to 7.65).
6.101 The Committee majority is of the view that extra conditions do not need
to be specified in relation to the conduct of a fair
dealing by a person on
behalf of another, as has been provided under s. 29(3) of the UK Act. The
Committee majority considers that
the non-exclusive set of factors set out in
section (2) of the proposed fair dealing provision (see paragraph 6.143) is
sufficiently
flexible to determine the fairness of the dealing.
6.102 Given that the conduct of a dealing on behalf of another must be
regarded as being fair before the fair dealing exception applies,
the Committee
considers that allowing such dealings will not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of copyright owners
or disturb the balance struck between
users and owners of copyright material.
Recommendation
6.103 The Committee recommends that, in principle, the dealing with
be excluded from
being a fair dealing if it can be found to be ‘fair’ having regard
to the relevant criteria.
Application of the
quantitative test
6.104 The Committee is of the view that, subject to the exception described
in paragraph 6.105, a person should not be able to conduct
a dealing under
the proposed quantitative test on behalf of another. The Committee reached this
conclusion because the proposed quantitative
test operates separately from the
proposed open-ended fair dealing model. Thus, applying the principle stated in
case (see paragraph 6.94), the purpose of the person
actually conducting the dealing on behalf of another would have to be that
in the test (that is, research or study). It is difficult to envisage
circumstances where a person, for their own purpose of research
or study, would
conduct a dealing under the quantitative test on behalf of another. The
Committee therefore concludes that where
a person conducts a dealing on behalf
of another with a literary, dramatic or musical work, and the amount dealt with
falls within
the scope of the quantitative test, the dealer would have to rely
on the general fair dealing provision.
6.105 The Committee considers that an exception to the foregoing should apply
in relation to a dealing by way of copying by a library
or an archives under the
proposed quantitative test (see paragraphs 7.67 to 7.72).
dealings by enrolled external students
6.106 Section 40(1A) of the Act provides,
A fair dealing with a literary work (other than lecture notes) does not
constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if
it is for the purpose
of, or associated with, an approved course of study or research by an enrolled
external student of an educational
institution.
The related s. 40(1B) provides,
In subsection (1A) the expression ‘lecture notes’ means any
literary work produced for the purpose of the course of study
or research by a
person lecturing or teaching in or in connection with the course of study or
6.107 The Committee notes that ss. 40(1A) and 40(1B) of the Act were
introduced by way of non-government amendment in the
the Government
of the day stated that it viewed the amendment as
‘unnecessary’.
Government took this position because it believed that the special needs of
external students could be taken into account before
the Copyright Tribunal when
determining the copying rate under the statutory licence for copying by
educational institutions under
The Government noted, however, that the
amendment could be accommodated in the
6.108 In contrast, the then Opposition stated that the insertion of
ss. 40(1A) and 40(1B) was quite a substantial reform for the benefit
external students.
The Opposition
External students under the Bill are denied the same copyright rights as day
students simply because they are external students. They
do not have the same
access to libraries as do students who are regularly on the spot each day at the
educational institution.
6.109 The Committee considers that the copying of copyright material by
institutions for external students in relation to their approved
course of study
is capable of falling within fair dealing for the purpose of research or
6.110 The Committee questions the value of s. 40(1A) given that it is
not a deeming provision and that the dealing must first be regarded
fair dealing before it can apply. It seems doubtful whether the wording of the
section achieved the purpose contemplated
by its proponents. Nevertheless, the
Committee concludes that specific recognition of external students under the
proposed fair dealing
provision is unnecessary.
Recommendation
6.111 The Committee recommends that ss. 40(1A) and 40(1B) not be
included in the proposed fair dealing provision and that they therefore
Restoration
of the word ‘private’ before ‘study or research’
6.112 The Committee notes that the
deleted the word ‘private’ from s. 40, in accordance with
the recommendation made by the Franki Committee. The Franki
Committee considered
that the limitation was intended to distinguish use of material for private
study from use for classroom instruction,
but it regarded the distinction as
artificial and difficult to maintain. It said,
It is clear that the photocopying of material is of considerable assistance
in enabling teachers and students to prepare material
for classroom use, and
that it is difficult to maintain a distinction between private study and other
educational purposes. So long
as the photocopying for educational use is
qualified, for the purposes of s. 40, by the requirement of fair dealing,
we think that
the removal of the limitation to private study will not prejudice
owners of copyright.
6.113 The Committee received a number of submissions that called for the
reinsertion of the word ‘private’ before study
because it was felt
that the operation of s. 40 is too broad (see Appendix D, paragraphs 29 to
36). CAL argued that it frequently
encounters corporations, institutions,
commercial organisations and statutory bodies claiming that they may rely on the
to copy material as part of their work activities. In CAL’s view
this is a use of the exception that was not contemplated when
the existing Act
was drafted or when it was amended in 1980.
6.114 The counter-argument was put forward by organisations representing
users of copyright material. The Council of Australian University
argued that limiting fair dealing in this manner would affect universities
engaged in joint-venture research, leading to
commercial exploitation of their
discoveries. Similarly, the AVCC stated that to attempt to qualify research as
in some other way introduces unnecessary
uncertainty and places an unworkable restriction on an activity that is
fundamental to universities:
researchers must have the flexibility to draw on
the information base and resources that underpin their research, regardless of
sources or ultimate use.
6.115 The Committee notes that the Australian courts are yet to decide a case
that determines whether research activities with a commercial
end in view are
included in fair dealing for the purpose of research or study. The Committee
understands that it is possible for
such activities to fall within the
equivalent fair dealing provisions of New Zealand and the United Kingdom (see
paragraph 4.18).
The Committee also notes, however, the advice by Dennis Rose
QC, as Chief General Counsel to the Attorney-General’s Department,
referred to in
Computer Software
In relation to the
expression ‘research and study’ used in s. 40, Mr Rose
[It is] likely that the courts would hold that ‘study’ is
confined to study by individuals for their own purposes, whether
in private or
in some institutional course or otherwise. Moreover, the courts could well
confine ‘research’ to research
activities such as those in
universities and the CSIRO, for the purpose of increasing knowledge in the
community as a whole—by
contrast, for instance, with research in a
Government Department for the purpose of advising Ministers on proposed
legislation, or
research by a manufacturing company for the purpose of improving
its products.
6.116 In the Committee’s view it is undesirable to reintroduce the word
‘private’ before ‘research or study’.
It notes that the
distinction between private and commercial activities undertaken for research or
study is often unclear, and it
considers that the public interest would be
maximised if fair dealing for the purpose of research or study did not
necessarily exclude
some commercial activities. The Committee notes, however,
that if the activity in question is for a commercial purpose and results
economic detriment to the copyright owner it should be raised as a factor
weighing against the finding of fair dealing. Consideration
of such a factor is
specifically required under the purpose and character of the dealing
(s. 40(2)(a)) and the effect of the dealing
on the potential market for, or
value of, the copyright material (modified s. 40(2)(d)) and would continue
to be required under the
proposed amendments.
Recommendation
6.117 The Committee recommends
that the word ‘private’
not be re-inserted before the phrase ‘study or research’ in relation
to fair dealing
for the purpose of ‘research or study’ (ss. 40
Limitations
on fair dealings
6.118 Under the current fair dealing provisions the following requirements
exist in relation to the operation of fair dealing:
(a) where the dealing is for the purpose of criticism or review, a sufficient
acknowledgment of the copyright material must be made
(ss. 41 and
(b) where the dealing is for the purpose of reporting news in a text form (a
newspaper, magazine or similar periodical), a sufficient
acknowledgment of the
(c) where the dealing is for the purpose of reporting news by means of
broadcasting or in a cinematograph film, a musical work played
in the course of
reporting the news must form part of the news being reported
(s. 42(2)).
6.119 The Committee considers that requirement (a) reflects Australia’s
international obligations under art. 10(3) of the Berne
Convention, which
requires that an indication of the source and author shall be provided when
quotations are used from works and
cinematograph
The Copyright Act complies with
this obligation and provides for ‘sufficient acknowledgment’ to be
made in relation to
the criticism or review of works (s. 41) and
‘audio-visual items’, which includes cinematograph films
(s. 103A). The
Committee notes, however, that the definition of
‘sufficient acknowledgment’ under s. 10(1) of the Act is
provided only
in relation to works and does not include cinematograph films.
This appears to be inconsistent with art. 14
(1) of the Berne
Convention which states, ‘The owner of copyright in a cinematographic work
shall enjoy the same rights as the
author of an original work.’
Recommendation
6.120 The Committee recommends
that the Act be amended so as to
include reference to cinematograph films in the definition of ‘sufficient
acknowledgment’
to achieve compliance with Australia’s international
obligations under arts. 10(3) and 14
(1) of the Berne
Convention.
6.121 The Committee considers it should anticipate that, at the time the
Government considers this report, the moral rights legislation
contained in the
will have come into operation. The new
be inserted by the Bill
provides for statutory recognition of
the moral rights of authors of works and directors and producers of films. The
Committee notes
that the new moral rights provisions will be insufficient to
effect compliance with art. 10(3) of the Berne Convention. As discussed
further in paragraph 6.125, the moral rights provisions require only
identification of the author (s. 193 of the new Part IX) and
do not require
that an indication of the source be given. As stated in paragraph 6.119,
art. 10(3) of the Berne Convention requires
an indication of both the
source and the author when quotations are used from works and cinematograph
Recommendation
6.122 The Committee recommends that a specific provision be maintained in
the Act (similar to the current ss. 41 and 103A) to comply
art. 10(3) of the Berne Convention or, alternatively, that the moral rights
provisions be appropriately amended in relation
to dealings conducted for the
purpose of criticism or review.
6.123 Unlike sufficient acknowledgment in relation to dealings for the
purpose of criticism or review, the introduction of the new
moral rights
legislation would remove the need for specific reference to the requirement for
sufficient acknowledgment in relation
to dealings for the purpose of reporting
the news in a text form (ss. 42(1)(a) and 103B(1)(a) of the Act—see
requirement (b)
in paragraph 6.118). The Committee notes that as requirement (b)
currently operates it does not satisfactorily implement Australia’s
international obligations under the Berne Convention. A fair dealing with a work
or cinematograph film for the purpose of reporting
the news is authorised under
the following articles that provide for the making of exceptions:
the general exception of art.
the specific exception of art.
(2), which applies in relation to the reporting of current events by
means of photography, cinematograph films, broadcasts and
transmissions;
the specific exception
(2), which applies in relation to the reporting of lectures,
addresses and other works of the same nature in the press.
6.124 Unlike art. 10(3), the articles just mentioned do not
specifically require the identification of the author. The above exceptions
operate subject to art. 6
, however, which applies in relation to
exceptions authorised by the Convention.
(1) therefore applies to all dealings for the purpose of
reporting the news and is not limited in any way to the reporting of news
text form. The article provides that an author has the right to have the
authorship of their works recognised in clear and unambiguous
The fact therefore that
requirement (b) specifies only sufficient acknowledgment when reporting the news
in a text form would appear
to fall short of the requirements of
6.125 The Committee notes that a fair dealing with a work or cinematograph
film for the purpose of reporting the news would be classified
‘attributable act’ under the new moral rights provisions and would
require the identification of the author (s.
193 of the new Part IX). The
Committee also notes that the current requirement for the acknowledgment of both
the source and the
author under ss. 42(1)(a) and 103B(1)(a) appears to be
unnecessary, given that art. 6
(1) provides only
with the right of attribution of authorship.
Recommendation
6.126 The Committee recommends that ss. 42(1)(a) and 103B(1)(a) be
removed from the Act and that reliance be placed on the new moral
provisions to effect compliance with art. 6
(1) of the Berne
Convention.
6.127 Given that art. 9(2) of the Berne Convention operates subject to
the requirements of art. 6
(1), it would appear that the author,
and the owner of copyright in a cinematograph film, have the right of
attribution of authorship
in relation to all fair dealings with works or
cinematograph films (art. 14
(1)). The Committee also notes that
the proposed s. 193 appears to attach moral rights to attributable acts,
even though they might
be a fair dealing. The use of works and films for
reporting the news would thus attract the operation of the proposed moral rights
provisions.
6.128 Section 42(2) of the Act provides that the playing of a musical work in
the course of reporting the news by means of broadcasting
or in a cinematograph
film is not a fair dealing with the work if the playing of the work does not
form part of the news being reported
(requirement (c), paragraph 6.118).
6.129 The Committee notes that s. 42(2) was introduced as a result of a
recommendation made by the Spicer Committee on the basis of
submissions received
from the Australasian Performing Rights Association Limited (APRA) and the
Those organisations argued that
adoption of s. 6(3) of the UK
would authorise the
playing of background music to a news item without the consent of the copyright
owner. The Spicer Committee accepted
this argument and recommended that it be
clearly provided that fair dealing does not extend to the playing of musical
do not form part of the current event being
6.130 The Copyright Law Review Committee notes the obligation under
(2) of the Berne Convention:
It shall also be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to
determine the conditions under which, for the purpose of
reporting current
events by means of photography, cinematography, broadcasting or communication to
the public by wire, literary or
artistic works seen or heard in the course of
the event may, to the extent justified by the informatory purpose, be reproduced
made available to the public.
6.131 The Committee therefore notes that s. 42(2) also partially
implements art. 10
(2). In interpreting this article the Committee
notes that art. 2 of the Berne Convention specifies that ‘literary or
works’ includes literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works
and cinematograph films. The Committee also understands that
the reference in
(2) to ‘seen or heard in the course of the
event’ has been interpreted as placing an important temporal limitation on
the operation of the article. Professor Ricketson states that it would not be
permissible after the report has been made to embellish
it by the addition of a
picture of a work of art or a musical
accompaniment.
If this interpretation is
correct it would appear that s. 42(2) may fall short of what is permissible
under Article 10
(2), since s. 42(2) applies only to musical
Recommendation
6.132 The Committee recommends that s. 42(2) of the Act be expanded to
include literary, dramatic and artistic works and cinematograph
6.133 The Committee notes a further deficiency in s. 42(2) in that it
applies only to reporting the news by means of broadcasting
or cinematograph
film. Article 10
(2) is broader and includes the reporting of news by
means of photography and communication to the public by wire. The Committee
that communication to the public by wire is dealt with in s. 42(3),
while reporting the news by photography is not dealt with in
s. 42(2) or 42(3).
Recommendation
6.134 The Committee recommends that s. 42(2) of the Act be expanded to
include reporting the news by means of photography. As a matter
of drafting, the
Committee also recommends that the provision be recast into a simple statement
rather than remain in the double
negative form in which it currently
dealing for the purpose of professional legal advice
6.135 Some organisations representing copyright owners have specifically
argued against the operation of the fair dealing exception
for the purpose of
professional advice by a legal practitioner or patent attorney. For example, CAL
submitted that the provisions
have no place in a modern copyright regime and
that it is not in the public interest that certain professional groups enjoy the
of making copies of copyright material without the need to pay (see
Appendix D, paragraphs 43 to 46).
6.136 With the exception of one member, the Committee notes that the purpose
of the fair dealing provisions relating to professional
advice is not to provide
legal practitioners or patent attorneys with benefits not enjoyed by other
professional groups or members
of society. The purpose of the provisions is to
facilitate access to the legal system and, indirectly, to lower legal costs. The
Committee majority therefore considers that the fair dealing provisions for the
purpose of professional advice are clearly justified
on the basis of the public
interest. The majority also notes that the free use of copyright materials under
these provisions is most
likely to be limited and that dealings for this purpose
are unlikely to have a major impact on the potential market for, or value
the copyright material being used. Although the dissenting Committee member
agrees in principle with the policy that access to
the legal system is in the
public interest, he does not consider that copyright owners, in particular,
should subsidise the access.
The dissenting member is opposed to allowing the
ability to electronically reproduce or transmit, or both, copyright material for
the purpose of professional legal advice without the permission of the copyright
6.137 Paragraphs 4.28 and 4.29 provide a general discussion of the operation
of ss. 43(2), 104(b) and 104(c). It should be noted that
at present a
number of inconsistencies exist in relation to the use of copyright materials
for the purpose of professional advice.
Section 43(2), which applies to works,
is in fact narrower in operation that ss. 104(b) and 104(c), which apply to
subject matter
other than works. Section 43(2) allows for the use of copyright
material for the purpose of the
of professional advice, whereas
ss. 104(b) and 104(c) allow for the use of copyright material for the
professional advice (s. 104(b)) and for the
purpose of,
or in the course of, the giving
of professional advice
(s. 104(c)). Another important difference is that s. 43(2) requires
the use to be a fair dealing, whereas
ss. 104(b) and 104(c) operate as
straight exceptions to copyright and are therefore not subject to any
‘fairness’ requirements.
In the Committee’s opinion there is
no basis for the distinctions that currently exist between works and subject
matter other
than works in relation to the operation of these exceptions. These
distinctions should be removed from the Act.
Recommendations
6.138 With the exception of one member, the Committee recommends that all
uses of copyright material for the purpose of professional
legal advice fall
within fair dealing and therefore be subject to the fairness requirements if
they are not to be infringements.
The dissenting Committee member does not agree
that ‘all uses’ should include the reproduction or supply of
electronically.
6.139 The Committee considers that direct reference to the terms
‘giving’ and ‘seeking’ professional legal
unnecessary. It recommends that both related activities be covered by a general
reference to a dealing with copyright material
‘for the purpose of
professional advice by a legal practitioner, patent attorney or trade mark
attorney’ (see subsection
(1) of the prototype provision in paragraph
6.140 The Committee regards the phrase ‘or in the course of’
(s. 104(c) of the Act) as unnecessary: activities that fall
within this
phrase would be covered by the broad phrase described in paragraph 6.139.
The Committee therefore
that the phrase be
6.141 The Committee notes that, having regard to the
Intellectual
Property Laws Amendment Bill 1997
the prototype provision includes reference to professional advice by a
‘trade mark attorney’.
6.142 Paragraphs 8.14 to 8.18 provide a discussion of the related question of
acts done for the purpose of judicial proceedings.
Implementation
of the proposal
6.143 The Committee proposes that the current provisions of the Act that
provide that certain dealings with copyright materials do
not infringe copyright
if they are fair dealings be consolidated to provide as follows.
(1) Subject to this section, a fair dealing with any copyright material for
any purpose, including the purposes of research, study,
criticism, review,
reporting of news, and professional advice by a legal practitioner, patent
attorney or trade mark attorney, is
not an infringement of copyright.
(2) In determining whether in any particular case a dealing is a fair
dealing, regard shall be had to the following:
(a) the purpose and character of the dealing;
(b) the nature of the copyright material;
the possibility of obtaining the copyright material within a
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price;
(d) the effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or value of, the
(e) in a case where part only of the copyright material is dealt
with—the amount and substantiality of the part dealt with,
considered in
relation to the whole of the copyright material.
(3) The use of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or a
cinematograph film, in the course of reporting the news by means
of photography,
communication to the public
cinematograph film, shall be a fair dealing only if that material forms part of
the news being reported.
6.144 With the exception of one member, the Committee proposes the insertion
of the following provision in substitution for s. 40(3)
of the current
(1) A dealing with copyright material being a literary, dramatic or musical
work, or an adaptation of such a work, for the purpose
of research or study,
being a dealing where
(a) the copyright material is contained in an article in a printed periodical
publication—of the whole or part of that copyright
material, or
(b) the copyright material is contained in a printed published edition of
10 pages or more—of not more than a ‘prescribed
of the copyright material,
shall not be an infringement of copyright in that copyright material.
(2) Paragraph (1)(a) does not apply to a dealing with the whole or a part of
an article in a periodical publication if another article
in that publication,
being an article dealing with a different subject matter, is also dealt
6.145 The Committee recommends the insertion in the Act of a definition of
‘prescribed portion’. A prescribed portion
would constitute no more
than 10 per cent of the number of pages or, where the published
edition is divided into chapters, more than
10 per cent of the number
of pages but no more than the whole of a single chapter. The provision should
also prohibit the making
of serial copies of prescribed portions from the same
6.146 The Committee also considered the relationship between the library and
archives copying provisions and the proposed fair dealing
provision and the
proposed quantitative test—see paragraphs 7.52 to 7.99.
2 Further royalty-free exceptions
7 Copying by libraries and archives
This chapter examines the provisions in the
regulating copying by libraries and archives. A number of general matters are
discussed first:
whether the libraries and archives
provisions are needed at all;
division of the provisions between
and IV of the
the definitions of
‘library’ and ‘archives’.
Committee notes that some of the activities covered by the present provisions
are capable of falling within the proposed revised
fair dealing provision. Where
this is the case, subject in a number of instances to a minority position, the
Committee proposes that
those provisions be repealed.
The chapter then examines more specific libraries and archives matters and
provisions:
the declaration system;
copying by libraries and archives for
users and other libraries and archives;
copying of works, sound recordings and
cinematograph films for preservation;
copying of illustrations accompanying
other works;
copying and publication
of unpublished works, sound recordings and cinematograph films held in libraries
and archives;
copying by parliamentary
Finally, a number of issues related to the digital
environment are examined, including the making by libraries and archives of
copies of materials held in their collections and digitisation of
Introduction
7.01 In its issues paper
Copying by Libraries and Archives under the
—‘the issues paper’
chapter—the Committee sought comments on simplification of the provisions
for royalty-free copying done by libraries
and archives. Comments were sought on
three general topics:
whether library and archives
provisions are needed at all;
division of library and archives provisions between
and IV of the
the definitions of
‘library’ and ‘archives’.
The Committee
examined the following sections of the Act:
the declaration system (ss. 49,
50, 51A and 110B);
copying by libraries
and archives for users and for other libraries and archives (ss. 49 and
copying of copyright material for
preservation (ss. 51AA, 51A and
copying of illustrations
accompanying articles and other works
copying and publication
of unpublished copyright material (ss. 51, 52 and
copying by parliamentary
libraries (ss. 48A and 104A).
Issues related to the digital
environment were dealt with under two headings:
libraries and archives creating
digital copies of materials held in their
collections;
infringing copies made on
machines installed in libraries and archives
7.02 The Committee explored these issues with
interest groups at the public forum. The issues paper invited written
submissions on
the matters discussed. The Committee also made inquiries about
the practical application of these provisions and held with interest
further consultations about the reliance placed on these provisions. The
following discussion and recommendations are based
on the Committee’s
consideration of comments made at the public forum, submissions made in response
to the issues paper, previous
submissions to the Committee in relation to its
review and simplification reference, responses to the Committee’s
during its consultations with interest groups.
7.03 Among other things, the issues paper prompted responses on temporary or
incidental copies created as a by-product of digital
transmission and on
publication of anonymous and pseudonymous works. The Committee considers that it
would be more appropriate to
discuss these matters when it reports on the
exclusive rights of copyright owners and other matters raised by the CCG in its
Highways to Change
libraries and archives provisions needed at all?
7.04 The issues paper sought comment on whether separate provisions for
royalty-free copying by libraries and archives are needed
in the Act and, if so,
how these provisions could best be simplified.
7.05 In recommending changes to the existing library and archives provisions,
the Committee was mindful of the differing functions
of publishers and
libraries. Its recommendations are not intended to place libraries in direct
competition with publishers. Access
to copyright material provided by libraries
and archives is to remain limited so as to not interfere with the legitimate
of copyright owners.
7.06 Copyright owners have proposed the adoption of voluntary or statutory
licensing schemes in place of the present royalty-free
copying by libraries and
archives. The replacement of the existing libraries and archives provisions with
licensing schemes was opposed
by educational institutions, libraries, and the
Law Council of Australia (LCA) on the basis that it would result in restriction
access to information.
7.07 An alternative supported by copyright owners is to permit libraries and
archives to make copies only in instances where the copyright
material is not
available within a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price. This
approach was strongly opposed by libraries
and educational institutions. Their
main objection was that to restrict all forms of copying by libraries and
archives to instances
where the copyright material is not available within a
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price would unreasonably encroach
the ‘right to read’.
7.08 The Committee notes that this restriction is already a mandatory
requirement in relation to the following:
the copying of the whole of a work
(other than an article contained in a periodical publication) or parts greater
than a reasonable
portion of works for users
(s. 49(5));
the copying of the
whole of a work (other than an article contained in a periodical publication) or
parts greater than a reasonable
portion of works for other libraries and
archives (s. 50(7A));
(s. 51A(4)).
Applying this as a mandatory restriction to all
copying done by libraries and archives would extend its application to the
of articles contained in periodical publications, reasonable portions of
works, copying done by parliamentary libraries, and copying
by the Australian
Archives under s. 51AA. This would constitute a significant shift in the
existing balance between the interests
of copyright owners and the public
interest in access to information.
7.09 The Committee is of the view that, in the public interest, limited
royalty-free copying of copyright materials by libraries and
archives is an
important exception to the exclusive rights of copyright owners that should be
maintained. Provisions regulating royalty-free
copying of copyright materials by
libraries and archives should not be replaced by voluntary or statutory
licensing schemes or amended
in such a way as to constitute a substantial
reduction in the type of copying currently permitted in the Act.
7.10 The issues paper invited comment on whether the library and archives
provisions could be regarded as falling within a general
fair use or
‘dealing’ exception. Submissions from educational institutions,
libraries and archives gave support for consolidating
the library and archives
provisions with the fair dealing provisions in the Act. This amalgamation was
supported mainly because it
would allow libraries and archives to make copies of
7.11 The Committee notes, and discusses in full in paragraphs 7.52 to
7.58, the fact that some of the current provisions for royalty-free
libraries and archives regulate activities where the proposed fair dealing
provision, discussed in Chapter 6, has the
capacity to apply.
Recommendation
7.12 The Committee recommends that provisions regulating the making of
royalty-free copies of copyright material by libraries and
archives remain in
the Act, but in a simplified form.
division of library and archives provisions between Parts III and IV of the
7.13 Submissions received by the Committee suggested that one way to simplify
the Act would be to treat works and subject matter other
than works consistently
throughout the Act. The issues paper noted that, whilst libraries and archives
may make copies of published
works for users or other libraries and archives
under ss. 49 and 50 of the Act respectively, there are no corresponding
permitting the copying of published subject matter other than works.
‘Subject matter other than works’ comprises sound
recordings,
cinematograph films, television and sound broadcasts, and published editions of
works. That these copyright materials
cannot be copied by libraries and archives
for users or other libraries and archives appears to be historical rather than a
policy choice. Comments were sought as to whether the Act should be
amended so that it treats works and subject matter other than
works consistently
with respect to copying by libraries and archives.
7.14 In this context the Committee notes that, in connection with the copying
of unpublished copyright material and the copying of
purposes of preservation by libraries and archives, as well as all copying done
by parliamentary libraries,
works and subject matter other than works are
already treated consistently within the Act.
7.15 Changes to the Act that would provide a consistent application to the
copying by libraries and archives for users and other libraries
and archives of
the whole or parts of works and the whole or parts of subject matter other than
works were supported in the submissions
from libraries and the LCA.
7.16 The ACC opposed royalty-free copying of audiovisual items by libraries
and archives, at least with respect to copying for educational
institutions and
students in connection with a course of instruction at an educational
institution, given the existence of the statutory
licence under Part VA of the
Act. These provisions apply only to educational institutions’ copying of
sound or television broadcasts.
The ACC considers that the policy behind the
provisions in Part VA would be undermined if the library and archives provisions
the copying of non-broadcast material and the copying of broadcast
material without remuneration to the copyright owner. The Committee
persuaded by this argument. Licensing agreements similar to those provided in
Part VA with respect to broadcasts are also
provided in Part VB of the Act with
respect to works. It is also noted that where a licensing agreement is in
operation the principle
enunciated in
would apply; that is, an existing licensing agreement would need to be taken
into account before any royalty-free copying under the
fair dealing provisions
could be justified.
7.17 The issues paper noted that ss. 49 and 50 of the Act permit copying
of the whole, parts or reasonable portions of works and that
‘reasonable
portion’ is defined only with respect to literary, dramatic or musical
works. Comment was invited on whether
the term ‘reasonable portion’
should be extended to sound recordings, cinematograph films, sound broadcasts
and television
broadcasts, which are collectively defined as audiovisual items
under s. 100A of the Act.
7.18 Extending the definition of ‘reasonable portion’ to
audiovisual items for the purposes of the library and archives
provisions was
supported by educational institutions, libraries, archives and the ACC. The
Committee is not opposed in principle
to extending the definition of reasonable
portion in the Act, but it reached the conclusion that any approach that
attempts to define
a reasonable portion of audiovisual items is unworkable. The
Committee refers readers to its general discussion on reasonable portion
‘prescribed portion’, as proposed by the Committee) and the
quantitative test in Chapter 6.
7.19 The Committee considers it anomalous that an individual under
s. 103C may make copies of audiovisual items but libraries and
acting at the request of their users cannot. This is especially so given that
libraries and archives may make copies for
users at their request
the copyright material requested to be copied is a work.
7.20 It is the view of the Committee that treating works and subject matter
other than works consistently will not only remove any
possible confusion to
users of the Act caused by different standards set for different types of
the structure of the Act and
unnecessary duplication. No matter what their views
on the extension of copying by libraries and archives to subject matter other
than works, submitters supported the amalgamation of the library and archives
provisions in Parts III and IV of the Act. The Committee
agrees that this would
significantly to simplifying the Act.
Recommendation
7.21 The Committee recommends that the library and archives provisions be
amended so that the copying of whole works or parts of works
and subject matter
other than works for users and other libraries and archives is treated
consistently (subject to a dealing with
a prescribed portion being confined to
printed published works).
Definitions
of ‘library’ and ‘archives’
7.22 The Committee’s issues paper noted that libraries generally
consider that it is not necessary for the term ‘library’
defined in the Act, subject to the proviso that a library to which the Act
applies not be conducted for profit. Section 18
of the Act provides, ‘For
the purposes of this Act, a library shall not be taken to be established or
conducted for profit
by reason only that the library is owned by a person
carrying on business for profit.’ It was further noted that, whilst
49 and 50 apply only to libraries that are not conducted for profit,
this limitation is not applied to copying under ss. 51, 51A,
110A and 110B;
that is, the provisions relating to copying unpublished copyright material and
copying for preservation. The Committee
sought comments on whether this is a
distinction that should be maintained.
7.23 The submissions the Committee received on this issue all stated that the
Act should be uniform in its provisions relating to
copying by libraries. It was
the view of these submitters that the provisions for copying by libraries should
apply only to libraries
that are not conducted for profit.
7.24 The Committee agrees that the provisions for copying by libraries should
be consistent throughout the Act. Contrary to the submissions,
however, the
Committee is of the view that all libraries, whether they be conducted for
profit or not, should be permitted to rely
on all the library provisions
regulating royalty-free copying. The Committee reached this conclusion for two
7.25 First, the Committee does not consider that permitting libraries that
are conducted for profit to perform royalty-free copying
in limited instances
will unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of copyright owners.
Profits accrued by libraries are also
likely to be derived from a range of
activities they engage in and not solely from the supply of requested
7.26 Second, determining whether or not a library is conducted for profit has
become an extremely difficult task. For example, if
a library is part of an
organisation that is conducted for profit, whether or not the library is
conducted for profit may depend
on the accounting practices of the organisation.
Any definition of what constitutes a library conducted for profit would need to
be long and detailed to cover every possible circumstance. This approach would
not contribute to the Committee’s aim of simplifying
It is the view of the Committee that libraries should continue to
be able to supply royalty-free copies of copyright material to users
libraries and archives, in response to specific requests and only in the limited
circumstances specified in paragraphs
7.57 and 7.58. The limited extent of
copying by libraries permitted by the Act stands in contrast to the exclusive
rights of publishers
as copyright owners or licensees. The Committee
does not expect that the provisions will encourage libraries to set up copying
as an alternative to publishers.
Recommendation
7.28 The Committee recommends that all provisions in the Act permitting
royalty-free copying by libraries (currently ss. 48A, 49,
50, 51, 51A,
104A, 110A and 110B) apply to all libraries, whether or not they are conducted
for profit.
7.29 The Committee notes that, by removing the requirement that a library
must not be conducted for profit from the Act, s. 18 is
Recommendation
7.30 Subject to the recommendation that all provisions in the Act
permitting royalty-free copying by libraries apply to all libraries,
not they are conducted for profit, being adopted, the Committee recommends that
s. 18 of the Act be repealed.
7.31 One member of the Committee supports the two foregoing recommendations
on the proviso that mandatory requirements be included
in the Act preventing a
library from supplying a whole work that is commercially available or from
profiting from the supply of these
copies. These requirements are discussed more
fully in paragraphs 7.75 and 7.76.
7.32 Apart from the question of whether the definition of library in the Act
should be limited to libraries not conducted for profit,
the majority of
submissions received by the Committee regarded the ordinary dictionary meaning
of ‘library’ as a sufficient
reference for users of the Act. The
Committee agrees with this.
Recommendation
7.33 The Committee recommends that the term ‘library’ remain
undefined in the Act.
7.34 ‘Archives’ is defined in the Act by referring to the
material in the custody of certain specified institutions and
then adding a
general ‘catch-all’ description of a type of collection of
documents. The issues paper sought comment on
whether particular archival
institutions need to be specified, whether the definition should exclude
archives operated for the purpose
of deriving a profit, and whether the term
‘archives’ needs to be defined in the Act at all or whether reliance
placed on its ordinary dictionary meaning.
7.35 Libraries and archives submitted that there is no need for particular
archives to be listed within a definition of ‘archives’
in the Act.
Since the list that currently exists in s. 10(1) is intended to be merely
illustrative, not exhaustive, the Committee
sees no need for specific archives
to be listed.
Recommendation
7.36 The Committee recommends that references to specific archival
institutions in paragraph (a) of the definition of ‘archives’
s. 10(1) of the Act be removed.
7.37 The definition of archives in ss. 10(1) and 10(4) of the Act
currently has the effect of limiting all royalty-free copying by
archives to
archives that are not operated for the purpose of deriving a profit. The
Committee notes that apart from s. 51AA, which
applies exclusively to the
Australian Archives, all provisions for royalty-free copying by archives also
apply to libraries. The
Committee considers that it would be anomalous if
libraries conducted for profit were to be permitted to copy under the library
archives provisions (as is recommended in paragraph 7.28) but archives that
derive a profit were not. Application of the copying
by libraries and archives
provisions should be consistent between libraries and archives.
Recommendation
7.38 The Committee recommends that all provisions in the Act permitting
royalty-free copying by archives apply to all archives, whether
or not they
derive a profit.
7.39 One member of the Committee supports the foregoing recommendation on the
proviso that mandatory requirements be included in the
Act preventing an
archives from supplying a whole work that is commercially available or from
profiting from the supply of these
7.40 The submissions the Committee received from libraries and the LCA
emphasised the need for any definition of archives to refer
to both the meaning
of archives as a collection of documents and archives as an institution. The
Committee notes that the ordinary
dictionary meaning of archives covers both
these concepts. It considers that the definition of archives currently in the
Act differs
from the ordinary dictionary definition of archives in that it
specifies only particular archival institutions and restricts the
application of
the Act to archives not operated for the purpose of deriving a profit. Since the
Committee recommends that reference
to specific institutions be removed and that
it should not matter whether an archives derives profit or not, the Committee is
the view that no definition of archives need be provided in the Act. As with
libraries, the ordinary dictionary meaning of archives
should be sufficient
reference for users of the Act. Concern was expressed in some submissions about
whether museums and art galleries
were within the meaning of archives in the
Act. The Committee points out that the dictionary meaning of archives is
where public records or other historical records are
Recommendation
7.41 The Committee recommends that the current definitions of
‘archives’ in ss. 10(1) and 10(4) of the Act be removed.
declaration system
7.42 When a user, not being a remote user, asks a library or archives to make
a copy of a published work for himself or herself, the
user must provide a
signed declaration stating that certain requirements are satisfied for the
copying to be non-infringing (s. 49).
When a library or archives makes for
a user or another library a copy of a published work
constitutes more than a reasonable portion of the work, or if the copying
done is for a remote user who has not provided a signed
request, or if the copy
is being supplied to a library that has previously received a copy of the work,
the librarian or archivist
responsible for the copying done must sign a similar
declaration (s. 50). Declarations are also required to be made and retained
when libraries and archives perform copying for the purposes of preservation
(ss. 51A and 110B). Declarations must be retained by
libraries and archives
for four years.
7.43 Inclusion of the declaration system was intended to act as a check
against excessive copying of copyright materials by libraries
and archives.
Requirements for the maintenance of these records are set out in ss. 203A
to 203F of the Act. Notations required to
be made on, or attached to, the copies
made are set out in ss. 203H(1) to 203H(5). No remuneration flows to
result of the making of these records. The principal
purpose of the declarations appears to be to remind libraries, archives and
their users of their copyright obligations and to enable copyright owners, if
they so choose, to monitor compliance with the copying
requirements.
7.44 Libraries and archives have identified deficiencies in the declaration
system. The main concern is the requirement that requests
made by users under
s. 49 be physically signed by the user. This prevents requests being made
digitally; for example, by email. Introduction
of a personal identification
number (PIN) registration system as a form of ‘electronic signature’
was suggested by libraries
and supported by educational institutions, the ACC,
and the LCA. If the declaration system were to be maintained, the Committee
support the introduction of a PIN registration system. But, for the
reasons given in the following paragraphs, it is the Committee’s
statutory provisions for a declaration system are no longer needed in the
7.45 During its consultations with libraries and archives the Committee heard
that a major deficiency in the declaration system is
that administration of the
records is labour intensive and diverts the financial resources of libraries and
archives away from areas
of more useful
expenditure, such as acquisition
of copyright materials. The Committee notes that an increase in the purchasing
of copyright materials
by libraries and archives would provide a direct
financial benefit to copyright owners, whereas the declaration system provides
direct benefit.
7.46 In its consultations with libraries, archives and copyright owners the
Committee sought comments on the reliance placed on, and
the rate of inspection
of, the records libraries and archives are required to retain under ss. 49,
50, 51A and 110B of the Act. Responses
to the Committee suggested that little or
no inspection of these records is undertaken by copyright owners or their
agents. It was
further stated by libraries that inspection of these records
would be unlikely to act as a deterrent against libraries and archives
infringing copies of copyright material since it is improbable that a librarian
or archivist would keep a record of their
own wrongdoing.
7.47 The Committee is of the view that any benefits for copyright owners that
may be derived from the declaration system in reducing
the amount of infringing
copying done by libraries and archives are greatly outweighed by the cost of the
system’s administration,
including the cost to copyright owners of
checking the records. The low rate of inspection of these declarations by
and their agents suggests that minimal reliance is placed on
the declarations. On the contrary, libraries and archives place greater
on the declaration system as a means of indemnification against possible suit
for copyright infringement.
7.48 The Committee notes that removing the declaration system will remove the
statutory immunity currently enjoyed by libraries.
A user, or library in
the case of inter-library copying, will still be required to make a request for
any copying done by a library
or archives for that user or library, and the
librarian or archivist responsible for the copying done must be satisfied that
copying is permitted under the Act. It will be for libraries and archives to
determine what procedures they require to be fulfilled
before making
royalty-free copies of copyright material. If challenged, they will need to
establish the basis for their copying,
be it a fair dealing or other statutory
In the absence of a statutory requirement for libraries and
archives to retain records, it would be up to the libraries and archives
choose whether to implement an alternative system of record keeping upon which
they could rely to defend any infringement action
that might be brought against
Recommendation
7.49 The Committee recommends that the requirement for declarations to be
made by both users and librarians and archivists when libraries
and archives
make copies of copyright material be removed from ss. 49, 50, 51A and 110B
of the Act.
7.50 Removal of the statutory requirement for libraries and archives to
administer a declaration system renders ss. 203A to 203F of
unnecessary. Similarly, ss. 203H(1) to 203H(5), which regulate the
notations to be made on, or attached to, copies made by
libraries and archives,
are no longer necessary.
Recommendation
7.51 Subject to acceptance of the recommendation that the requirement for
declarations be removed from the Act, the Committee recommends
ss. 203A to 203F and 203H(1) to 203H(5) be repealed.
by libraries and archives for users
Expansion of the
purposes for which libraries and archives can copy
7.52 Section 49 of the Act provides that users of libraries and archives may
request a copy of the whole, parts or reasonable portions
of works where the
copy is required by the user for the purpose of research or study. This
provision was recommended for inclusion
in the Act by the Spicer Committee as a
supplement to fair dealing for purposes of research or study provided under
s. 40. It was
considered that if a student were to be permitted to make a
copy of a work under fair dealing a librarian acting on the student’s
behalf should also be permitted to do
7.53 The issues paper sought comments on whether s. 49 should be
broadened to permit libraries and archives to make copies of works
not only for the purposes of research or study but also for all other purposes
recognised as being within the scope of
fair dealing. The current fair dealing
provisions with respect to works permit individuals to make copies of works for
for the additional purposes of criticism or review (s. 41),
reporting the news (s. 42) and giving professional legal advice
(s. 43(2)).
7.54 Submissions from libraries, educational institutions and the LCA
supported broadening the scope of s. 49 to permit libraries
and archives to
copy the whole, parts or reasonable portions of works for users for the same
purposes as under the current fair dealing
provisions. Libraries submitted that
it was ‘anomalous’ that individuals can make copies for
for certain purposes but a library or archives acting on
their behalf cannot.
7.55 The Committee is of the view that permitting libraries and archives to
perform copying for users for the purposes of research
or study but not for
other purposes permitted under fair dealing is a restriction in the Act that
should not be maintained. It considers
that the restriction should be removed,
and the Act further simplified, by repealing s. 49 and permitting the
copying currently conducted
by libraries and archives under this section to be
governed by the proposed fair dealing provision. Such an amendment to the Act
would permit libraries and archives to conduct dealings, by way of copying on
behalf of users, that would be assessed against the
‘fairness’ criteria (described in subsection (2) of the proposed
fair dealing provision—see paragraph
6.143) in order to determine whether
the dealing was ‘fair’. In determining the ‘fairness’ of
the dealing
the user’s purpose would be regarded as the relevant purpose
(see paragraphs 7.62 to 7.64).
7.56 The change just discussed would also permit a library or archives to
conduct a dealing by way of copying on behalf of a user
for purposes other than
research or study. As discussed in paragraph 6.143, the proposed fair dealing
model is open ended. A library
or archives would therefore be able to conduct a
dealing by way of copying for any purpose of a user, including those currently
in the Act, on the condition that such a dealing is regarded as
7.57 The Committee is of the view that a library or archives should be
permitted to conduct a dealing by way of copying under the
proposed fair dealing
provision only in response to a request made by the user and in instances where
the library or archives is
satisfied that the request constitutes a fair
dealing. With respect to libraries and archives copying subject matter other
for users, the Committee refers readers to the discussion and
recommendations in paragraphs 7.13 to 7.21.
7.58 Copying by libraries and archives on behalf of users should also be
permitted under the proposed quantitative test. Such copying
should, however, be
restricted to the user’s purpose of research or study (see paragraphs 7.67
Recommendations
7.59 The Committee recommends that s. 49 of the Act be repealed and
that copying by libraries and archives for users be governed by
the proposed
fair dealing provision and the proposed quantitative test.
7.60 The Committee recommends that libraries and archives be permitted to
perform copying for users in all instances where users would
be permitted to
make the copy for themselves under the proposed fair dealing provision or under
the proposed quantitative test.
purpose is the relevant purpose in applying exceptions
7.61 The Committee notes the
case, which held that the
relevant purpose when determining whether a dealing is fair is that of the
person actually undertaking the
In the light of this decision the Committee considers that under the current
fair dealing provisions a librarian or archivist could
make a copy on behalf of
a user only if the actual act of copying by the librarian was regarded as being
for one of the specified
purposes, as well as fair.
7.62 In paragraph 6.99 the Committee notes that under the new open-ended fair
dealing model it would be open to a court, in assessing
the fairness of a
dealing where a person acted on behalf of another, to consider whether the
purpose of the person for whom the dealing
was conducted was recognised as being
fair, such as for the purpose research or study. The Committee is of the view
that such an
approach is consistent with the principle stated in the
7.63 With the exception of one member, the Committee is, however, of the view
that there should be a special exception to the principle
stated in the
case in relation to copying by a library or archives on behalf of a
user under the proposed fair dealing provision. Accordingly, in
determining
whether such copying is ‘fair’, the purpose of the user should be
considered as the relevant purpose. Such
an exception is necessary if libraries
and archives are to be permitted to perform copying for users in all instances
where users
would be permitted to make the copy for themselves under the
proposed fair dealing provision (see paragraph 7.60). The Committee
notes that such a view is consistent with the approach taken by the Spicer
Committee (see paragraph 7.52).
Recommendations
7.64 With the exception of two members, the Committee recommends that,
where a library or archives conducts a dealing by way of copying
on behalf of a
user under the proposed fair dealing provision, the user’s purpose be
regarded as the relevant purpose in ascertaining
the ‘fairness’ of
the dealing.
7.65 One dissenting Committee member supports the foregoing recommendation
on the condition that dealings by way of copying by libraries
and archives under
the proposed fair dealing provision do not include the electronic reproduction
of copyright material or dealings
conducted for profit.
7.66 The other dissenting member recommends that no exception to the
principle stated in the
case apply to a dealing by way of
copying by a library or archives on behalf of a user under the proposed fair
dealing provision.
7.67 In paragraph 6.104 the Committee notes that, subject to the exception
stated in paragraph 7.68, a person should not be able to
conduct a dealing under
the proposed quantitative test on behalf of another. The Committee arrived at
this view by applying the principle
stated in the
concluded that it is difficult to envisage circumstances in which a person, for
their own purpose of research or study, would
conduct a dealing under the
quantitative test on behalf of another.
7.68 With the exception of one member, the Committee is of the view that an
exception to the foregoing should apply in relation to
a dealing by way of
copying by a library or archives under the proposed quantitative test. As stated
in relation to fair dealing,
the Committee majority is of the view that such an
exception is necessary if libraries and archives are to be permitted to perform
copying for users in all instances where users would be permitted to make the
copy for themselves. The Committee majority therefore
considers that libraries
and archives should be permitted to make a copy on behalf of a user in response
to a verifiable request
by the user stating that the copy is for the purpose of
their own research or study and that they have not previously been supplied
a copy of the same article or other work or the same part of the article or
other work, as the case may be, by a library or
7.69 Such a dealing would operate as a special exception to the principle
stated in the
case because the user’s purpose would be the
relevant purpose.
7.70 The Committee majority also notes that such an exception is necessary if
libraries and archives are to be permitted to conduct
the same level of copying
under the proposed fair dealing provision and proposed quantitative test as they
currently do under s.
49 of the Act. Subject to s. 49(3) (discussed in
paragraphs 7.73 and 7.80 to 7.82), s. 49 operates as a deeming provision
and permits
a library or archive to copy works that fall within the scope of the
quantitative test where the material is for a user’s purpose
of research
or study. Permitting libraries and archives to copy under the quantitative test
will ensure that libraries and archives
can continue to copy articles and
smaller portions of works on behalf of their users.
Recommendations
7.71 With the exception of one member, the Committee recommends that a
library or archives be able to conduct a dealing by way of
copying under the
quantitative test on behalf of a user in response to a verifiable request by a
user stating that the copy is for
the purpose of their own research or study and
that they have not previously been supplied with a copy of the same article or
work or the same part of the article or other work, as the case may be, by
a library or archives.
7.72 The dissenting Committee member supports the foregoing recommendation
on the condition that dealings by way of copying by libraries
and archives under
the proposed quantitative test do not include the electronic reproduction of
for profit.
restrictions to copying by libraries and archives under s. 49
7.73 The Committee notes that under s. 49 certain mandatory requirements
restrict a library’s or archives’s ability to
copy on behalf of a
user. The most important restrictions are as follows:
s. 49(3), which provides that,
where a charge is made by a library or archives for making and supplying a copy
of the whole, part
or a reasonable portion of a work to a user, the library or
archives may not rely on the immunity provided in ss. 49(2) and 49(2C)
this copying if the amount of the charge to the user exceeds the cost of making
and supplying the copy;
which provides that, where a library or archives is copying the whole of a work
(other than an article contained in a periodical
publication) or a part of such
a work that contains more than a reasonable portion, the work must form part of
the library’s
or archives’s collection. In addition, the librarian
or archivist must be satisfied that a copy of the work cannot be obtained
a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial
Application
of the restrictions to the proposed fair dealing provision
7.74 In relation to copying by libraries and archives under the proposed fair
dealing provision, the Committee (with the exception
of two members) is of the
view that these restrictions should not be specifically retained. The Committee
majority is of the view
that the matters raised in ss. 49(3) and 49(5) will
be considered in the determination of the ‘fairness’ of the dealing,
having regard to the relevant criteria (described in subsection (2) of the
proposed fair dealing provision—see paragraph 6.143).
Two members of the
Committee are of the view that the limitations should be retained in the Act and
included as part of the proposed
fair dealing provision.
7.75 In relation to s. 49(3), the majority of the Committee notes that
the proposed fair dealing provision is capable of applying
to copying done for
any purpose
and that this could include for the purpose of making a
profit. The commercial nature of the dealing would be examined by a court
consideration of ‘the purpose and character of the dealing’ (see
paragraph (2(a)) of the proposed provision in
paragraph 6.143). The Committee
notes that, in the application of the general fair dealing principles, the fact
that the purpose
of the dealing is commercial would weigh against the finding of
a fair dealing (see paragraphs 5.14 to 5.16). The majority of the
Committee is
of the view that libraries and archives should not be denied the opportunity to
supply requested copies for profit to
other bodies or individuals that request
the making of a fair dealing copy on their behalf.
7.76 A minority of the Committee considers that libraries and archives should
be restricted to supplying requested copies on a cost-recovery
basis because of
their unique position in being large depositories of copyright material. The
minority considers that libraries and
archives should not be permitted to charge
at more than a cost-recovery rate for copying and that no definition of cost
should be included in the Act. What is considered to be within cost
recovery would continue to be determined by the courts.
7.77 In relation to s. 49(5), the Committee notes that the possibility
of obtaining the work within a reasonable time at an ordinary
commercial price
is one of the factors listed for consideration in determining whether the
dealing is ‘fair’. The majority
of the Committee is of the view that
having this requirement as one of the factors for consideration in the fair
dealing provision
is sufficient to maintain the current balance between the
interests of copyright owners and the public interest of access to information.
7.78 Two members of the Committee are of the view that this requirement
should be mandatory, not just a factor for consideration.
They consider that a
section to the effect of the current s. 49(5) should be added to the
proposed fair dealing provision. Retaining
the requirement as mandatory would
mean that no more than a reasonable portion of a work of which the library or
archives owns a
copy would ever be able to be copied for a user unless the work
is no longer in print or in stock.
Recommendation
7.79 With the exception of two members, the Committee recommends that
sections that maintain the mandatory effect of the current ss.
49(5) of the Act not be included as part of the proposed fair dealing provision.
The dissenting Committee members recommend
that the effect of ss. 49(3) and
49(5) be retained in the Act.
Application of the
restrictions to the proposed quantitative test
7.80 Of the two restrictions mentioned in paragraph 7.79, s. 49(3)
is the only constraint that currently applies to libraries and
archives where an
article or portion of a work that falls within the scope of the quantitative
test is copied on behalf of a user
for the purpose of research or study. The
restriction provided in s. 49(5) applies only where an amount greater than
that prescribed
by the quantitative test is copied.
7.81 The Committee notes that the proposed quantitative test operates as a
simple deeming provision and functions separately from
the concept of
‘fair dealing’: there is no requirement for recourse to the criteria
of ‘fairness’ (see paragraph
6.67). The Committee is therefore of
the view that s. 49(3) should be specifically retained in relation to the
copying of an article
or part of a work by a library or archive under the
quantitative test on behalf of a user. The Committee considers that if a library
or archive wishes to copy on behalf of a user on a for-profit basis such a
dealing should be conducted under the proposed fair dealing
provision and
assessed against the relevant ‘fairness’ criteria (see paragraph
Recommendation
7.82 The Committee recommends that the mandatory effect of the current
s. 49(3) be included as part of the proposed quantitative test.
Committee further recommends that a library or archives be able to conduct a
dealing by way of copying under the quantitative
test on behalf of a user on a
cost-recovery basis only.
Specificity
of a user’s request and copying samples for users
7.83 The issues paper noted that libraries consider that remote users who do
not have access to bibliographic facilities are disadvantaged
by the requirement
in the Act that the user specify a particular work or article when requesting
copies from libraries and archives.
Comments were sought on the libraries’
proposal that these users be permitted to make requests for copies of
unspecified works
on a specified subject, rather than have to request
a particular work or article.
7.84 Libraries’ submissions to the Committee stressed that the needs of
people who cannot physically attend a library or archives
are the same as the
needs of those who can. The submissions from the Council of Australian
University Librarians and the Library
and Information Service WA pointed out
that permitting users in a remote location to specify a subject, rather than a
work, in their request to a library or archives is to provide them
with service equal to that of other library users. It was submitted
librarians commonly help users identify relevant material: permitting them to
select material on behalf of a user in a remote
location is, it was submitted,
similar to the assistance they provide to other library users.
7.85 Submissions to the Committee from libraries, educational institutions
and the LCA supported permitting users in remote locations
to make a request to
a library or archives for material by reference to subject only.
7.86 It was noted in the issues paper that copyright owners were not
supportive of remote users being able to make requests on a subject
rather than
a particular work or article. Copyright owners are of the view that copying for
this type of request cannot be considered
to be a fair dealing. They suggested
that a library or archives should provide users in a remote location with a
bibliographic list
from which a particular work or article could then be
requested. The issues paper sought comments on this approach.
7.87 Libraries and educational institutions were not supportive of supplying
bibliographic lists to remote users because of the necessary
increase in
administration this would entail, especially in the creation of the lists. ACLIS
would support the supply of bibliographical
lists provided that
‘unnecessarily high transaction costs’ could be
7.88 Libraries and educational institutions suggested that the administrative
burden of supplying bibliographic lists to remote users
could be reduced by
permitting libraries and archives to supply samples and content pages of works
to remote users. The main mode
of supply contemplated was electronic
transmission. Digital transmission of copyright material is discussed in
paragraphs 7.175 to
7.89 Libraries submitted that the supply of abstracts, previews or samples of
a work could better enable remote users to determine
if they required a copy of
the whole or a reasonable portion of a particular work. Submissions to the
Committee from the ACC and
the LCA did not support libraries and archives being
permitted to supply abstracts, samples, or contents pages of works to users.
is noted, however, as stated, that the LCA supported remote users being able to
request material on specified subjects, eliminating
the need for a library or
archives to supply bibliographic lists.
7.90 It is the Committee’s view that a special provision to permit
copying by libraries and archives for remote users on the
basis of a request on
a specified subject, rather than with respect to a particular work or subject
matter other than a work in the
library’s or archives’s collection,
is not warranted. The Committee recommends in paragraph 7.59 that s. 49 of
be repealed and the copying currently regulated by this section be
regulated instead by the proposed fair dealing provision and the
quantitative test. The Committee considers that the making and supplying of
copies of copyright material to a remote user
in response to a general request
on a specified subject should be assessed on a case-by-case basis to determine
whether the copying
constitutes a fair dealing. Some degree of specificity in
the request would be required, but this would depend on the subject being
researched by the remote user. The specificity required in the request would be
determined by what would be considered fair in the
circumstances.
7.91 The Committee notes that the degree of the user’s remoteness from
a library would be an important factor for determining
whether the copying done
by a library or archives in response to a request by subject only would be
‘fair’. It is the
view of the Committee that such copying is likely
to be considered a fair dealing only in instances where the user is in a
sufficiently
remote location from a library. In general, this would mean where
the user is geographically isolated and,
as a result of this
would have substantial difficulty in personally attending a
7.92 Permitting copying for remote users’ requests on a specified
subject in instances where this would constitute a fair dealing
means that it
will not be necessary to consider allowing libraries or archives to supply
copies of abstracts, contents pages or samples
from copyright material for the
purpose of enabling a user to request a specific title. It is noted, however,
that remote users may
prefer to make a more informed choice in their requests to
libraries and archives. The proposed fair dealing provision is not limited
specific set of instances that would constitute a fair dealing. The Committee is
of the view that a library or archives providing
an abstract or contents page to
a sufficiently remote user, as described in paragraph 7.91, for the purpose of
the user being able
to request a particular title could constitute a fair
dealing. The Committee considers that copying samples from the main body of
work for the purposes of enabling a remote user to determine whether they would
like to request a copy of the whole, a part or
a reasonable portion of the work
is also capable of falling within what constitutes a fair dealing. The Committee
considers, however,
that such circumstances would be limited.
Recommendation
7.93 The Committee recommends that no special provision be introduced into
the Act to permit a library or archives to give effect
to a remote user’s
request to copy unspecified works on a specified subject rather than with
respect to a particular work.
Copying by libraries and archives for remote users
should be regulated by the principles of fair dealing.
by libraries and archives for other libraries or archives
7.94 Section 50 of the Act permits a library or archives to provide a copy of
the whole, a part or a reasonable portion of a work
for a user of another
library or archives when the library or archives the user has attended does not
own a copy of the work (s.
50(1)(b)). Section 50 also permits a library or
archives to supply a single copy of the whole, a part or a reasonable portion of
a work to another library or archives for the purpose of including the copy in
the collection of the receiving library or archives
(s. 50(1)(a)). The
supply of a subsequent copy for this purpose is permitted only if the prior copy
sent has been lost, destroyed
or damaged (s. 50(7)). (Inter-library copying
for the purpose of assisting members of parliament in their duties
(s. 50(1)(aa)) is
discussed in paragraph 7.167.) The amount permitted to be
copied is the same under ss. 49 and 50 of the Act.
7.95 As with s. 49, it is the view of the Committee that the copying
currently permitted under s. 50 is copying to which the proposed
dealing provision and the proposed quantitative test could apply. The Committee
further considers that the purposes for copying
that are listed in the current
s. 50 are purposes that would be considered to be fair dealings. This
should be outlined in the explanatory
memorandum to the Bill that makes the
7.96 There are in s. 50 provisions equivalent to those in the current
s. 49 of the Act, prohibiting a library charging more than cost
for copies provided (s. 50(6)) and requiring that the work form part of the
collection of the library or archives and not
be available within a reasonable
time for a commercial price if the copy is of the whole or more than a
reasonable portion of a work
(other than an article contained in a periodical
publication) (s. 50(7A)). For the reasons given in paragraphs 7.74 to 7.78
respect to s. 49, two members of the Committee are of the view that
these requirements should be included as mandatory in the proposed
fair dealing
provision with respect to copying done by libraries and archives. For the
reasons given in paragraphs 7.80 and 7.81
with respect to s. 49, the
Committee is of the view that the restriction provided under s. 50(6)
should apply to the proposed quantitative
test with respect to dealings by way
of copying done by libraries and archives.
Recommendations
7.97 The Committee recommends that s. 50 of the Act be repealed and
that copying by libraries and archives that was previously done
under s. 50
be governed by the proposed fair dealing provision and the proposed quantitative
7.98 Two members of the Committee recommend that this be subject to the
condition that the proposed fair dealing provision be drafted
to restrict
copying by libraries and archives for other libraries and archives in ways
similar to that now provided for in ss. 50(6)
and 50(7A) of the Act.
7.99 The Committee recommends that the mandatory effect of the current
s. 50(6) of the Act be included as part of the proposed quantitative
of works, sound recordings and cinematograph films for preservation
7.100 Instances when a library or archives may make a royalty-free copy of a
work in its collection for the purpose of preservation
are listed in
s. 51A(1) of the Act. This form of royalty-free copying is permitted
whenever the work is in manuscript form
original artistic
work (s. 51A(1)(a)) or
the work has been damaged or has
deteriorated (s. 51A(1)(b)), or if it has been lost or stolen
(s. 51A(1)(c)).
7.101 The issues paper sought comments on proposals by libraries and archives
that royalty-free copying for preservation purposes
extend to all rare material
that is not available for purchase and be permitted
deteriorated or is damaged, lost or stolen. Support for broadening the scope of
s. 51A(1) in this manner was evident in
submissions from educational
institutions and reiterated in submissions from libraries and archives. The LCA
agreed that rare material
that is not available for purchase should be permitted
to be copied under s. 51A(1)(a), but it did not support preservation copies
being able to be made before copyright material has been damaged since this
‘would allow the copying of all material when temporarily
7.102 Through s. 51A(2), s. 51A also provides for the making of a single
royalty-free microform copy of a work for purposes not falling
s. 51A(1); that is, for purposes that are outside the preservation purposes
listed in the Act. By virtue of s. 51A(3), however,
when a copy of a work
is made under s. 51A(2) the work from which the copy is made must be
destroyed as soon as practicable. Submissions
from libraries, archives and
educational institutions expressed strong opposition to any requirement that a
work be destroyed after
being copied onto microform as against
decision being left to the discretion of the library.
7.103 As a general principle, the Committee takes the view that royalty-free
dealing with a copyright owner’s works should be
available only if that
dealing can be considered fair; that is, the dealing is consistent with an
equitable balance between the interests
of owners and users. The Committee
considers that this approach should govern the right of libraries and archives
to make preservation
copies of copyright material: the current limits on copying
preservation in s. 51A(1) are overly restrictive. Conversely,
the scope of s. 51A(2) is unjustifiably broad and this is reflected
restrictions in s. 51A(3). An approach preferable to these blanket
prescriptive
provisions would be for libraries and archives to assess
preservation requirements on a case-by-case basis, using the criteria set
the proposed fair dealing provision.
7.104 The current s. 51A provides that works held in published form may
be copied only if the librarian or archivist is satisfied
that a copy (not being
a second-hand copy) of the work cannot be obtained within a reasonable time at
an ordinary commercial price
(s. 51A(4)). Two members of the Committee are
of the view that, as with the corresponding provisions in ss. 49(5) and
50(7) of the
Act, the effect of s. 51A(4) should be retained as an
additional, mandatory requirement in the proposed fair dealing provision.
7.105 The two Committee members note that, although the current
s. 51A(4) prevents the copying of works that can be obtained within
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price, the copying of less than a
reasonable portion of a work for preservation purposes
will still be permitted
by the Act, even if another copy is available within a reasonable time at an
ordinary commercial price. This
the effect of the current
s. 50 is that where less than a reasonable portion of the work is required
to be copied—for example,
to replace a damaged, deteriorated, lost or
stolen portion of a work—this portion may be copied and supplied by
another library
that owns a copy of the work. This amount of copying will be
maintained under the proposed fair dealing provision.
7.106 The current s. 51A limits copying for preservation of works to
works that form, or formed, part of the collection of the library
or archives
undertaking the preservation copying. The majority of the Committee considers
that this restriction should be maintained.
A section giving effect to this
requirement could be added to the proposed fair dealing provision.
Committee member is concerned, however, that in some instances the library
holding the material in need of preservation copying
may not have the facilities
to make a suitable copy; that member believes that in such circumstances another
library or archives
with the requisite facilities should be permitted to make
the preservation copy.
7.107 The Committee does not support the retention of s. 51A(2). It
considers that if a purpose for copying cannot be characterised
dealing no royalty-free copy should be able to be made. Repeal of s. 51A(2)
would also remove the need for any requirement
that a work be destroyed.
Recommendation
7.108 Subject to its recommendation in paragraph 7.136
in relation to copying for the preservation of unpublished works, the Committee
recommends that s. 51A of the Act be repealed. Two
members of the
Committee recommend that this be subject to the inclusion in the Act of a
section that maintains the mandatory effect
of the current s. 51A(4) as
part of the proposed fair dealing provision.
7.109 The issues paper noted that it is unclear whether the Act allows more
than one copy of a work to be made for preservation. Submissions
the Committee
received suggested that some copying formats (such as digitisation) necessitate
the creation of more than one copy
of the work and that if only one copy were
permitted to be made preservation of some works, or preservation in particular
could not be undertaken. The ACC submitted that, although the Act
should allow for more than one copy to be made without infringement
accommodate preservation methods that require a number of copies to be made, the
number of copies able to be made should be limited.
The Committee notes that
under the proposed fair dealing provision the number of copies made for
preservation purposes would be limited
to what would be fair in each
circumstance.
7.110 A majority of the Committee is of the view that the making of
preservation copies in digital format may be considered to be
a fair dealing. It
notes that, as part of the Digital Agenda reforms, the Government has decided to
extend s. 51A into the digital
environment. One member of the Committee
foresees problems with permitting the digitisation of material for preservation
if the original work was not in digital form. Digitisation of copyright
material is discussed further in paragraphs 7.169 to 7.174.
7.111 The Australian Society of Archivists (ASA) submitted that if the
provisions for copying for preservation were amended to permit
the making of more than one
preservation copy in whatever format is considered appropriate by the library or
archives making the copy,
the making of
copies before material is damaged,
retention of the original item after copying,
then s. 51AA,
which regulates the copying of works in the Australian Archives, would become
redundant. The Committee has already noted
that s. 51A does not require the
destruction of works after they have been copied for the preservation purposes
listed in s. 51A(1).
7.112 The Committee is of the view that the scope of copying described by the
ASA could be considered a fair dealing in some instances.
It considers
that, for reasons similar to those described in relation to s. 51A, the
provision for the copying of works in the Australian
Archives (s. 51AA)
should also be subsumed by the proposed fair dealing provision.
Recommendation
7.113 The Committee recommends that s. 51AA of the Act be repealed.
Copying currently regulated by this provision should instead be
regulated by the
proposed fair dealing provision.
of materials
7.114 Libraries and archives submitted to the Committee that a special
permitting the copying for public display of unpublished
materials held in their collection (particularly old or fragile materials),
as not to expose those materials to the risk of damage or deterioration, should
be added to the Act. Libraries submitted that
works permitted to be copied under
a such a provision could be original works of ‘exceptional documentary
character’.
In their submissions to the Committee educational institutions
and the LCA expressed support for this type of copying by libraries
7.115 The Committee is of the view that a specific provision is unnecessary:
nothing needs to be added to the Act to protect unpublished
works in these
circumstances. An amendment of the existing provision, s. 51, could resolve
the question of copying for the purpose
of public display. This is discussed in
paragraphs 7.134 to 7.136.
Recommendation
7.116 The Committee recommends that the provisions of the Act that
currently allow copying of unpublished materials by libraries and
archives be
amended to permit the copying of those materials for the purpose of public
matter other than works
7.117 Section 110B of the Act currently restricts preservation copying to
sound recordings and cinematograph films. The issues paper
sought comments on
the proposal by libraries and archives that copying for preservation be extended
to include preservation copying
of all subject matter other than works. This
would include the copying of sound and television broadcasts. Support for
s. 110B to apply to a wider class of copyright material than that
to which it currently applies was expressed in the submissions
from libraries
and educational institutions.
7.118 The ACC expressed the view that a library or archives making a copy of
a broadcast is making the copy not for preservation purposes
but for the purpose
of adding to its collection. This is because the ACC considers that the
preservation provisions relate only to
‘original’ physical
embodiments of material and that broadcasts are generally recorded and stored in
a broadcaster’s
own archives. The Committee’s consultations with
libraries suggest that this is not uniformly the case and that
researchers’
access to this material may be restricted if a library or
archives is not permitted to make a copy. The Committee notes that preservation
copying of works permitted in the Act extends beyond the copying of original
manuscripts.
7.119 A majority of the Committee agrees with the ACC’s submission. It
seems that the policy behind the preservation copying
provisions is to enable
libraries and archives to preserve articles in their holdings. The majority of
the Committee is uncertain
that either libraries or archives should have a role
in copying broadcasts for users. Where, however, a library or an archives has
its holdings a copy of a broadcast, it should be able to make a further copy,
for the purpose of preserving the original, without
infringing copyright in the
recorded broadcast or any of the other underlying copyright subject matter. One
member of the Committee
is of the view that an archives such as the National
Film and Sound Archive should be able to make copies of broadcasts with a view
to preserving the national heritage in sound and vision.
Recommendation
7.120 A majority of the Committee recommends that no change to the Act be
made to permit libraries or archives to copy broadcasts
without the permission
of the copyright owner. If a copy of an article embodying a broadcast needs to
be made for the purpose of
preservation of the copyright materials embodied in
that article (including the broadcast), copying by the library or archives
be permitted. One member of the Committee is of the view that an archives
such as the National Film and Sound Archive should be able
to make copies of
broadcasts with a view to preserving the national heritage in sound and
7.121 In paragraphs 7.13 to 7.21 the Committee proposes that, wherever
appropriate, works and subject matter other than works be treated
consistently
within the Act. The requirements for making a preservation copy under
s. 110B are substantially similar to those listed
for works under
s. 51A. As with preservation copies of works, the Committee is of the view
that in some instances copying should
be permitted to preserve a sound
recording, cinematograph film or any audiovisual item against damage, loss or
destruction. Whether
copying should be permitted in such circumstances is, in
the Committee’s view, best determined through reference to the proposed
fair dealing provision.
Recommendation
7.122 The Committee recommends that s. 110B of the Act be repealed.
Copying of audiovisual items for the purpose of preservation should
determined by the general principles of fair dealing.
7.123 Section 110B(3) provides that, before a preservation copy can be made,
the librarian or archivist must be satisfied that a copy
(not being a
second-hand copy) of the copyright material cannot be obtained within a
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price.
As with preservation copying of
works, in which case it is recommended that the operation of s. 51A(4) be
retained, it is the view
of two members of the Committee that the operation of
s. 110B(3) should also be retained as an additional, mandatory requirement
with respect to copying by libraries and archives.
Recommendation
7.124 Two members of the Committee recommend that this be subject to the
inclusion in the Act of a section that maintains the effect
of s. 110B(3)
as an additional, mandatory requirement to the proposed fair dealing
of illustrations accompanying articles and other works
7.125 Section 53 of the Act provides that if an article, thesis or literary,
dramatic or musical work is accompanied by artistic works
provided for the
purpose of explaining or illustrating the article, thesis or other work then,
where the Act permits royalty-free
copying of the article, thesis or other work,
royalty-free copying of the artistic work is also permitted.
7.126 The Committee’s inquiries in relation to the practical
application of
and reliance placed on s. 53 revealed that it is most
often relied on in conjunction with ss. 49, 50 and 51A. The National
of Australia noted that without the operation of s. 53 the working
of these earlier sections in the Act would be invalidated.
7.127 The Committee recommends, in paragraphs 7.59, 7.97 and 7.108, that
ss. 49, 50 and 51A be repealed and that the copying previously
regulated by
those provisions be regulated instead by the proposed fair dealing provision.
Similarly, s. 53 could be repealed and
the copying of artistic works
contained within another work for the purpose of explaining that other work
could be regulated by the
general principles of fair dealing. The Committee
notes that the factors to be listed
for consideration in the proposed
fair dealing provision will not be exhaustive. It considers that, in determining
whether the copying
of an artistic work is fair, regard should also be had to
whether the artistic work accompanies an article, thesis or other work
purpose of explaining or illustrating the work.
7.128 The Committee notes that in some instances the copying of an artistic
work may be regarded as incidental only to the copying
of the principal subject.
An example of this would be the copying of an advertisement that appears on the
same page as part of an
article being copied. The Committee notes,
paragraphs 8.33 to 8.43, that incidental use of copyright material in some
cases can be regarded as being within the general principles
7.129 The question of whether it is permissible to make royalty-free copies
of illustrations accompanying articles and other works
should be determined on a
case-by-case basis through reference to the general principles of fair
Recommendation
7.130 The Committee recommends that s. 53 of the Act be repealed.
Copying currently permitted under this provision should be regulated
proposed fair dealing provision.
and publication of unpublished works, sound recordings or cinematograph films
held in libraries or archives
Unpublished
works and fair dealing
7.131 Section 51 of the Act defines limited circumstances in which a person,
or a library or archives acting in response to a request
from a user, may copy
an unpublished work for the purpose of research or study or with a view to
publication. Section 52 regulates
the publication of these unpublished works
As with other sections currently regulating copying done by libraries and
archives, the Committee has examined the feasibility of
repealing ss. 51
and 52 and having the copying currently permitted under those sections regulated
instead by the proposed fair dealing
7.132 The relationship between unpublished works and fair dealing is
discussed in paragraphs 5.18 to 5.22: the Committee expresses
conclusion that case law in Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States
suggests that it is unlikely that copying
or publication of an unpublished work
would be considered a fair dealing. The Committee notes in paragraph 5.18
that the US fair
use provision under s. 107 of the US
which lists factors for consideration that are similar to those
in the Committee’s proposed fair dealing provision, has been amended
to provide that ‘[t]he fact that a work is unpublished
shall not itself
bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the
above factors.’
The Committee considers that insertion of a similar statement in the
Australian Act would not clearly maintain the type of copying
and publication
currently permitted under the existing ss. 51 and 52. It considers that, if
libraries and archives are to continue to be able to copy and
publish unpublished works in special circumstances, and if libraries
archives are to continue to be able to copy such works for users, ss. 51
and 52 should be retained in the Act. Amendments to
simplify these provisions
are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Recommendation
7.133 The Committee recommends that ss. 51 and 52 remain in the Act,
but in a simplified form.
Preservation
of unpublished works
7.134 The Committee notes that the existing provisions for preservation
copying contemplate the copying of unpublished works for preservation
(s. 51A(5) of the Act). The Committee recommends in paragraph 7.108 and
7.113 that ss. 51A and 51AA be repealed and that
copying for preservation
be regulated by the proposed fair dealing provision. If this recommendation is
adopted, the ability of libraries
and archives to copy unpublished works for
preservation purposes may be placed in doubt by the general presumption case law
has developed
against finding the copying of unpublished copyright material to
be within copying permitted by fair dealing.
7.135 It is the Committee’s opinion that, rather than introduce a new
provision to retain the ability of a library or archives
to copy unpublished
works for preservation purposes, it would be better to amend the provisions
regulating the copying of unpublished
works. Section 51 currently permits
copying for the purpose of research or study or with a view to publication: the
purposes for
which copying is permitted under s. 51 could be extended to
permit copying for preservation.
Recommendation
7.136 The Committee recommends that copying for the purpose of preservation
be added to s. 51 of the Act.
of protection
7.137 The copyright in an unpublished literary, dramatic or musical work, or
a photograph or engraving, subsists indefinitely (s.
33). Section 51(1) of
the Act provides that, subject to certain requirements, these works may be
copied at a time more than 50 years
after the expiration of the calendar year in
which the author died and more than 75 years after the time at which, or the
of the period during which, the work was made. The Committee’s
issues paper noted that libraries and archives submitted that
this period of
protection is too long.
7.138 Libraries and archives claimed that calculating the period of
protection through reference to the date of the death of an author
is unworkable
because it is often difficult to determine when the author died. It was noted in
the issues paper that the practical
difficulties faced by libraries and archives
in determining when an author died are similar to those faced by people who need
ascertain whether a work is still protected by copyright. As a signatory to
the Berne Convention, Australia is required to provide
to works a minimum period
of protection of ‘the life of the author and fifty years after his
7.139 Two approaches for determining the period after which an unpublished
work may be copied under s. 51 were submitted to the Committee.
suggested that the period of protection be reduced to 30 years after the work
was made, a suggestion that appears to be
modelled on the open access period
applied to records held by the Australian
The Committee notes that the
class of works to which s. 51 applies is broader than that to which the
Archives Act applies.
7.140 As an alternative, libraries and archives endorsed the approach adopted
in the UK and New Zealand legislation, which provides
that a library or archives
may, under certain conditions, make a copy of an unpublished work if the owner
has not prohibited such
copying. The Committee notes that the depositor of
material in a library or archives will not necessarily be the copyright owner
all or any of the material deposited. In the case of letters, for example, the
recipient. In some instances a
not have anticipated
the need to do so.
7.141 The Committee does not agree that the period of protection should be
shortened through either of the approaches just outlined.
It notes, however,
that the period of protection could be reduced for some works, consistent with
Australia’s international
obligations.
7.142 The period of protection specified in s. 51 of the Act is the
minimum period of protection required by art. 7(1) of the Berne
Convention plus
an additional requirement of 75 years after the work was made. This additional
requirement was modelled on s. 7(6)
which provided, in addition to the minimum period of protection of the life of
the author and 50 years, an extended period of protection
than one hundred years after the time, or the end of the period, at or during
which the work was made’. In adopting
approach, the
Spicer Committee recommended that the additional period of protection in
Australian legislation be ‘shortened
to 75 years in view of the relatively
short period of Australian development and increasing interest in our early
7.143 Whilst the Committee received from libraries and archives submissions
arguing that this period should be reduced, it did not
receive any submissions
supporting the retention of the current period of protection. The Committee is
of the view that removal of
the requirement that unpublished works not be copied
until 75 years after they were made will not discourage the deposit of private
papers into public collections. It also notes that the UK provision on which the
period of protection in s. 51 is modelled does not
unpublished works made after 30 September 1989. The Committee considers
that an unpublished work should be able to be copied,
in accordance with
s. 51 of the Act, after 50 years from the year in which the author of the
Recommendation
7.144 The Committee recommends that the requirement in s. 51 of the
Act that an unpublished work not be copied until 75 years have
elapsed since the
work was made be removed from the provision.
7.145 It is noted that two members of the Committee have recommended, in
paragraphs 7.65 and 7.66, that libraries and archives be
permitted to supply
copies of copyright material to users only on a cost-recovery basis; that is,
they should not be permitted to
make a profit from the supply of copies to
users. In order to provide consistency within the Act, these two members are of
that s. 51 should similarly be restricted so that libraries and
archives cannot make a charge that exceeds the cost of making and
supplying a
copy to a user.
Recommendation
7.146 Two members
of the Committee recommend that a mandatory
requirement be inserted in s. 51, stating that libraries and archives
cannot make a charge
that exceeds the cost of making and supplying a copy to a
user when providing copies to a user who has made a request under this
7.147 It should be noted that copying of unpublished works may be consented
to by the copyright owner and that libraries and archives
should inquire, if
possible, at the time material is deposited whether the copyright owner will
permit this use of the work.
7.148 The Committee also notes that in a limited number of cases the use of
unpublished works by libraries and archives may be regulated
through the
operation of s. 198 of the Act. This section provides,
Where under a bequest, whether specific or general, a person is entitled,
beneficially or otherwise, to the manuscript of a literary,
dramatic or musical
work, or to an artistic work, and the work was not published before the death of
the testator, the bequest shall,
unless a contrary intention appears in the
testator’s will, be read as including the copyright in the work in so far
testator was the owner of the copyright immediately before his or her
In circumstances where a testator bequeaths material in which they own
to a library or archives, the library or archives will be the
the right to copy and publish them unless a contrary intention appears in the
Photographs
and engravings
7.149 Section 52(1) of the Act provides that, in certain limited
circumstances set out in the section,
published literary, dramatic or musical work incorporates the whole or a part of
an unpublished work
kept in a library or archives. Libraries have submitted that
s. 52 should be extended to provide for the publication of unpublished
photographs or engravings that are
incorporated in a literary,
dramatic or musical work. Such an extension would permit the publication of
photographs or engravings
as single works; for example, as a poster.
7.150 The Committee notes that s. 52 as it is currently drafted treats
all unpublished
works in a consistent manner. Just as unpublished
photographs or engravings that are not incorporated in a literary, dramatic or
work cannot be published, neither can the whole or parts of unpublished
works such as poems, diary instalments, letters, musical
scores or dramatic
texts that are not so incorporated. Adding the amendment suggested by libraries
would single out photographs and
engravings for special attention and will not
aid in simplifying the Act.
Recommendation
7.151 The Committee recommends that no change be made to s. 52 of the
Act so as to permit the publication of previously unpublished
photographs or
engravings that are
incorporated in a literary, dramatic or musical
heading of s. 52: ‘Publication of unpublished works kept in
7.152 The Committee noted in its issues paper that although the content of
s. 52 indicates that it applies to the publication of unpublished
kept in both libraries
archives, the heading to the section does not
make reference to archives. Submissions received by the Committee sought
clarification
of the ambit of s. 52.
Recommendation
7.153 The Committee recommends that the heading of s. 52 be amended to
read ‘Publication of unpublished works kept in libraries
recordings and cinematograph films
7.154 It is noted in paragraphs 7.134 to 7.136 that the ability of libraries
and archives to copy unpublished works for preservation
may have been placed in
doubt by the Committee’s recommendation to subsume the provisions for
preservation copying into the
proposed fair dealing provision. The ability of
libraries and archives to copy unpublished sound recordings and cinematograph
is similarly affected. The Committee has previously stated that, where
applicable, works and subject matter other than works should
consistently within the Act.
Recommendation
7.155 The Committee recommends that the purposes for which unpublished
sound recordings and cinematographs films may be copied, as
s. 110A, be extended to include for the purpose of preservation.
7.156 The submission from the State Library of New South Wales expressed
concern that there was inequity in the Act between the period
of protection
given to unpublished works and to unpublished sound recordings and cinematograph
films before they may be copied under
ss. 51 and 110A.
7.157 The only significant difference in the application of ss. 51 and
110A is the differing periods of protection before unpublished
material can be copied. Both ss. 51 and 110A specify a minimum period of
protection that accords with the amount of time
for which copyright would have
subsisted in the material had it been published; that is, the life of the author
and 50 years for
works and 50 years from the year of publication for sound
recordings and cinematograph films. The current s. 51, however,
an additional requirement that 75 years must also have passed since the work was
made. This may or may not extend the period of
protection beyond the length of
time for which copyright would have subsisted had the work been published.
7.158 The Committee recommends in paragraph
7.144 that the extra
period of protection required for unpublished works be removed. Removal of this
requirement means that unpublished
works and unpublished sound recordings and
cinematograph films are treated consistently within the Act.
Recommendation
7.159 The Committee recommends that no change be made to the period of
protection given to unpublished sound recordings and cinematograph
s. 110A of the Act.
7.160 Although s. 110A contemplates the copying of unpublished sound
recordings and cinematograph films with a view to publication,
there is no
provision corresponding to s. 52 regulating the publication of this
Recommendation
7.161 The Committee recommends that a provision be included in the Act to
regulate the publication of unpublished sound recordings
and cinematograph
films. This provision should be modelled on s. 52.
by parliamentary libraries
7.162 The Committee’s issues paper sought comments on whether
ss. 48A and 104A of the Act need to state specifically that they
digital copying and whether their operation should be extended so that members
of any parliament—Federal or State
and Territory—have access to
copies made by any parliamentary library.
7.163 Submissions from libraries called for a clarification that these
provisions apply to digital copying. Since ss. 48A and 104A
are broadly
drafted to permit ‘anything done’, however, the Committee sees no
need to refer specifically to digital copying.
7.164 Libraries expressed support for provision being made for members of the
Federal Parliament to have the same access to copyright
State and Territory parliamentary libraries
they currently
enjoy at the Federal Parliamentary Library. Similarly, it was suggested that
State and Territory parliamentarians should
have the same
parliamentary libraries as they do in
their own. It was claimed that promoting the interests of informed
government requires such reciprocal
access. Submissions from copyright
owners and the LCA opposed any extension of the provisions for
parliamentary libraries.
7.165 The Committee is of the view that parliamentarians, whether Federal or
State and Territory, should have access to copyright
ss. 48A and 104A at any parliamentary library. It does not consider that
such an approach would adversely affect the interests
of copyright owners.
7.166 The Committee made inquiries about the practical operation of and
reliance placed on ss. 48A and 104A with a view to determining
these provisions could be subsumed by the revised fair dealing provision. The
responses the Committee received through written
submissions and during
consultations with interest groups described the volume of and speed with which
copies are required by members
of parliament in pursuit of their parliamentary
duties. The Committee is of the view that, given the special pressures
experienced
by parliamentary libraries, it is not appropriate to regulate
copying by parliamentary libraries through the proposed fair dealing
The Committee considers that the provisions relating to the use of copyright
material by parliamentary libraries should
be maintained, but in an amended
form. The provisions should be amended, in such a way as to not reduce the level
of certainty currently
provided in ss. 48A and 104A, to apply to both works
and subject matter other than works and to permit members of any parliament
make use of all parliamentary libraries.
7.167 In relation to inter-library copying for members of parliament
(s. 50(1)(aa)), the Committee notes its recommendation that s.
repealed and inter-library copying be regulated by the principles of fair
dealing. It is the Committee’s view that copying
non-parliamentary library for the purpose of supplying copyright material to a
parliamentary library that has requested
the material to assist a person who is
a member of a parliament in the performance of their duties as such a member
would be considered
to be a fair dealing.
Recommendation
7.168 The Committee recommends that ss. 48A and 104A of the Act be
amalgamated. The majority of the Committee recommends that this
section provide
that the copyright in works or subject matter other than works
infringed by anything done, for the sole purpose of assisting a person who is a
member of an Australian parliament in the performance
of their duties, by an
authorised officer of a library with the principal purpose of providing library
services for members of an
Australian parliament. A member of the Committee does
not agree that ‘anything done’ should include the reproduction
supply of material electronically.
digital environment
and archives making digital copies of materials held in their collections
7.169 The Committee’s issues paper invited comment on whether the Act
should make provision for libraries and archives to make
royalty-free digital
copies for the purpose of users accessing the copies electronically from within
or outside libraries and archives
and, if so, what limitations, if any, should
apply to these dealings.
7.170 The Committee recognises that, in providing users with access to
may need to exercise
rights other than the right of reproduction: they may be doing more than copying
the copyright material. The
Federal Government has stated that it intends to
introduce into the Act a new broadly based, technology-neutral right of
communication
to the public. This right will encompass acts of electronic
transmission such as email and making copyright material available to
through the Internet. The right of communication to the public will be subject
to statutory exceptions such as fair dealing,
as is the right of
reproduction.
7.171 The Committee notes that the effect of the recommendations it makes in
paragraphs 7.100 to 7.113 is to permit libraries and
archives to create digital
copies of materials held in their collections where this form of copying would
amount to a fair dealing.
For example, a preservation copy of a work in the
collection of a library or archives collection may be permitted to be made in a
digital format.
7.172 The remainder of this chapter deals with other instances when the
making of a digital copy by a library or archives could be
considered to be a
fair dealing. Apart from the example of copying for the purpose of preservation
just given, there are two other
obvious purposes for which libraries and
archives may wish to make digital copies of material held in their
collection:
to supply digital copies to users
and other libraries and archives in response to a request for the
to make digital copies
available for browsing by users.
7.173 One member of the
Committee does not agree that libraries and archives should be able to digitise
material that is not originally
in digital form without the prior permission of
the copyright owner. That member considers that libraries would be making a
transformative
use of the work, thereby exercising a right that in some cases
the copyright owner may have chosen not to exercise. Another Committee
considers that libraries and archives should be able to digitise copyright
materials that are not in digital form solely for
preservation purposes;
digitisation for any other purpose, in that member’s view, should occur
only with the permission of
the copyright owner.
7.174 Unless otherwise specified, the views expressed in paragraphs 7.175 to
7.188 are the views of the majority of the Committee.
of digital copies to users and other libraries and archives
7.175 In its
Computer Software Protection
report the Committee
recommended that libraries and archives be able to make royalty-free digital
copies (including electronic transmission
of a copy stored in digital form and
the loan of a digital copy of a work on a carrier such as floppy disk) for the
purpose of providing
copies to users and other libraries and archives under
ss. 49 and 50 of the Act.
Committee notes that in approving the introduction of a new right of
communication to the public the Government has also decided
that libraries
should, at the request of users, be able to make and supply a digital copy of a
work on the same terms as they can
now make a hard copy.
7.176 The Committee noted in its
Computer Software Protection
and reiterates here, that the effect of its recommendation is not to permit
systematic digitisation of a library’s
or archives’s collection.
Under the current ss. 49 and 50 of the Act a library or archives is
permitted to make a copy of the
part, or a reasonable portion of
a particular work only in response to a request made for that particular work.
Copying of more than
a reasonable portion of a work
(other than an
article contained in a periodical publication) is permitted only if the
authorised officer is, after reasonable investigation,
satisfied that a copy
(not being a second-hand copy) of the work cannot be obtained within a
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial
price. The format in which a copy may
be made is not specified. Under the proposed fair dealing provision, these
limitations will
continue to be factors for consideration in determining whether
the royalty-free copying done by a library or archives is permitted
by the Act.
7.177 Digital copies made by libraries and archives for transmission in
response to a request made by a user or another library or
archives should be
capable of being found to be a fair dealing. For example, a majority of the
Committee is of the view that
the supply of digital copies of copyright
by email should be treated as analogous to a library supplying
copies of the same material in print form by mail or by fax.
7.178 A minority of the Committee is of the view that if more than a
reasonable portion of a work (other than an article contained
in a periodical
publication) is sought, libraries and archives should be permitted to make
digital copies only if the librarian or
archivist is satisfied that a copy (not
being a second-hand copy) of the work cannot be obtained within a reasonable
time at an ordinary
commercial price. The minority considers that this
requirement should operate with respect to the availability of works in both
and digital form.
7.179 The Committee recommends in paragraph 7.21 that, wherever appropriate,
works and subject matter other than works be treated
consistently within the
Act. It is the Committee’s view that libraries and archives should be able
to make digital copies,
in response to a user’s request, of both works and
subject matter other than works in the circumstances currently contemplated
ss. 49 and 50 if such copying comes within the proposed new fair dealing
7.180 Digital copies made by libraries and archives in response to a request
should not be used for any purpose other than to supply
the copy to the person
who requested the copy. This means, for example, that a library or archives
would not be permitted to make
the digital copy available to the public by
placing it on a publicly accessible database maintained by the library or
archives. The
question of whether libraries and archives should be permitted to
make digital copies of materials held in their collections for
the purpose of
placing these digital copies on a database accessible by the public is discussed
in the following paragraphs.
digital copies available for browsing by users
7.181 Submissions from libraries and educational institutions supported
permitting libraries and archives to make digital copies available
for browsing
by users. Some educational institutions submitted that remuneration to copyright
owners should be payable when a digital
copy of their material is made.
Libraries submitted that, although the technology for gaining access to
the fundamental principles on which copyright
law is based have not. Libraries and archives, it was submitted, should not be
from using new technologies as they arise. The LCA submitted that
libraries and archives should be permitted to make digital copies
for digital
browsing only if a copyright owner has consented to their work being used in
this manner.
7.182 Copyright owners did not support libraries and archives being permitted
to make royalty-free digital copies of copyright material
for users to browse
digitally. The Australian Publishers Association submitted that recent changes
in technology have created a ‘new
paradigm’ that has substantially
altered normal practices for exploiting a work. CAL stated that viewing
from a computer terminal will soon become the main method of
exploiting a work. Whereas in the past the copying of a work would be
a subsidiary use, digital delivery of copyright material is developing into a
main use. Similarly, Screenrights stated
in its submission that permitting
digital copies to be browsed ‘is analogous to sales of many physical
Recommendation
7.183 The majority of the Committee recommends that no special provision be
included in the Act to permit libraries and archives to
digitise copyright
material held in their collections for the purpose of making digital copies
available for browsing by users.
7.184 The majority of the Committee notes that digitisation of copyright
material held in the collections of libraries and archives
may be permitted in
limited instances under the proposed fair dealing provision.
Recommendation
7.185 One member of the Committee recommends that libraries and archives be
given a separate right to digitise works and subject matter
other than works
held in their collections for the purpose of making digital copies available for
browsing by users, but only where
the copyright material being digitised is not
in digital form
within a reasonable time at an ordinary
commercial price.
7.186 This recommendation would operate as a statutory exception to the
proposed right of communication to the public.
7.187 The Federal Government has stated its intention to legislate that,
where a library or archives gives its users access to copyright
materials in its
holdings that have been published in digital form, this access must be provided
on computer terminals from which
it is impossible for users to copy, download or
print the copyright material being displayed. The consequence of this proposal
that the use of such digital copyright materials held by libraries and
archives will be physically confined to browsing. To the extent
that libraries
and archives are permitted to make such materials available without reference to
fair dealing principles, the Government’s
proposal is broader than that
recommended by the Committee.
7.188 The Committee notes that the use of a digital copy of copyright
material will be subject to the principles of fair dealing to
which use of a
hard copy of copyright material is subject. A user will not be permitted to
print or download a digital copy of a
work, just as they cannot photocopy from
the hard copy of a work, unless the reproduction constitutes a fair dealing.
This applies
to copying of the whole or substantial parts of copyright material.
The Committee considers that notices similar to those already
required to be
displayed close to photocopy machines in libraries and archives should be
required to be incorporated in the display
of database material. These notices
and their role in limiting the liability of libraries and archives with respect
to the authorisation
of infringement of copyright are discussed in the following
paragraphs.
copies made on machines installed in libraries and archives
7.189 Section 39A of the Act provides that, if an infringing copy is made on
a reprographic reproduction machine installed in a library
or archives, the
library or archives will not be taken to have authorised the making of the
infringing copy by reason only that the
copy was made on the machine if a
prescribed notice warning of the limits of the fair dealing exceptions is
displayed on or near
that machine. The display of this notice provides, to
libraries and archives that permit the use of reprographic reproduction
a limited form of immunity from liability for the authorisation of
Computer Software Protection
report the Committee
recommended that s. 39A of the Act be extended to apply where a work stored
on a library or archives database
is displayed via a computer terminal made
available to users. The report specified that, with respect to computer
terminals, the
notice would be required to be incorporated with the display of
the work; that is, the notice should appear within the screen of
the computer
The display of this notice
would provide the same form of immunity to libraries and archives in relation to
acts done on a computer
terminal as is currently provided for acts done on a
reprographic reproduction machine.
7.191 The Committee notes that, in addition to works, other copyright
material such as sound recordings and cinematograph films may
also be stored in
digital form. It is the Committee’s view that, where appropriate, works
and subject matter other than works
should be treated consistently in the Act.
The revised s. 39A notice should be technology neutral.
Recommendation
7.192 The Committee recommends that s. 39A of the Act be extended to
apply where any copyright material in the collection of a library
or an archives
is accessible via a computer terminal made available to users.
7.193 The recommendation in the
Computer Software Protection
proposed that the notice required to be incorporated within the display of the
work advise users of the computer terminal
of the copyright obligations incurred
by printing out the work. It is recognised that the printing out of a work may
not constitute
the only way in which the copyright in the work might be
infringed. In particular, the downloading of database material to computer
memory or onto a carrier such as a floppy disk and the transmission of the
material to another computer are other ways in which a
copy of a work or subject
matter other than a work may be obtained. To provide immunity from acts other
than copying, the notice
should refer to anything done by the user that cannot
be characterised as a fair dealing, as well as any other exception permitted
the Act to the exclusive rights of copyright owners.
Recommendation
7.194 The Committee recommends that the prescribed notice under s. 39A
advise the user of the copyright owner’s rights and the
possible legal
consequences arising from any unauthorised exercise of the copyright
owner’s rights.
8 Miscellaneous exceptions
This chapter examines 40 miscellaneous exceptions provisions in the
to see if they might be subsumed within the
Committee’s proposed fair dealing provision. The organisation of the
miscellaneous
exceptions provisions in the Act is considered first and
recommendations are made to simplify that organisation.
The chapter also considers substantive problems in respect of the
provisions. Repeal is recommended of only those provisions that
are clearly
capable of falling within the proposed revised fair dealing provision. A number
of the miscellaneous exceptions provisions
raise policy questions that go beyond
the Committee’s reference to simplify the Act. The Committee does not
recommend changes
to those provisions.
Introduction
8.01 In addition to the fair dealing provisions discussed in Chapters 4 and
contains 33 royalty-free exceptions to the exclusive rights
comprising copyright. As with the present fair dealing provisions, specificity
is the main feature of the miscellaneous exceptions provisions—each of
them allows for a specific act to be done in relation
to a specific subject
matter of copyright.
As already seen, the current fair dealing provisions
apply to all copyright subject matter and all acts of copyright but are confined
to permitting the doing of these acts for four specific purposes. Both sets of
provisions create exceptions to copyright and as such
are justified by the same
policy rationale: the need to allow, in certain circumstances, free use of
8.02 The emphasis of the miscellaneous exceptions provisions on specific acts
and works is reflected in the organisation of the exceptions
in the Act. Part
III of the Act deals with ‘Copyright in original literary, dramatic,
musical and artistic works’. Division
2 of Part III, ‘Infringement
of copyright in works’, contains provisions that specify what constitutes
an infringement
of a copyright work. Divisions 3, 4, 6 and 7 of Part III contain
the miscellaneous exceptions relating to copyright works. Division
(ss. 40 to 44B) is entitled ‘Acts not constituting infringements of
provisions in respect
of works, as well as four miscellaneous exceptions. Division 4 (ss. 45 to
47A) is entitled ‘Acts not
constituting infringements of copyright in
literary, dramatic and musical works’; it contains exceptions to the
exercise of
reproduction, performance and broadcast rights in respect of all
works except artistic works. Division 6 of Part III (ss. 54 to 64)
a statutory licence in respect of the recording of musical works.
Division 7 (ss. 65 to 73) is entitled ‘Acts not constituting
infringements of copyright in artistic works’; it contains
exceptions to
the exercise of all the exclusive rights of copyright in respect of artistic
8.03 Part IV of the Act deals with ‘Copyright in subject-matter other
than works’ which comprises sound recordings, cinematograph
films, sound
and television broadcasts and published editions of works. Division 6 of Part IV
(ss. 100A to 112B) concerns ‘Infringement
of copyright in
subject-matter other than works’. As well as containing provisions that
specify what constitutes an infringement
of copyright in the copyright subject
matter, Division 6 contains the four fair dealing provisions in respect of the
other subject
matter and 10 miscellaneous exceptions. These exceptions relate to
the exercise of the reproduction, performance and broadcast rights
in respect of
the subject matter referred to. Part VII of the Act deals with Crown copyright
and Crown use of copyright and contains
two relevant exceptions. Finally, Part X
of the Act is entitled ‘Miscellaneous’; it contains four
miscellaneous exceptions
relating to the transmission of broadcasts.
Organisational
problems with the miscellaneous exceptions provisions
8.04 It should be clear from the foregoing that the organisation of both the
fair dealing and the miscellaneous exceptions provisions
is confusing. This is
mainly because the exceptions are located in different Parts of the Act and,
within those Parts, in a number
of different divisions. A further problem is
that there is a lack of consistency in how the exceptions are arranged in
works and subject matter other than works. Thus, Part III of the Act
deals with the exceptions as they apply to works in three separate
while Part IV of the Act deals with the exceptions as well as more general
matters relating to infringement in one division
8.05 One way these organisational problems could be resolved is by locating
all the royalty-free exceptions in one part of the Act.
The key to such a reform
would be to eliminate, or at least minimise, the current distinction in these
exceptions between works and
subject matter other than
In the interests of simplifying
the Act and promoting a technology-neutral approach to it, the Committee adopts
this approach, subject
to the recommendations it makes for the substantive
reform of the particular exceptions provisions.
Recommendation
8.06 The Committee recommends that all miscellaneous exceptions provisions
be located in one part of the Act. It further recommends
that the provisions be
organised within the ‘Miscellaneous exceptions’ part in terms of the
exclusive rights of copyright
to which they relate.
Substantive
problems in respect of the miscellaneous exceptions provisions and the
Committee’s approach to these problems
8.07 More difficult than the organisation of the miscellaneous exceptions
provisions is the question of their substantive justification.
The provisions
cover a wide variety of situations and the question must be asked whether, given
the changes in the use of copyright
materials that have taken place since the
passing of the
in 1968, all the provisions are still relevant.
Simplification of the Act would be well served by a reduction in the number of
miscellaneous
exceptions, particularly since many of the provisions are wordy
and complicated.
8.08 In order to obtain feedback on the operation of the miscellaneous
exceptions provisions in practice, on 14 November 1997 the
Committee sent a
letter to copyright interests, seeking examples of reliance on the provisions
and expressing an interest in learning
whether any industry or business
practices have developed around the exceptions. The Committee received 29
submissions in response
to its letter. Where appropriate these submissions are
referred to in the discussion that follows.
8.09 The Committee’s approach to simplification of the miscellaneous
exceptions provisions has been to determine whether they
are capable of falling
within the revised fair dealing provision. The proposed expansion by the
Committee of the fair dealing concept
to include copyright dealings done for any
purpose allows a wide range of exceptions to copyright to be considered within
dealing context. For the reasons that follow, however, the Committee
recommends the repeal of only those miscellaneous exceptions
provisions that are
clearly capable of falling within its revised statement of fair dealing,
including the non-exclusive set of factors
developed from s. 40(2) of the
Act and under local and overseas case law and provisions of international
conventions such as art.
9(2) of the Berne Convention.
8.10 In approaching its task, the Committee has notionally divided the
miscellaneous exceptions into three categories:
those where in the Committee’s
view the exception is clearly capable of falling within the revised fair dealing
those where there is some
uncertainty whether the activity contained in the relevant provision would be
considered a fair dealing;
those where
the activity is excepted from what would otherwise constitute an infringement of
part of government.
8.11 The Committee considers that the provisions setting out the
exceptions falling within the first category should be repealed.
The Act will be
simplified if the ability to engage in these activities without infringement is
dealt with in the fair dealing context.
8.12 In relation to the exceptions falling under the other two categories,
the Committee proposes the retention in the Act of the
sections relating to
them. Problems that might arise from their operation are referred to but,
despite any shortcomings, the Committee
considers that these provisions must be
retained. In the case of the provisions falling within the second category, the
considers that their retention is warranted in the interests of
promoting certainty in the way the relevant exceptions operate. Simplification
of the provisions falling within the third category raises questions that, in
the Committee’s view, fall outside its terms
of reference.
8.13 Each of the 40 miscellaneous exceptions provisions is considered in this
chapter in the order shown in Table 1.
1 Miscellaneous exceptions: list of provisions considered
Section no.
Section name or description
Reproductions and related uses
43(1), 104(a)
Reproductions and other acts done for the purpose of judicial
proceedings
Back-up copy of a computer program
Reproduction of writing on approved label for containers for chemical
47, 70, 107
Reproduction of works and other copyright subject matter for purpose of
broadcasting
65, 66, 67, 68, 69
Certain reproductions and publication and transmission by diffusion of
artistic works
Reproduction of part of artistic work in later work
Reconstruction of buildings
Filming or recording of broadcasts for private and domestic use
Reproductions of editions of work
Reproduction of statutory instruments and judgments
Performances, transmissions and broadcasts
Performances in respect of literary or dramatic works
Performances of works and sound recordings at places where people reside or
sleep or in respect of a club or other non-profit organisation
199(2), 199(3)
Public performance of certain broadcasts
Public performance of recordings that originate overseas
Public performance of old news film
Public performance of works contained in old films
Re-transmission of broadcasts
Importation of books and published editions
Recording of musical works
Use of record embodying film soundtracks
Use of copyright material for the services of the Crown
Reproductions
and related uses
Reproductions
and other acts done for the purpose of judicial proceedings
8.14 Section 43(1) of the Act states that copyright in a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work is not infringed by anything
done for the purpose of a
judicial proceeding or of a report of a judicial proceeding. Section 104(a) is
in terms identical to those
of s. 43(1), except that it applies to subject
matter other than works. ‘Judicial proceeding’ is defined in
as ‘a proceeding before a court, tribunal or person having
by law power to hear, receive and examine evidence on oath’.
8.15 Submissions to the Committee evinced strong reliance on these two
provisions by the judiciary and the legal profession and by
libraries and
educational institutions. The Supreme Court of Western Australia, for example,
The two exceptions are both essential in order to facilitate the work of the
courts. The copying of works the subject of copyright,
or extracts from them,
whether they be extracts from reported or unreported judgments, legal or other
textbooks etc for the purposes
of evidence or submissions, is a well established
need. Acts with respect to subject matter other than works are also necessary
similar reasons including, in particular, copying, showing, playing,
exhibiting or otherwise dealing with the subject matter for
the purposes of
legal proceedings.
The LCA referred to the broader rationale of the two provisions by arguing
that they ‘play an extremely important role in the
administration of
justice and are fully consistent with the public interest’. The Committee
notes that the provisions were
recommended for inclusion in the Act by the
Franki Committee because ‘people are entitled to know the law and they are
to know their legal rights and
obligations’.
8.16 Strong policy considerations clearly underlie ss. 43(1) and 104(a).
The Committee regards review of these considerations as not
falling within its
terms of reference. It does, however, note that there is scope for criticising
the two provisions on the basis
that they are too broad, particularly in so far
as they are used by the private legal profession. As Professor Ricketson pointed
out, sound recordings, films and broadcasts may be copied under s. 104 by
any person or organisation without limitation, provided
they are copied for the
purposes prescribed by the provision.
In respect of s. 43(1), CAL submitted,
In CAL’s view, many users are confused as to what copying is permitted
under [s. 43(1)] and the meaning of the term ‘judicial
proceedings’. Many law firms believe they are entitled to rely on the
exception for copying related to intended or continuing
litigation. Due to the
existence of s. 43(2) [the fair dealing provision related to the giving of
professional advice], CAL’s
view is that this exception applies only to
copying within the court system itself in relation to matters that have already
8.17 One member of the Committee supports the claim that ss. 43(1) and
104 are too broad. The member agrees in principle with the
policy that access to
the legal system is in the public interest, but they do not believe that
subsidise that access. If the Committee
were of the view that the substantive reform of ss. 43(1) and 104(a) was
within its terms
of reference, this member of the Committee would make the
following recommendations in relation to those sections:
that s. 104(a) be limited to
applying to copying in respect of proceedings that have already
that ss. 43(1) and
104(a) be amended to make it clear that they do not allow the reproduction or
supply of material
electronically.
Recommendation
8.18 A majority of the Committee recommends the retention of ss. 43(1)
and 104(a) of the Act. It further recommends that the two provisions
copy of a computer program
8.19 Section 43A(1) allows the owner of a copy of a computer program to make
a copy of the program as protection against loss, destruction
or damage that
renders the copy unuseable. The back-up copy may not be made from an infringing
copy of the computer program or contrary
to an express prohibition by the owner
of the copyright in the computer program (s. 43A(2)).
8.20 The Committee received numerous submissions providing examples of
reliance on s. 43A. The ACC stated that it often receives inquiries
the section—for example, libraries wanting to lend the back-up copy rather
than the original; libraries wanting to rely
on the section to make back-up
copies of other material such as CDs, audiotapes and videos; owners of computer
programs (individuals,
companies, libraries, educational institutions, and so
on) wanting confirmation that they can make a back-up copy and what are the
conditions under which they can do it; commercial copying organisations wanting
to make back-up copies of clients’ software;
and application of the
exception to works in a software package that are not ‘computer
programs’. Seven educational institutions
and libraries informed the
Committee that they placed strong reliance on s. 43A.
8.21 Three of those seven submissions referred to computer programs’
special vulnerability to damage or destruction. Monash
University, for example,
submitted, ‘The exception offered by this section is essential protection
against accidental deletion
or corruption of the code which can easily occur
through no fault of the user. It should be
preserved.’
8.22 Strong policy considerations underlie s. 43A, a fact reflected in
the considerable public reliance on the section. In the Committee's
reliance warrants the retention of s. 43A. In its
Computer Software
report, the Committee made eight recommendations (in paragraphs
2.17 to 2.22) that effectively proposed the strengthening of s. 43A.
Committee notes that, as part of the Digital Agenda reforms already mentioned,
the Government announced that it has adopted many
of the recommendations in the
Computer Software Protection
report, including those relating to back-up
copying of computer programs.
Recommendation
8.23 The Committee reaffirms its recommendations in the
Software Protection
report concerning s. 43A of the Act.
Reproduction
of writing on approved label for containers for chemical product
8.24 Section 44B of the Act provides that the reproduction on a label on a
container for a chemical product of any writing appearing
on an approved label
is not an infringement of any literary copyright that may subsist in relation to
that writing. Section 112B
provides for the same exception in relation to any
published-edition copyright that may subsist in relation to the writing. Section
10(1) defines ‘approved label’ as a label approved under (a) Part 2
of the Agvet Code of a State or of the Northern Territory;
or (b) Part 2 of the
Agvet Code of the participating Territories within the meaning of the
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Act 1994
8.25 Copyright in labels for, and other material included in the packaging
of, chemical products was affirmed (where the relevant
material can be said to
be an original compilation) by the English Court of Appeal in
Elanco Products
Ltd v Mandops (Agrochemical
Specialists)
and the Full Court of
the Federal Court of Australia in
Skybase Nominees Pty Ltd v Fortuity Pty
The Committee understands that
ss. 44B and 112B were introduced in the mid-1990s as part of government
policy on the marketing of
generic agricultural and veterinary chemical products
in Australia. In the Committee’s opinion the exception provided by these
provisions may not be capable of falling within the revised fair dealing
8.26 Having regard to its terms of reference, the Committee considers that it
is not open to it to review the policy underlying this
exception. Accordingly,
it confined its attention to whether the Act could be simplified. In the
Committee’s view there is
no need for the exception to be contained in two
Recommendation
8.27 The Committee recommends that ss. 44B and 112B of the Act be
Reproduction
for purpose of broadcasting, reproduction for purpose of including work in
television broadcast, making copy of sound
recording for purpose of
broadcasting
8.28 Section 47 provides that where the broadcasting by a person of a
literary, dramatic or musical work, or of an adaptation of such
a work, would
not—whether by reason of an assignment or licence or of the operation of a
provision of the Act—constitute
an infringement of the copyright in the
work, but the making by the person of a sound recording or a cinematograph film
of the work
or adaptation would (apart from this section) constitute such an
infringement, the copyright in the work is not infringed by the
making such a recording or film solely for the purpose of broadcasting or
adaptation of the work (s. 47(1)). Sections
70 and 107 are identical to
s. 47(1) except for the following crucial differences: s. 70 applies
to the making of a copy of a broadcast
film that includes an artistic work and
s. 107 applies to the making of a copy of a sound broadcast that includes a
sound recording.
8.29 These sections allow broadcasters to make ephemeral reproductions or
reproductions that facilitate the broadcasting of a film
or sound recording. The
Spicer Committee justified its recommendation to include the provisions in the
Act as follows:
Reproductions of performances by artists and others are often made by
broadcasters for the purposes of subsequent broadcasting. In
a country such as
Australia, with its different time zones and limited number of co-axial cables,
we think that this practice is
necessary and
8.30 In the Committee’s view, it is uncertain whether the exceptions
provided by ss. 47, 70 and 107 are capable of falling within
the revised
fair dealing provision. The Committee notes that both the Berne Convention and
the Rome Convention specifically recognise
the making of ephemeral reproductions
as exceptions to copyright (arts. 11
(3) and 15 respectively).
Furthermore, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Germany and the
Netherlands all specifically
allow for the making of ephemeral reproductions in
their copyright laws.
8.31 The Committee notes further that the three provisions were the subject
of consideration by the CCG in
Highways to Change
, where it recommended
that the provisions be extended to cover all broadcasting, regardless of whether
it involved wire or wireless
technology. In relation to other transmissions to
the public, the CCG suggested that the necessity of extending the ephemeral
provisions to cover these services should be given further consideration
in the ‘wider review of the Act, proposed by the Minister
Accordingly, the
Committee proposes to consider the possible extension of the ephemeral copying
provisions when it considers other
matters identified by the CCG as requiring
further review (see paragraph 8.73).
Recommendation
8.32 Subject to any recommendations it makes in relation to the application
of the sections as a result of its consideration of matters
identified by the
CCG as requiring review, the Committee
recommends the retention of
ss. 47, 70 and 107 of the Act as stand-alone provisions; it further
recommends that the three provisions
be combined.
and certain other works in public places, buildings and models of buildings,
incidental filming or televising of artistic
works, publication of artistic
works, and artistic works transmitted to subscribers to a diffusion
8.33 Section 65 provides that it is not an infringement of copyright in a
sculpture or work of artistic craftsmanship that is situated,
otherwise than
temporarily, in a public place or in premises open to the public, to make a
painting, drawing, engraving or photograph
of it or to include it in a film or
television broadcast. ‘Work of artistic craftsmanship’ is not
defined in the Act
but it is referred to in paragraph (c) of the definition of
‘artistic work’ in s. 10. The effect of this reference is
exclude paintings, drawings, engravings, photographs, buildings and models of
buildings from the operation of s. 65. Application
of the exception only to
sculptures and works of artistic craftsmanship has resulted in considerable
criticism of s. 65, which is
discussed in paragraph 8.36.
8.34 The exception in s. 66, which is identical in terms to s. 65,
applies to buildings and models of buildings. Section 67 provides
that, without
prejudice to ss. 65 and 66, the copyright in an
artistic work is not
infringed by the inclusion of the work in a cinematograph film or in a
television broadcast if its inclusion
in the film or broadcast is incidental to
the principal matters represented in the film or broadcast. The exception
provided for
in s. 67 is in addition to those contained in ss. 65 and
66. Unlike those sections, however, s. 67 applies to all artistic works
and, unlike s. 65, it is not limited in its operation to works in public
places or premises open to the public.
8.35 Section 68 states that the copyright in an artistic work is not
infringed by the publication of a painting, drawing, engraving,
photograph or
cinematograph film if, by virtue of s. 65, 66 or 67, the making of that
painting, drawing, engraving, photograph or
film did not constitute an
infringement of the copyright. Section 69 allows works that ss. 65, 66 and
67 permit to be included in
a television broadcast to be included also in a
television program that is transmitted to subscribers to a diffusion
8.36 A considerable level of community reliance appears to be placed on
ss. 65, 66, 67 and 68. The ACC stated that it often receives
rely on the section—for example, a creator
of public sculptures complained
of people reproducing images of the sculptures on postcards and other tourist
items for sale; a sculptor
designing a sculpture in connection with a major
public event was concerned about the sculpture’s image being reproduced on
postcards, advertising material, and so on; and a museum published pictures of
public art in a book.
8.37 The ACC noted that many of the inquiries it receives about s. 66
are from people who are upset that their house has appeared
in an advertisement.
Some inquiries are from students wanting to paint, draw or photograph buildings.
Others are from people who
want to photograph or film houses and public
buildings for inclusion in publications and in films. The State Library of New
Wales stated that it relies on ss. 65 and 66.
8.38 The ACC also noted that it often receives inquiries about
s. 67—for example, people making films and documentaries who
know if they need to get copyright clearances for artworks that are filmed;
advertising agencies filming in private homes;
and galleries wanting to know if
people can film in the gallery. The ACC noted that it also often receives
inquiries about s. 68
and that these arise in conjunction with queries
8.39 The Screen Producers’ Association of Australia stated that
s. 67 is much used in the film and television industries to
incidental filming of artistic works during shoots. SBS (the Special
Broadcasting Service) stated that it regularly relies
on ss. 65, 66 and 67
in relation to the filming of sculptures and buildings and incidental filming of
artistic works. It submitted
that the most common manner in which these
provisions would be applied would be when a reporter is conducting an interview
or a ‘stand-up’
in a public place and chooses to stand near a
sculpture, work of art or building as a backdrop.
8.40 In the Committee’s view incidental filming as covered by
s. 67 is clearly capable of falling within the revised fair dealing
8.41 The Committee understands that ss. 65 and 66 were included in the
Act to allow copying of works found in public parks or streets
and other places
where it is not practicable to control
The expectation was, it seems,
that the copying of the works would be occasional and would not constitute an
unfair use of the copyright
in the works. In practice, however, the intended
scope of ss. 65 and 66 has been exceeded by the commercial exploitation of
reproductions
allowed under the sections. As the ACC has pointed out, the
sections provide
nothing to stop commercial exploitation of [a] work and equally nothing which
grant[s] the artist any right to benefit from such exploitation
... The mere
display of, say, a tapestry in a gallery allow[s] a visitor to the gallery to
photograph that work and to reproduce
that photo onto items such as cards,
posters and postcards.
From the ACC’s submission to the Committee, it appears that there is a
considerable amount of commercial exploitation occurring
pursuant to ss. 65
and 66. The extended fair dealing concept is the appropriate context for
resolving the practical injustices to
which the present wording of ss. 65
and 66 gives rise.
8.42 In the Committee’s view it would be consistent with the intention
of the legislation as expressed by the Spicer
to allow the activities
covered by the provisions under consideration to be exempt from copyright
infringement as fair dealings,
if the claim can be made in the circumstances of
a particular case. On this basis, and on the basis that their deletion will
the Act, the Committee recommends as
Recommendation
8.43 The Committee recommends the repeal of ss. 65, 66 and 67 of the
Act and, as a necessary consequence, ss. 68 and 69.
Reproduction
of part of artistic work in later work
8.44 Section 72(1) provides that the copyright in an artistic work is not
infringed by the making of a later artistic work by the
same author if, in
making the later work, the author does not repeat or imitate the main design of
the earlier work. Section 72(2)
states that s. 72(1) has effect
notwithstanding that part of the earlier work is reproduced in the later work
and that, in reproducing
the later work, the author used a mould, cast, sketch,
plan, model or study made for the purposes of the earlier work.
8.45 Section 72 covers the situation where an artist has produced a
particular work, the copyright in which is owned by another person—for
example, where the work has been done pursuant to a contract of employment or a
contract of commission that provides for copyright
ownership by the employer or
commissioner—and the artist wishes to reproduce certain features or
aspects of this work in a
the absence of a special provision to the contrary, the artist would run the
risk of infringing the copyright in the first work
if he or she reproduced a
substantial part of it. The effect of s. 72(1) is that in such a case the
making of a later work will not
infringe the earlier work provided that the
artist does not ‘repeat or imitate the main design of the earlier
8.46 The operation of s. 72 has been criticised by some commentators as
being uncertain. Professor Ricketson, for instance, states
that the meaning of
the expression ‘main design’ is unclear and is not made any clearer
by s. 72(2). In his view s. 72
must mean that an artist is free to use
more than the ‘ideas’ of their earlier work or more than an
insubstantial part
thereof; otherwise the provision would be redundant.
Therefore ‘part’ in s. 72(2) must mean a substantial part; on
other hand, it must not be so substantial so as to constitute the
‘main design’ of the work, whatever that may
Professor Ricketson believes that
ultimately the section allows an artist to use a substantial part of an earlier
artistic work in
a later work provided that they do not take the whole design of
the earlier work.
8.47 In the Committee’s view it is not clear whether the exception
provided by s. 72 is capable of falling within the revised
fair dealing
exception, particularly in so far as it relates to commercial dealings with
works. The Committee acknowledges that there
is an argument to be made that
s. 72 is redundant. Professor Ricketson, for example, states,
Perhaps the real explanation of the section is that it is an attempt to put
into legal terms a convention normally exercised by artists
in their everyday
work and one that has never caused any particular trouble, being well understood
by all practising artists.
The Committee, however, is limited to making the following recommendation
with respect to s. 72.
Recommendation
8.48 The Committee recommends the retention of s. 72 of the Act.
Reconstruction
of buildings
8.49 Section 73(1) provides that where copyright subsists in a building this
is not infringed by a reconstruction of the building.
Section 73(2) provides
that where a building has been constructed in accordance with architectural
drawings or plans in which copyright
subsists and has been so constructed by, or
with the licence of, the owner of the copyright, that copyright is not infringed
later reconstruction of the building by reference to those drawings or
8.50 In the Committee’s view the exception given by s. 73 is
obviously capable of falling within the revised fair dealing provision.
therefore makes the following recommendation.
Recommendation
8.51 The Committee
recommends the repeal of s. 73 of the
or recording of broadcasts for private and domestic use
8.52 Section 111(1) states that the copyright in a television broadcast, in
so far as it consists of visual images, is not infringed
by the making of a
cinematograph film of the broadcast or the making of a copy of such a film for
the private and domestic use of
the person by whom it is made. Section 111(2) is
identical to s. 111(1), except that it applies to the copyright in a sound
or in a television broadcast in so far as it consists of sounds.
8.53 The expression ‘private and domestic’ is not defined in the
Act. Section 111(3) effectively provides, however, that
the phrase does not
(a) selling a copy of the film or sound recording, letting it for hire, or by
way of trade offering or exposing it for sale or hire;
(b) distributing a copy
of the film or sound recording, whether for the purpose of trade or otherwise;
(c) by way of trade exhibiting
a copy of the film or sound recording in public;
(d) broadcasting the film or recording; or (e) causing the film or recording to
be seen or heard in public.
8.54 Section 111 applies only to the making of a recording of a television or
sound broadcast. It does not create an exception in
respect of the copying of
any work, film or sound recording included in such a broadcast. In practice,
therefore, the exception is
limited to the copying of live broadcasts such as a
sports event or concert.
8.55 Despite the ‘private and domestic use’ limitation contained
in this provision, the Committee does not consider that
the exception would come
within its revised fair dealing proposal.
8.56 The Committee notes the submission by ARIA (the Australian Recording
Industry Association), which called for clarification of
s. 111 in the
light of the High Court’s recent decision in
Telstra Corporation v
Australasian Performing Rights Association
This case considered the
meaning of the words ‘to the public’ as they appear in the
definition of the term ‘broadcast’
in s. 10(1) of the Act. A
majority of the court held that ‘public’ means the ‘copyright
owner’s public’.
ARIA submitted that the High Court’s
interpretation of ‘public’ is inconsistent with s. 111(3),
which, in ARIA’s
view, suggests that the words ‘private and domestic
use’ are to be understood in opposition to commercial or public use.
further submitted,
Section 111 needs to be clarified to ensure adequate copyright protection of
sound recordings in an increasingly converged communications
environment ...
Callers on hold are accessing material which has been broadcast to or
prepared in a recorded format for the point of transmission
of that material.
Internet users are in a comparable situation. With the advent of converged
communications services, in particular
Web TV and platforms which combine
broadcasting and interactivity, material can be accessed in private according to
subsection 111(3)
but in public, in the sense of being available to members of
the public should they choose to seek access, as found in
8.57 As discussed, on 30 April 1998 the Government announced its intention to
effect a number of copyright reforms, the most significant
introduction of a new broadly based, technology-neutral right of communication
to the public to replace the broadcast and
other transmission rights. The
Committee considers that the operation of s. 111 needs to be further
examined in the light of the
Government’s decision: it proposes to examine
the operation of this provision when it considers the simplification of the
rights of copyright owners.
Recommendation
8.58 Subject to any recommendations it makes when it examines s. 111
of the Act as part of its consideration of the simplification
of the exclusive
rights of copyright owners, the Committee recommends the retention of
s. 111 as a stand-alone provision.
Reproductions
of editions of works
8.59 Paragraph (a) of s. 112 provides that the copyright in a published
edition of a work is not infringed by the making of a reproduction
of the whole
or a part of that edition if that reproduction is made in the course of a
dealing that, by virtue of the fair dealing
defences in ss. 40 to 44, does
not infringe the copyright in that work, or the making of a copy (including a
handicapped reader’s
copy or an intellectually handicapped person’s
copy) of the whole or a part of that work, the making of which does not infringe
(ss. 49, 50 and 51A), copying by educational institutions
to 135ZT) and the copying of statutory instruments and judgments (s.182A).
Paragraph (b) of s. 112 extends the same exception
to a published edition
containing more than one work, in which case the relevant dealing or
reproduction may be with some or all
of the works.
8.60 The submissions the Committee received in respect of s. 112 showed
a low level of reliance on and awareness of the
The Committee infers that this
was because of the location of the provision outside the schemes of exceptions
to which it relates.
The provision is required because these other exceptions as
they are currently drafted do not apply to published editions.
Committee notes also that, in its view, it is not certain that s. 112 in
its entirety is capable of falling within the revised
fair dealing provision. It
therefore makes the following recommendation and notes that, should the
Committee’s recommendations
on the other schemes of exceptions be
accepted, it will be necessary to make a number of changes to s. 112, such
as deletion of the
references to the fair dealing and library copying
exceptions, which the Committee has recommended should apply to all copyright
material, including published editions.
Recommendation
8.61 The Committee recommends the retention of s. 112 of the Act as a
stand-alone provision.
Reproduction
of statutory instruments and judgments
8.62 Section 182A of the Act states that the copyright, including any
prerogative right or privilege of the Crown in the nature of
prescribed work is not infringed by the making, by reprographic reproduction, of
one copy of the whole or of a part
of that work by or on behalf of a person and
for a particular purpose (s. 182A(1)). For the purposes of s. 182A, a
‘reprographic
reproduction’ is a facsimile copy of the whole or part
of the work in any size or form (s. 10(3)(g)).
8.63 The foregoing provision does not apply to the making, by reprographic
reproduction, of a copy of the whole or part of the work
where a charge is made
for making and supplying that copy, unless the amount of the charge does not
exceed the cost of making and
supplying that copy (s. 182A(2)).
8.64 Section 182A(3) defines ‘prescribed work’ thus:
a) an Act or State Act, an enactment of the legislature of a Territory or an
instrument (including an Ordinance or a rule, regulation
or by-law) made under
an Act, a State Act or such an enactment;
b) a judgment, order or award of a Federal court or of a court of a State or
c) a judgment, order or award of a Tribunal (not being a court) established
by or under an Act or other enactment of the Commonwealth,
a State or a
d) reasons for a decision of a court referred to in paragraph (b), or of a
Tribunal referred to in paragraph (c), given by the court
or by the Tribunal;
e) reasons given by a Justice, Judge or other member of a court referred to
in paragraph (b), or of a member of a Tribunal referred
to in paragraph (c), for
a decision given by him or her either as the sole member, or as one of the
members of the court or Tribunal.
8.65 By operation of s. 112, a published edition of any such work may be
copied where the copying of that work is not an infringement
of copyright under
8.66 The Committee received no representations relating to the content of
s. 182A. It notes, however, that Professor Ricketson criticised
drafting of the section as being confusing and unreasonably restricted in
8.67 The Committee considers that the copying permitted by s. 182A is
unlikely to be considered a fair dealing. Any change in the
policy of the
section lies outside the Committee’s terms of reference. Accordingly, it
is confined to making the following
recommendation with respect to s. 112,
but it does invite consideration of Professor Ricketson’s criticisms of
the drafting
of the section.
Recommendation
8.68 The Committee recommends that s. 182A of the Act be retained and
be amended to include published editions of prescribed works;
recommends that s. 112 be amended accordingly.
Performances,
transmissions and broadcasts
or recitation in public or for a broadcast, public performance of television or
sound broadcast containing reading or recitation
8.69 Section 45 states that the reading or recitation in public, or the
inclusion in a sound broadcast or television broadcast of
a reading or
recitation, of an extract of reasonable length from a published literary or
dramatic work, or from an adaptation of
such a work, does not constitute an
infringement of the copyright in the work if sufficient acknowledgment of the
work is made. The
phrase ‘sufficient acknowledgment’ is defined in
s. 10(1) of the Act.
8.70 Section 199(1) states that where the inclusion in a television broadcast
or sound broadcast of a reading or recitation of an
extract from a published
literary or dramatic work, or an adaptation of such a work, does not constitute
an infringement of the copyright
in the work, a person who, by the reception of
the broadcast, causes the work or adaptation to be performed in public does not,
doing so, infringe the copyright in the work.
8.71 The ACC stated that it has had inquiries about s. 45 from drama
students giving public performances and speakers giving readings
at community
events. ACLIS stated that public libraries rely on s. 45 in carrying out
their services to the community, particularly
when holding readings for groups
of children. Victoria University of Technology stated that s. 199(1) is
much relied on by communication
and language studies staff and students.
8.72 In the Committee’s view it is uncertain whether the exceptions
provided by either s. 45 or s. 199(1) would be considered
8.73 With respect to s. 199(1), the Committee notes that in its
Highways to Change
report the CCG recommended the review of the provision
together with ss. 199(2) and 199(3) on the basis that the operation of
sections could exceed their originally intended scope because of
developments of digital technology. Paragraph 1(d) of its terms
of reference
requires the Committee to inquire into and report on ‘outstanding issues
identified by the [CCG] in its report
Highways to Change
to the extent
that they are not the subject of a specific request for consideration under this
reference [for example, under paragraph
1(a)] or of other processes of Federal
Government inquiry’. The Committee proposes to review the operation of
s. 199(1) when
it considers the other outstanding matters identified by the
Recommendation
8.74 The Committee recommends the retention of s. 45 of the Act as a
stand-alone provision. Subject to any recommendations it makes
with respect to
s. 199(1) as a result of its consideration of matters identified by the CCG
as requiring further review, the Committee
recommends the retention of the
section as a stand-alone provision.
Performance
of a work at premises where persons reside or sleep, causing sound recording to
be heard at a guest house or club
8.75 Section 46 of the Act states that where a literary, dramatic or musical
work, or an adaptation of such a work, is performed in
public, by the operation
of wireless telegraphy apparatus or by the use of a record, at premises where
people reside or sleep, as
part of the amenities provided exclusively for
residents or inmates of the premises or for those residents or inmates and their
the performance does not constitute an infringement of the copyright in
8.76 In so far as it relates to premises where people reside or sleep,
s. 106 is identical to s. 46, except that it applies to sound
recordings. Section 106 effectively provides for two exceptions. Section 106(1)
states that where a sound recording is caused to
be heard in public at premises
where people reside or sleep, as part of the amenities provided exclusively for
residents or inmates
of the premises or their guests, this does not constitute
an infringement of copyright in the recording (s. 106(1)(a)). The exception
does not apply if a specific charge is made for admission to the part of the
premises where the recording is to be heard (s. 106(2)(a)).
‘specific charge’ may be made partly for admission and partly for
other purposes (s. 106(3)).
8.77 Section 106(1) also provides that where a sound recording is caused to
be heard in public as part of the activities of, or for
the benefit of, a club,
society or other organisation that is not established or conducted for profit
and the principal objects of
which are charitable or are otherwise concerned for
the advancement of religion, education or social welfare, the act of causing
record to be heard does not constitute an infringement of copyright in the
recording (s. 106(1)(b)). This exception does not
apply if a charge is made
for admission to the place where the recording is to be heard and any of the
proceeds are applied otherwise
than for the purposes of the organisation
(s. 106(2)(b)). The ‘charge’ may be made partly for admission
and partly for
other purposes ((s.106 (3)).
8.78 The ACC stated that it receives a small number of inquiries about
ss. 46 and 106. In respect of ss. 46 and 106(1)(a) it stated
inquiries have come from retirement villages, nursing homes, holiday camps and
resorts, boarding schools and prisons. In respect
of s. 106(1)(b) it stated
that inquiries have come from churches, schools and sporting clubs.
8.79 ARIA made a strong submission for the amendment of s. 106. It
argued as follows:
There is a growing incidence of resort-style enterprises which provide a
variety of entertainments including accommodation, sporting
activities as well
as areas where music is played, in particular night clubs. By amalgamating the
variety of amenities provided and
failing to charge a specific fee for entry to
the night club area, these clubs are able to claim a section 106 exemption.
These enterprises
are highly commercial and the playing of sound recordings
incontrovertibly adds to their appeal and the revenue of such enterprises.
nature of their business is no different from other businesses which derive
commercial gain from playing sound recordings in
public and recognise copyright
interests accordingly. Only the structure of the business is
ARIA suggested that s. 106 should perhaps be limited to those premises
that use sound recordings as background music
8.80 The Committee agrees with the fundamental proposition underlying
ARIA’s submission that in certain circumstances the operation
ss. 46 and 106 may be unfair. It notes that the Spicer Committee justified
its recommendation for inclusion of s. 46 in the Act
as follows:
In our opinion, a performance in a guest house or hotel to residents or their
guests should not be treated as a public performance
where there is a similarity
between the type of performance given in such an establishment and the
performance that a person might
receive in his own
In the Committee’s view, in the light of technological developments and
the High Court’s decision in the
Telstra v APRA
case, this is an
outdated characterisation of the public performance right in such circumstances.
The Committee sees merit in a re-examination
of ss. 46 and 106.
notes that on 1 June 1998 the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs released a report
on the collection of
businesses. Although the report examined
the nature and scope of the public
performance right, it did not consider the exceptions provided by ss. 46
and 106 in any detail.
The Committee therefore proposes to consider the
operation of the two provisions when it looks at the outstanding matters
by the CCG.
Recommendation
8.81 Subject to any recommendations it makes with respect to ss. 46
and 106 of the Act as a result of its consideration of outstanding
identified by the CCG, the Committee recommends the retention of those sections
as stand-alone provisions.
performance of television or sound broadcast containing sound recording and
public performance of television broadcast containing
8.82 Similar problems arise with respect to ss. 199(2) and 199(3): these
provisions also relate to the public performance right. Section
199(2) provides
that a person who, by the reception of a television broadcast or sound
broadcast, causes a sound recording to be
heard in public does not, by doing so,
infringe the copyright, if any, in that recording under Part IV. Section 199(3)
states that
a person who, by the reception of an authorised television
broadcast, causes a cinematograph film to be seen or heard in public shall
treated, in any proceedings for infringement of the copyright, if any, in the
film under Part IV, as if the person had been the
holder of a licence granted by
the owner of that copyright to cause the film to be seen or heard in public by
the reception of the
8.83 The ACC stated that it receives few inquiries about either provision. It
stated that inquiries about s. 199(3) are usually from
pubs, clubs and
shops with a television on in a public area. Victoria University of Technology
stated that s. 199(2) is much relied
upon by communication and language
studies staff and students. In respect of s. 199(2) ARIA submitted,
There is no justification for this exception. The interests of copyright
owners in works which are broadcasted are properly recognised
and recompensed.
afforded to copyright owners of
material in sound
broadcasts.
8.84 In the Committee’s view, the exceptions provided by
ss. 199(2) and 199(3) may not constitute a fair dealing, particularly
relied on in a commercial context. This appears to be a strong possibility
because of technological developments such as the Internet
and other new
communications services. The Committee draws support for its position in
relation to these sections from the comments
made by the CCG in its
report in relation to ss. 199(1) to 199(3):
The relevance of these sections will undoubtedly be tested when a significant
or possibly primary means of delivery of these copyright
materials may be by
electronic transmission. The result could be a significant inroad into the
public performance right for these
categories of copyright materials,
particularly if the scope of the definition of broadcast is widened to include
new services. The
CCG believes that due to the development of new services, the
operation of sections 199(1)–(3) may exceed the scope originally
It is of the view that these provisions are not justified where payment is
received in respect of the viewing of the broadcast.
Further consideration
should be given to confining the operation of these sections to their intended
The Committee had anticipated that the House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs report on the
of copyright royalties for licensing the playing of music in public by small
businesses would examine the operation of
s. 199(2). The Committee notes,
however, that the report does not consider s. 199(2) in any detail. It
proposes to consider ss. 199(2)
and 199(3) together with the other
outstanding matters identified by the CCG.
Recommendation
8.86 Subject to any recommendations it makes with respect to
ss. 199(2) and 199(3) of the Act as a result of its consideration of
outstanding matters identified by the CCG, the Committee recommends the
retention of those two sections as stand-alone provisions.
in sound recordings first published in Australia not infringed by causing the
recording to be heard in public or broadcast
8.87 Section 105 states that copyright subsisting in a sound recording by
virtue only of s. 89(3) is not infringed by the causing
of the recording to
be heard in public or by the broadcasting of the recording. Section 89(3) allows
sound recording without the need to show
that the maker of the sound recording was a qualified person or that the sound
was made in Australia. The only connecting factor that must to be
satisfied is that the sound recording was first published in Australia.
89(3) and 105 apply, in other words, to published sound recordings that have no
connection with Australia other than being
first published here.
8.88 Section 89(3) operates in conjunction with the Copyright (International
Protection) Regulations, which are made pursuant to s.
(‘Application of Act to countries other than Australia’). The
Regulations extend copyright protection to works and
other subject matter that
have a connection with a country that is a party to the relevant international
convention to which Australia
is also a party. The effect of the Regulations
together with ss. 89(3) and 105 is that the owners of copyright in
published sound
recordings that were made or first published in some countries
that are not signatories to the Rome Convention, or were made by the
or residents of such countries, do not have the exclusive right to perform or
broadcast the recording. The Committee understands
that denial of broadcasting
and public performance rights to the class of sound recordings specified in
s. 105 is consistent with
international obligations and has been on the
understanding that the countries with which the sound recordings have the
closest connection
do not give such rights to owners of copyright in sound
recordings.
8.89 ARIA submitted the following argument for the repeal of s. 105:
No rational basis is apparent to explain the distinction. Logically, where
it should exist in
respect of all rights. With the proposed expansion of the definition of
broadcast to include both wireless and
wired transmissions, this exception would
seem to inexplicably and unjustifiably prejudice the interests of copyright
owners of sound
recordings.
8.90 The Committee is of the view that this exception is not capable of
falling within the revised fair dealing provision. It does
not, however,
consider that it should recommend the repeal of s. 105, which would
constitute a major change in the policy underlying
this and other provisions in
the Act on which the Committee has received insufficient comment.
Recommendation
8.91 The Committee recommends the retention of s. 105 of the Act as a
stand-alone provision.
performance of old news film
8.92 Section 110(1) provides that where the visual images forming part of a
cinematograph film consist wholly or principally of images
that, when they were
first embodied in an article or thing, were means of communicating news, it is
not an infringement of copyright
in the film to cause it to be seen and heard in
public after the expiration of 50 years after the year in which the principal
depicted in the film occurred.
8.93 In the Committee’s opinion this activity is unlikely to be
considered a fair dealing. The Committee received no representations
relating to
the operation of the provision, which appears to be based on policy choices that
the Committee is in no position to reassess.
Recommendation
8.94 The Committee recommends the retention of s. 110(1) of the Act as
a stand-alone provision.
performance of works contained in old films
8.95 Section 110(2) provides that where the copyright in a film has expired,
it is not an infringement of any copyright that may still
subsist in a literary,
dramatic, musical or artistic work used in the film to show that film in public.
8.96 This provision appears to exist because copyright in a cinematograph
film may be of shorter duration than that in relation to
works. Section 33(2)
provides that copyright in all works except photographs subsists until the
expiration of 50 years after the
expiration of the calendar year in which the
author of the work died. Section 94(2) states that copyright in a cinematograph
subsists until the expiration of 50 years after the expiration of the
calendar year in which the film was first published. In the
Committee’s
view, the activity referred to in s. 110(2) would constitute a fair dealing
with the works used in the film.
Recommendation
8.97 The Committee recommends the repeal of s. 110(2) of the
Re-transmission
of broadcast
8.98 Section 199(4) provides that a person who, by the reception of an
authorised television or sound broadcast, causes a literary,
dramatic or musical
work or an adaptation of such a work, an artistic work or a cinematograph film
to be transmitted to subscribers
to a diffusion service shall be treated, in any
proceedings for infringement of the copyright, if any, in the work or film, as
the person had been the holder of a licence granted by the owner of that
by the person
to subscribers to that service by the reception of the broadcast.
8.99 In the Committee’s view, this exception is not capable of falling
within the revised fair dealing provision. A submission
to the effect that
s. 199(4) was not fair was made by ARIA, which argued that the
recommendation made by the CCG in its
Highways to Change
respect of s. 199(4) should be adopted. The CCG recommended that
s. 199(4) be limited to self-help broadcasters. The Committee
notes that on
10 March 1998 the Government announced its intention to limit s. 199(4) in
this way. On 30 April 1998 the Government
reaffirmed this intention by
announcing the reform of the cable re-transmission right as part of its Digital
Agenda reforms. In the
view of the Committee it is not certain that even the
Government’s proposed limitation to s. 199(4) is capable of falling
its revised fair dealing provision. Since, however, the matter is one
governed by policy considerations that the Government has only
recently decided
on, the Committee does not propose to recommend any further changes at this
Recommendation
8.100 The Committee recommends no change to s. 199(4) of the Act, in
either its current form or that proposed by the Government in
announcements in connection with the provision.
Importation
of books and published editions
8.101 Section 44A allows the importation of books for the purposes of sale,
distribution and exhibition in three circumstances. The
first of these is
covered by s. 44A(1), which provides that the copyright in an overseas work
first published after 23 December 1991
is not infringed by a person who, without
the licence of the owner of the copyright, imports a non-infringing book into
for a purpose mentioned in s. 37. An ‘overseas work’
is ‘one which was first published in a country other than
Australia and
was not published in Australia within 30 days of its first publication in that
other country’ (s. 44A(9)). A
‘non-infringing book’ is a
book made (otherwise than under a compulsory licence) in a country specified in
the Copyright
Regulations, being a book whose making did not constitute an
infringement of any copyright subsisting in a work, or in a published
a work, under a law of that country. The effect of s. 37 is to prohibit the
unauthorised importation of the book for the
purpose of sale, distribution or
exhibition.
8.102 Section 44A(2) provides that the copyright in an overseas work
published before 23 December 1991 or a book first published in
whether before or after 23 December 1991, is not infringed by a person who,
without the licence of the owner of the copyright
imports a copy (the
‘imported copy’) of a hardback or paperback version of the book for
a purpose mentioned in s. 37
if the following conditions are satisfied. The
person must have ordered in writing from the copyright owner, or the
licensee or agent, one or more copies of that version of the book
(not being second-hand copies or more copies than were needed to
satisfy the
person’s reasonable requirements)(s. 44A(2)(c)). Furthermore, at
least seven days must have elapsed since the person
placed the order and the
the order would be filled
within 90 days after it was placed, or at least 90
days must have elapsed since the person placed the order and the copyright
licensee or agent had not filled the order (s. 44A(d)). Section
44A(2) does not apply to the importation of a copy of a hardback
version of a
non-infringing book into Australia if the copyright owner, or their licensee or
agent, is able to supply in Australia
enough copies of a paperback version of
the book to fill any reasonable order (s. 44A (7)).
8.103 Section 44A(3) states that the copyright in a published work (whether
first published before, on or after the commencing day)
is not infringed by a
person who, without the licence of the owner of the copyright, imports a single
copy of a non-infringing book
into Australia if the importation is for the
purpose of filling a written order, or a verifiable telephone order, by a
customer of
the person and by the order the customer makes a statement
(verifiable in the case of a telephone order) to the effect that they
intend to use the book for a purpose mentioned in s. 37. Section 44A(4)
extends this exception to libraries, for whom two
or more copies of a
non-infringing book may be ordered.
8.104 Section 112A is identical to s. 44A, except that it applies to
published editions.
8.105 In the Committee’s view, the importation of books in the three
circumstances described in ss. 44A and 112A is not capable
of falling with
the revised fair dealing provision. The Committee notes the submission from the
APA, which argued strongly that ss.
44A and 112A should be retained in the
Act because they have had a positive effect on the book publishing industry,
especially on
its supply and printing practices. The Committee makes no comment
on the policy underlying ss. 44A and 112A but, as a matter of presentation
and for simplifying the Act, it makes the following recommendation.
Recommendation
8.106 The Committee recommends that ss. 44A and 112A of the Act be
of musical works
8.107 Division 6 of Part III of the Act permits the making, for a royalty
payment, of a recording of a musical work. This action would
not constitute a
fair dealing and it has accordingly not been considered in this chapter. The
Committee is not inclined to recommend
any change to the Division at this time:
it received no representations suggesting a need to change the existing
arrangements.
Recommendation
8.108 The Committee recommends that there be no change to Division 6 of
Part III of the Act.
of record embodying film soundtracks
8.109 Section 110(3) provides that where the sounds that are embodied in a
soundtrack associated with the visual images forming part
of a cinematograph
film are also embodied in a record, other than such a soundtrack or a record
derived directly or indirectly from
such a soundtrack, the copyright in the
cinematograph film is not infringed by any use made of that record.
8.110 This provision appears to complement s. 23(1) of the Act, which
provides that the sounds embodied in a soundtrack do not constitute
recording. In the Committee’s view the exception provided by
s. 110(3) is not capable of falling within the revised
fair dealing
Recommendation
8.111 The Committee recommends the retention of s. 110(3) of the Act
as a stand-alone provision.
of copyright material for the services of the Crown
8.112 Section 183(1) states that the copyright in a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work or a published edition of such a
work, or in a sound
recording, cinematograph film, television broadcast or sound broadcast, is not
infringed by the Commonwealth
or a State, or by a person authorised in writing
by the Commonwealth or a State, doing any acts comprised in the copyright if the
acts are done for the services of the Commonwealth or the State. Sections 183(2)
to 183(11) cover matters incidental to the principal
exception given in
8.113 In the Committee’s view the exception provided by s. 183 is
not capable of falling within its revised fair dealing provision.
8.114 The Committee notes that amendments relating to the amount of
remuneration payable by the Crown pursuant to s. 183 form part
, which at the time of writing is yet to be passed.
The Committee notes further that it recommended in its
Computer Software
report that s. 183 be amended to provide that copying of
computer programs for the services of the Commonwealth and State and Territory
governments should be restricted to those cases where a copy of the program
cannot be obtained from the copyright owner or their
agent within a reasonable
time at a normal commercial price.
Committee understands that this recommendation is currently being considered by
the Government.
Recommendation
8.115 The Committee reaffirms the recommendation in its
Software Protection
report in relation to s. 183 of the Act but
otherwise recommends the retention of that section as a stand-alone
STATUTORY LICENCES
9 Copying for educational purposes
This chapter briefly examines the background to the educational copying
provisions in the
. In the absence of a case being made
for a change in the general approach taken in the Act, the Committee does not
propose any substantial
change. Instead, it makes recommendations aimed at
simplifying the provisions.
The chapter examines the structure of the provisions, individual provisions
relating to educational copying, and Parts VA and VB of
the Act. The Committee
considers that the statutory licences should, as far as practicable, be
technology neutral; this approach
is reflected in the recommendations.
In relation to the Part VB licence, the Committee notes the
Government’s recent decision to extend the licence to cover some
digital form. It recommends that a new statutory licence be created whereby
educational institutions may make available
subject to payment of a royalty.
Introduction
9.01 Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention and art. 13 of the TRIPS
Agreement (see Appendix B) permit a member country to provide limited
to the exclusive rights of copyright owners. Any such exceptions must be a
special case, must not conflict with the normal
exploitation of the work, and
must not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of rights owners.
Article 10(2) of the Berne
Convention permits the making of special provisions
for teaching.
9.02 In reliance on this express international authority, a number of
provisions have been included in the Act to deal with uses for
educational
purposes. The Committee summarised the effect of some of these provisions in its
issues paper entitled
Educational Institutions and Copying under the
. It received submissions in response to the paper from a
range of interests. In general, the comments from users reflected a desire
existing exceptions
to what would otherwise constitute infringement to be
extended or subjected to fewer constraints. Comments from owners tended to
the reverse approach—the right to copy, particularly without
remuneration or without a licence, should be limited. Neither
users nor owners,
however, proposed a radical recasting of the provisions of the Act that
currently relate to educational copying.
In particular, the majority of
submissions from both users and owners recommended retention of the present
statutory licensing schemes
set out in Parts VA and VB of the Act.
9.03 The Committee had invited comment on adoption of the scheme for
educational copying found in ss. 35 and 36 of the UK
and Patents Act 1988
, under which a free compulsory licence permits the
copying of a limited amount of copyright material in the absence of an agreed
voluntary licence. The principle underlying the scheme is to encourage the
parties to reach agreement on permissible copying. For
various reasons the
parties affected in Australia do not consider this a satisfactory way to deal
with educational copying. The Committee
considers that the position in Australia
is now well established and well known to all parties and no case has been made
for a change
in the general approach. The following discussion is set against
this conclusion. It is divided into three sections: the structure
of the Act;
individual provisions relating to copying by educational institutions; and the
content of the statutory licences.
structure of the Act
9.04 The Committee considers that all provisions relating to educational
copying should be included in one part of the Act. This view
was universally
supported in submissions.
9.05 The Committee also invited comment on whether it would be possible to
move some or all of the provisions relating to educational
copying to the
regulations. Submitters were generally opposed to this approach. The principal
argument against such action was that
it would mean that a person wishing to
find the law on the topic would have to look in two places. There was also a
feeling that
the greater ease with which regulations can be altered might result
in interest groups being able to secure, without adequate consultation,
alteration to the statutory schemes more easily than if the change had to be
passed through the Parliament.
9.06 The Committee does not consider the second reason to be valid: the very
point of regulations is to enable detailed provisions
of a technical nature to
be more readily updated. Some of the material that is contained in the statutory
licensing schemes is of
a kind that is appropriate for inclusion in regulations
rather than in an Act. It deals with the mechanical details of the licensing
scheme rather than the general question of whether such a scheme should apply to
educational copying practices. The Committee acknowledges,
however, that there
is a high level of sensitivity in this matter, even in relation to the details
of the licensing scheme itself.
Apart from the sections noted in Table 2,
it does not recommend the transfer of the provisions relating to the statutory
from the Act to the regulations.
9.07 The Committee does, however, consider that it would be possible to
reduce the number of provisions relating to the statutory
licences since there
is considerable duplication in the provisions relating to copying of broadcasts
in Part VA and copying of works
in Part VB. A study of the Act reveals that the
sections in Table 2 effectively duplicate one another and could be combined
less cumbersome form.
2 Sections to be combined
Sections under Part VA
Sections under Part VB
9.08 In addition, both Parts include common provisions relating to collecting
societies (see ss. 135P to 135S and 135ZZB to 135ZZE).
These provisions
could be combined. It would also be appropriate for them to be included in the
regulations since they relate to
a subject matter removed from educational
copying and are concerned with detail that it is not necessary to include in the
Recommendation
9.09 The Committee recommends that the Act be recast to
group together all provisions
relating to educational
institutions;
reduce the duplication in
Parts VA and VB by combining the provisions referred to in Table 2 with
appropriate modifications and including
them in a separate part or division of
transfer material relating to
collecting agencies to regulations.
of ‘educational institution’
9.10 The definition of ‘educational institution’ is
extraordinarily detailed. It is set out in s. 10(1) and further expanded
s. 10A and the proposed s. 153L in Schedule 10 of the
Amendment Bill 1997
. Overall, the definition occupies nearly four pages of the
Act. The definition works on the basis of specifying certain types of
institutions as ‘educational institutions’ and then allowing others
to bring themselves within the description by a process
of self-declaration,
thereby enabling them to take advantage of the special provisions in the Act
that relate to educational copying.
The self-declaration will, under the
, be able to be challenged by collecting societies by
application to the Copyright Tribunal (see proposed s. 153L).
9.11 The Committee considers that this attempt to produce an all-inclusive
definition of ‘educational institution’ has
resulted in unnecessary
complexity. It proposes that the effect of the definition can be achieved by an
alternative approach that
would allow the definition to be omitted from the
9.12 The provisions relating to educational institutions either except
copying by such institutions from what would otherwise constitute
infringement of copyright or permit the institution to take advantage of the
statutory licences. To omit the definition of ‘educational
institution’ from the Act would be to follow the approach taken in
relation to libraries. The Act does not define what is a
library but leaves it
to be given its ordinary meaning. If a body purports to use the library copying
provisions and a copyright
owner considers that the body is not a
‘library’, an infringement action can be brought and it will be
necessary for
the body sued to establish that it is indeed a
9.13 Adopting a similar approach, if there were no definition of
‘educational institution’ in the Act a copyright owner
challenge action being taken by a body using the educational copying provisions.
It would be up to the body concerned to demonstrate
that the exception or
licence provision applied to it because it was an ‘educational
institution’. This is in substance
a form of self-declaration similar to
that proposed to be included in the Act by the 1997 amendments. Instead of the
declaration
being done by
notice, it will be done through the
action of the body in seeking to rely on the exceptions in the Act. Indeed, the
giving of either
a records notice or a sampling notice under s. 135E
(copying of broadcasts) or under s. 135ZL (copying of works) would
conveniently
give the relevant collecting society notice of the self-declaration
of the body giving the notice and enable the society to consider
challenging the
status of the body at an early stage. This allows bodies that consider they are
engaging in activities that should
come within the exceptions in the Act to make
their case. It would remove from the Act cumbersome provisions that endeavour to
out in detail a concept that will probably change over time and require
updating and adding detail to the Act.
9.14 The Committee considers that, rather than attempting the task of trying
to identify the bodies that ought to be able to take
advantage of the
educational copying provisions, the Act should in effect transfer the onus of
establishing its credentials to the
body that is endeavoring to make use of
those provisions.
Recommendation
9.15 The Committee recommends that the Act be amended by omitting the
definition of ‘educational institution’ from s.
repealing s. 10A.
9.16 It may be thought that such an approach could lead to ambiguity about
whether centralised copying centres within educational
institutions or external
centres that undertake copying for such institutions would be able to use the
exceptions in the Act. But
the provisions of the Act that allow copying by
educational institutions in circumstances where that copying might be carried
by such a centre refer to copying by or
on behalf of
an educational
institution. It seems to the Committee that in these circumstances there is no
need to make special provision for
copying centres.
9.17 The Committee received a number of submissions referring to the
amendment to the definition of ‘educational institution’
made by the
so as to be able to rely on the reference to
institutions having to be ‘not for profit’ to attract the exceptions
the licensing provisions of the Act. It was said that profit-making
institutions should pay a higher level of remuneration for copying.
Committee considers that this is an appropriate matter for consideration by the
by regulations under
ss. 153A(3)(b) and 153C(3) as a matter that the Tribunal is required to
take into account.
9.18 Section 28 provides that the performance of works, sound recordings
and films in the course of educational instruction is not
to be regarded as a
public performance. The section is, however, limited by restricting the audience
allowed to be present at such
performances to teachers, students or other people
directly connected with the place where the instruction is given. A parent of
student is expressly excluded from the permissible audience. Educational
interests pressed for extension of the provision to permit
the attendance of
parents in the audience. Such an extension would bring school concerts and
performance recitals within the scope
of the section, thus eliminating the need
to obtain the permission of the copyright owner or a licence for the
performance. The Committee
is of the view that it would be inappropriate to
extend the operation of the section as suggested: when a work is being performed
for an audience that includes parents, this should be regarded as part of the
performance should be
treated as a public performance.
Recommendation
9.19 The Committee recommends that no change be made to the scope of
s. 28 of the Act.
40(1A) and 40(1B)
9.20 Sections 40(1A) and 40(1B)make special provision allowing a fair dealing
copy with a literary work for external students of an
educational institution.
This is discussed in Chapter 6.
9.21 Section 44 allows short extracts from works to be included in
collections to be used by a place of education. The right is heavily
circumscribed. It was included in the Act before the inclusion of the statutory
licence provisions to be found in Part VB. The Committee’s
revealed that, because of the limited circumstances in which it can be relied
upon, the section is seldom, if ever, used.
9.22 The fact that the section is seldom used would be sufficient basis to
justify a recommendation that it be repealed.The Committee
takes into account,
however, the fact that institutions are able to make copies of works for
inclusion in materials to be distributed
to students under s. 135ZG. The
copying permitted by s. 44 largely falls within the scope of s. 135ZG.
The Committee considers that
this approach to copying by educational
institutions is more appropriate than that contemplated by s. 44.
Recommendation
9.23 The Committee recommends that s. 44 of the Act be repealed.
9.24 Section 200 permits the use of works and broadcasts for educational
purposes in certain limited circumstances. The ACC suggested
that the section
could be repealed. It pointed out that the section predated the inclusion in the
Act of the licensing schemes in
Parts VA and VB and that the activities covered
by s. 200 should be seen to fall within those schemes.
9.25 Section 200(1)(a) is concerned with the reproduction of copyright
material in the course of educational instruction ‘otherwise
than by the
use of an appliance adapted for the production of multiple copies or an
appliance capable of producing a copy or copies
by a process of reprographic
reproduction’. Most obviously, it permits the reproduction of copyright
material on a blackboard
and the making by hand and use of an overhead
projection of a work. The ACC expressed concern that ‘the section could be
interpreted
as allowing more than one copy to be made, and that its application
to activities such as reproducing on a computer disk is not clear’.
Committee does not see that on its face the section can lead to the result
referred to by the ACC. In the absence of evidence
of the section being so
employed, the Committee does not think it appropriate to recommend any change to
a section that is obviously
intended to allow limited but useful copying for
teaching purposes.
9.26 Section 200(1)(b) permits educational institutions to reproduce works as
part of the questions to be answered in an examination
or in an answer to an
examination question. The view is put by copyright owner representatives that
reproduction of works in these
circumstances should be regarded as falling
within the statutory licence provided by Part VB. Educational institutions
by suggesting that to include copying for examination questions as
part of the statutory licence could have the effect of risking
confidentiality of the examination.
9.27 The Committee considers that educational interests can properly be
concerned that the revelation of what material has been copied
for examination
purposes in the records that are kept as part of the statutory licensing scheme
could jeopardise the confidentiality
of the examination process. It is also the
case that in some circumstances examination papers are not made public after an
examination
is completed.
9.28 Representations to the Committee from owners did not provide evidence of
widespread copying of works in the context of examinations.
It did not appear to
the Committee that copying under s. 200(1)(b) had a significant impact on
9.29 The ACC suggested that the copying of sound broadcasts, which is
permitted by ss. 200(2) and 200(2A), is covered by the statutory
included in Part VA. The Committee notes that the provision was retained when
the statutory scheme was enacted, s. 200(2A)
being added to permit a record
to be made of a sound broadcast without remuneration.
9.30 Educational institutions said that they relied on these provisions for
making records of broadcasts. The Committee considers
it inappropriate to repeal
ss. 200(2) and 200(2A). It notes, however, that s. 200(2A) is of
limited effect since it relates only
to making a record of a sound broadcast and
does not extend to works or sound recordings included in the broadcast.
Recommendation
9.31 The Committee recommends that no change be made to s. 200 of the
9.32 There was general agreement in the submissions that the statutory
licences should, as far as practicable, be technology neutral.
The Committee
agrees; the recommendations that follow apply this approach as far as is
practicable.
9.33 There was consensus among the interested parties that the licence to
copy broadcasts that is provided by Part VA should be extended
narrowcasting, cable and satellite delivery of programs, and material contained
in foreign broadcasts received in Australia.
The Committee agrees with these
suggestions and notes that changes to this effect are included in Schedule 11 of
9.34 No point was taken in the submissions that programs designed
particularly for the educational market should be excluded from
the statutory
licence, and the Committee notes that there is at present no such exclusion in
respect of broadcasts. This would therefore
appear not to be a concern.
Recommendation
9.35 The Committee makes no recommendation for any exceptions from the
operation of the licence scheme in
of the Act.
9.36 Division 4 of Part VA made interim provision for administration of the
copying scheme until a collecting society was declared
under s. 135P of the
Act. Upon declaration of the Audio Visual Copyright Society as the collecting
society, the Division ceased operating;
it can be repealed.
Recommendation
9.37 The Committee recommends that Division 4 of Part VA of the Act be
Representations
to the Committee
9.38 The consensus among interests seen in relation to the Part VA licence
does not extend to the licence to copy works contained
in Part VB. While still
asserting the principle that the copying licence should not be affected by
differences in technology, the
parties disagreed about the implications of this
for the licensing scheme contained in that Part. Owners would confine the
to print materials. Works in electronic form should be viewed
differently. Copying of these should require express permission and
a negotiated
payment. Conversion of works to digital format and electronic distribution of
works should not be permitted under the
9.39 As might be expected, educators wish to be able to treat copyright
material in digital form in the same way as they do print
works and also to
exploit electronic distribution of works whether they have been digitised from
print or are originally in digital
form. They called on the Committee to
recommend the expansion of Part VB to permit them to do this.
Government’s proposals
9.40 The Committee’s consideration of these matters was overtaken by
the Government’s announcement that the Part VB licence
is to be extended
to cover some digital copying of works. The Committee understands that it has
been decided that educational institutions
should be able to make and network
digital copies of works that have been published in print form on terms similar
to the right given
to copy print works. The detail of the extension of the
educational copying licence was not announced at the time of the statement
9.41 The Committee had reached a point in its deliberations where it had
concluded that the statutory licence permitting educational
institutions to make
multiple photocopies of works in print form should be extended to include all
works in digital form, no matter
what their original published format might have
been. The original version of the Part VB licence was adopted in 1980 to enable
educational
institutions to take advantage of the then new technology of
photocopying. It recognised the principle that educational institutions
not be prevented from using developments in technology to update teaching
methods. The Part VB scheme also recognised, however,
that copying by
educational institutions should require payment to copyright owners. The
Committee is of the view that the same principle
applies to the use of works in
digital form by educational institutions: the institutions should be permitted
to make certain use
of this technology without having to seek the permission of
the copyright owner but in return should be obliged to pay an appropriate
9.42 To the extent that the Government’s decision is limited to digital
copying of print material, the Committee considers that
it does not go far
enough. The Committee can see no reason for limiting the digital use of material
to works in print form. The principle
on which the Part VB scheme is based seems
not to require that such a constraint be adopted.
Recommendation
9.43 The Committee recommends that educational institutions be permitted to
use all copyright material in digital form pursuant to
a statutory licence
requiring the payment of a royalty.
9.44 One member of the Committee disagrees in principle with the copying of
works digitally (including the transfer from print to
digital) without prior
permission and negotiated payment. That member understands, however, that the
practice is widespread and accordingly
supports the Committee’s
recommendation that this copying be permitted subject to the payment of a
9.45 The Committee’s consideration of this recommendation’s
implementation led it to conclude that such an approach could
not be adopted by
a simple extension of Part VB of the Act for two reasons. First, the Part VB
licence is based on copying of pages
or identifiable parts of works; as
discussed in relation to fair dealing (see Chapter 6), this approach is not
compatible with work
in a digital form. Second, the licence provided for by Part
VB permits the multiple copying of copyright material. The Committee
understands
that the principal means of distribution by educational institutions of teaching
materials in digital form will not be
through the institution making multiple
copies; rather, the institution will make a digital reproduction of a work
available to students.
The students will then access the work and choose whether
to make their own electronic copy or print out the work in hard-copy form.
institution will thus not be the copier of the work. It will make the work
available for students to deal with in such manner
as they wish. In the
Committee’s view this is a different concept from the licence provided for
by Part VB and it is not possible
to extend the statutory provisions relating to
that licence to embrace the copying of works in digital form. The question will
to be dealt with by a separate licence that recognises the nature of the
dealing with digital copyright materials. That licence will
educational institution to make a copyright work available in digital form for
copying by students. The limits on such
copying will need to be spelt out in the
Act in same way as the limits on multiple copying of print works are spelt out
in Part VB.
9.46 As noted in paragraph 9.40, the Committee understands that the matters
alluded to in paragraph 9.45 have been recognised by the
Government in its
proposal to extend the educational copying licence. The question of making
available works in digital form is one
that arises where a work is converted to
digital format from print as well as where the work is originally in digital
form. It will
thus have to be dealt with to give effect to the
Government’s decision. The Committee does not consider that it is
appropriate
for it to attempt to set out in this report the detail of a
compulsory licence for digital copying when the Government is going through
same process at the same time. It seems to the Committee that the more efficient
procedure is for it to bring its views informally
to the attention of the
officers of the Attorney-General’s Department who are working on the
preparation of instructions for
the Office of Parliamentary Counsel. This
approach also accords with the direction to the Committee in its terms of
reference that
it should have regard to any amendments to the Act that the
Government announces are being considered for introduction into the
Parliament.
9.47 When the Government’s legislation is available the Committee will
examine it to see whether there are matters to which
it gives rise that fall
within the Committee’s terms of reference and on which it considers it
should comment. In this report
the Committee confines its consideration to Part
VB as it now stands; that is, the operation of the licence in relation to
copies of print materials.
for copying
9.48 The question of the amount that can be charged for copying of works was
raised in submissions to the Committee. Section 135ZZH(1)(a)
has the effect that
if a copy is sold or otherwise supplied for a financial profit it falls outside
the Part VB licence and becomes
an infringement. The Full Federal Court, in
, determined that an
educational institution that charged for materials supplied to students for use
in courses on a user-pays basis,
with no intention of selling the materials for
a financial profit, did not come within the proscription in the section. The
stated that an institution could build an amount for overheads into the
costs charged for the materials. The Committee does not consider
that any change
needs to be made to the present provision of the Act.
135ZM: copying of artistic works
9.49 Section 135ZM permits the copying of artistic works that are
illustrative of an article or other work that is being legitimately
pursuant to the Part VB scheme. Owners of copyright in artistic works claim that
the provision unfairly denies them a right
to remuneration for
copying. If the artistic work occupies a full page of the item that is being
copied, it seems to the Committee that the copying
of that work is covered by
the copying scheme in s. 135ZL and remuneration is payable for a page in
the totality of that which is
copied. The Committee acknowledges, however, that,
while it is the whole of the artistic work that is being copied, remuneration
will be paid only at the rate for a single page of the text copied. Where the
artistic work takes a form, such as a diagram, not
occupying a whole page, it
seems that remuneration is not payable for the copying of the diagram separately
from and in addition
to the amount that is payable for the copying of the page
on which the artistic work appears.
9.50 Viscopy and CAL argued strongly the injustice of this position and
called for the repeal of s. 135ZM. In its report on the
the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee recommended,
‘that the Attorney-General, on the basis of consultation
conducted from
his Department, consider whether it is appropriate to repeal section 135ZM by an
amendment to the Copyright Bill 1997’.
The Government is considering the
recommendation.
9.51 If s. 135ZM were repealed it would be necessary for educational
institutions to pay remuneration under s. 135ZL of the Act, to
for copying the page on which the artistic
work and the text appear. Separate
records would have to be kept of the copying of the literary, dramatic or
musical work being copied
on one hand and the artistic work on the other.
Separate payment arrangements would have to be negotiated. Since it is probable
it would be the whole of the artistic work that was being copied, it would
also be necessary for educational institutions to satisfy
themselves that the
artistic work had not been separately published. Viscopy contemplates
administering such a licence. It points
out that the
Review of Australian
(the Simpson report) recommended the repeal of
The education users
rejected the notion of there being put into operation a second licence scheme
with its own additional record-keeping
or negotiation requirements.
9.52 In practice, as with the present copying of literary works, it could be
expected that a voluntary
licensing scheme building on the provisions of
Part VB would be put into operation.
9.53 The Committee considers that the inability of owners of artistic works
to be remunerated for copying in educational institutions
in the circumstances
contemplated by s. 135ZM seems unfair. Inclusion of the section represents
a pragmatic view that it is only
by allowing free copying of an incidental
artistic work that the licensing scheme can be made to work. The AVCC and TAFE
stated that they would be happy with the repeal of the section if
adequate administrative arrangements to allow remuneration existed.
Queensland suggested that CAL should collect the amount due and pass it to
9.54 The Committee recognises the difficulty of the present situation, but it
does not see an easy way of resolving the problem without
establishing an even
more complex system for recording copying than already exists.
9.55 The Committee considers that the only practical course is for
s. 135ZM to continue to apply to copying unless there exists an
between the educational institutions and Viscopy approved by the Copyright
Tribunal or, failing agreement, a determination
made by the Tribunal that
relates to compensation and the method of collecting of that compensation for
the owners.
9.56 CAL should be involved in these negotiations. It may well be that CAL
could design its returns in such a way that, with minimal
effort, the copying of
artistic works could be noted by institutions when completing the CAL
Recommendation
9.57 The Committee recommends that no change be made to s. 135ZM of
the Act. The operation of the section should, however, be kept
under review. The
section should be repealed if appropriate arrangements are made between the
parties to provide compensation to
owners of artistic copyright in works.
135ZH: copying of published editions
9.58 Section 135ZH provides that the copyright in a published edition of a
work being a work in which copyright does not subsist is
not infringed by the
making of one or more reproductions if the reproduction is made in the course of
making a copy of the whole
or a part of the work by, or on behalf of, a body
administering an educational institution for the educational purposes of that
institution
or of another educational institution. The Australian Mechanical
the basis that
it allowed the copying of expensive high-quality editions of music. The
Committee recognises the justification for
this claim; it can also be made in
relation to the copying of some editions of artistic works. But it is difficult
to see how the
section can be amended to exclude copying of these types of
editions while permitting the copying of more mundane editions as part
educational copying scheme. It seems to the Committee that s. 135ZH must
apply to all published editions or be repealed. If
it were repealed, it would be
necessary to construct a statutory licensing scheme that permits the copying of
published editions
for remuneration; failure to do this could render the present
statutory licence provided by Part VB of the Act ineffective.
9.59 The Committee considers that the exception in s. 135ZH should be
recognised as simply a further restriction on the already limited
that is provided for published editions of works.
Recommendation
9.60 The Committee recommends that no change be made to s. 135ZH of
technical amendments to the licensing scheme
9.61 Interest groups made other representations for amendment of various
technical aspects of the licensing scheme. In the view of
the proponents of
these changes, adoption of such amendments would simplify the operation of the
Part VB licence and so fall within
the Committee’s remit. There is,
however, no agreement between the parties as to the desirability of making the
changes sought.
The scheme represents a compromise between the competing
interests of education users and copyright owners,
Committee is not inclined to make recommendations for any change of a
technical nature in the absence of submissions, from all parties
affected, on
the implications for them of the changes proposed.
10 Copying for people with disabilities
This chapter examines four main issues relating to copying for people with
disabilities. First, the issue of broadcasts by print–handicapped
licensees under s. 47A of the
is examined. The
Committee considers that the section should be extended to apply to sound
broadcasts and other transmissions and
the making available to the public of
programs and materials, but only where the sole purpose of the communication is
to serve people
with a print disability.
The second matter examined is copying of works for print-handicapped
readers and copying of copyright material for intellectually
handicapped people.
It is proposed that the relevant schemes be combined but that the single scheme
remain separate from, rather
than be subsumed by, a general fair dealing
The third matter concerns captioning, which it is proposed should be
recognised under the combined scheme through a statutory licence
preparation of captioned works to assist those with hearing disabilities.
Finally, the chapter proposes that the use of broadcasts by institutions
assisting intellectually handicapped people be included under
the proposed
combined scheme.
10.01 In its issues paper the Committee sought comments on the simplification
of the provisions dealing with copying for people with
disabilities under four
separate headings:
broadcasts by
print–handicapped radio
copying of works for
handicapped readers;
captioning.
Committee explored each of these topics with interested parties at the public
forum conducted in Sydney on 28 April 1997. At the
forum the Committee invited
further submissions on the topics discussed; this resulted in 10 submissions.
The following recommendations
are based on a consideration of all the
submissions received and the comments made at the public forum.
by print–handicapped radio licensees
10.02 Section 47A of the Act provides a statutory licence for the making of
sound broadcasts of published literary or dramatic works,
or adaptations of such
works, by radio stations for print-handicapped people. Operation of the licence
is conditional on the making
and retention of records relating to the broadcast
(ss. 47A(2) and 47A(3)) and allowing the copyright owner access to those
(s. 47A(6)). The copyright owner has the right to claim equitable
remuneration for the broadcast (s. 47A(8)). In the absence of an
the amount of equitable remuneration is determined by the Copyright Tribunal
(s. 47A(8)).
10.03 The Committee’s issues paper asked whether the licence to
print–handicapped radio licensees, provided for under
s. 47A of the
Act, should be extended to encompass other broadcasts and broadcasters.
10.04 Submissions received by the Committee following the public forum also
identified a problem with the operation of the section
resulting from changes
brought about in the
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
. At present the
provisions of s. 47A apply to the holder of a
‘print–handicapped radio licence’. This is defined
s. 47A(11) by reference to licences in force under the
Broadcasting
Services Act 1992
Radiocommunications Act 1992
licence that was granted for the purpose of authorising the making of sound
broadcasts to people unable to handle, read
or comprehend written material. The
Australian Council for Radio for the Print Handicapped (ACRPH) noted that the
distinction between
print–handicapped radio licensees and other
broadcasters no longer exists under the
Broadcasting Services Act
. The Committee
understands that this resulted from the merging of all categories of public
radio licences that existed at the time
of commencement of the
Broadcasting
Services Act
(and which included print–handicapped radio licences) and
their allocation as community licences under
Broadcasting
Services Act
Broadcasting Services (Transitional Provisions and
Consequential Amendments) Act 1992
s. 5(1)(c). As a consequence,
s. 47A clearly applies only to licences granted under the
Broadcasting
, which applied before the
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
came into force
It would be reasonable to assume, however, that
s. 47A also applies to community broadcasting service licences granted
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
Radiocommunications
provided they are for the purpose specified in
s. 47A(11)(b).
10.05 The Committee understands that the primary concern of copyright owners
in relation to the possible extension of s. 47A to include
a wider range of
broadcasters is that other broadcasters reach a much wider audience (of which
print-handicapped people form only
a minority). The Committee also understands
that much of the material broadcast for people with print disabilities is made
selected readings from newspapers. Newspaper publishers are understandably
concerned that if this material were widely distributed
by broadcasters there
could be a significant impact on the circulation of their newspapers. There is
particular concern in connection
with the broadcast of local newspaper reports
by local radio stations.
10.06 The Committee notes the submission by the ACRPH that radio for the
print-handicapped remains a readily identifiable form of
broadcasting. To the
extent that this is the case, it seems unlikely that what the Committee
understands to be the present format
of print–handicapped radio delivery
of newspaper articles would be appealing to many listeners other than
print-handicapped
listeners. It is not clear that the impact on local newspapers
would be any more significant than that on regional or national papers.
10.07 The Committee does not, however, favour allowing the broadcast,
pursuant to an amended s. 47A, of materials by broadcasters
simply on the
basis that some of the broadcasters’ audience includes people with a print
disability. The Committee considers
that the provision should be restricted to
applying in respect of a service or program whose sole purpose is to broadcast
who meet the criteria in s. 47A(11) and that this should be the
case regardless of what type of licence a broadcaster holds. It was
that expansion of the scheme to broadcasts made by other broadcasters would be
difficult to administer; for example, determining
what the equitable rate of
remuneration should be where there is a mixed audience. The Committee notes,
however, that s. 47A currently
provides for the relevant parties to agree
on an amount by way of equitable remuneration and that in the absence of
agreement this
is to be determined by the Copyright Tribunal. It would seem that
this mechanism is sufficiently flexible to enable an amount of
remuneration to be determined, even in circumstances where there is a broadcast
to a mixed audience.
10.08 The Committee notes that it is possible for services for people with a
print disability to be transmitted online—for example,
Internet—as well as broadcast as radio programs. These services may also
attract a wider audience than just those
people with a print disability. In this
situation, the Committee considers that the ‘sole purpose’ test
should also apply
to such transmissions.
Recommendation
10.09 The Committee recommends that s. 47A of the Act apply in respect
of sound broadcasts and other sound
transmissions and the making
available to the public of programs and materials, but only if the sole purpose
of the service or program
is to communicate with people described in
s. 47A(11)(b). The provisions relating to record keeping, inspection and
licence-fee determination
should be retained.
of works for handicapped readers and copying of copyright material for
intellectually handicapped people
10.10 Under the Act two separate schemes exist that permit the copying of
works for handicapped readers and the copying of copyright
material for the
intellectually handicapped. The schemes are set out in detail in ss. 135ZN
to 135ZQ and ss. 135ZR to 135ZT respectively.
The former scheme permits
certain copying of literary and dramatic works by institutions assisting
handicapped readers. To fall within
the scheme an institution must be an
educational institution or be declared to be an eligible institution. The
institution is limited
to making copies of such works in various prescribed
forms provided that the copy is made solely for use by a handicapped reader
the purpose of research, study or self-instruction.
10.11 The latter scheme is broader in its operation: it permits the copying
of published literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works,
sound recordings,
cinematograph films or television broadcasts by institutions assisting
intellectually handicapped people. Use of
the copy, by the institution or
otherwise, must be solely for the purpose of assisting intellectually
handicapped people.
10.12 Under the former scheme copying is permitted only if the person making
the copy is satisfied that it is not possible to obtain
a new copy of the work
in the required format in a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price.
Similarly, copying under the
latter scheme is permitted only if there is no copy
available commercially within a reasonable time. Both schemes require notice
the copying to be given to the relevant collecting society and the payment of
equitable remuneration on request.
10.13 The former scheme permits the making of a master copy of a literary or
dramatic work for use in the making of copies of the
work for handicapped
readers on the condition that the master copy be destroyed within three months.
Similarly, under the latter
scheme, a copy made for the purpose of making other
copies for intellectually handicapped people must be destroyed within three
10.14 In its issues paper the Committee asked whether the schemes could be
regarded as falling within a general fair use provision.
Although the Committee
did not receive many submissions on this subject, the majority of comments did
not favour the schemes being
subsumed by a general fair dealing/fair use
provision. The Committee is of the view that a case has not been made for
inclusion of
the disability copying provisions in its proposed revised fair
dealing provision.
Recommendation
10.15 The Committee recommends that the provisions for copying for
handicapped readers and intellectually handicapped people remain
identifiable in
the Act and not be merged with the fair dealing provisions.
10.16 The Committee also sought comments on whether the two copying
schemes—for handicapped readers and for intellectually handicapped
people—could be combined. The Committee asked whether, having regard to
the somewhat similar provisions in both schemes, they
might be simplified by
combining them. The overwhelming response from representatives of both copyright
owners and users was that
the two schemes should be combined. CAL submitted that
the provisions concerning equitable remuneration, commercial availability,
record keeping and marking requirements should be retained, while restrictions
on the purpose for which copies could be made should
be relaxed.
10.17 The Committee is of the view that, in the light of the broad-based
support for the combination of the two schemes, this would
be a worthwhile
simplification of the Act.
Recommendation
10.18 The Committee recommends that the current schemes for copying for
handicapped readers and intellectually handicapped people
be combined into a
provision that deals with copying for people with print and intellectual
disabilities.
10.19 The Committee notes that if this recommendation is adopted amendments
to ss. 135ZW(5) and 135ZZH(2) would be necessary.
10.20 Subject to the Committee’s following comments, and taking into
account changes resulting from the combination of the two
schemes, the revised
structure of the provisions could be built on the streamlining of the two
schemes already proposed in Schedule
10.21 The Committee sought comments on a number of specific matters arising
from the proposals in Schedule 6. The following discussion
takes into account
the Committee’s recommendation that the two schemes be combined.
10.22 The release of the Committee’s issues paper and the public forum
occurred before the
was referred for consideration to
the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee, which published its
findings on 27 October
1997. The Senate
Committee has accepted the
proposals in Schedule 6 of the Bill. In relation to one matter, however, it has
recommended that the Attorney-General
consider whether the proposal in the Bill to limit the formats covered by
licence to audio, braille and large print: will disadvantage
people with a print
disability by denying them access to electronic copies; and consider whether the
Bill should be amended.
The Committee’s recommendation in paragraph 10.33 deals with this.
matters relating to the copying of works for people with a print disability and
people with an intellectual disability
of a handicapped reader
10.23 Section 10(2) of the Act defines a ‘handicapped reader’
(a) a blind person;
(b) a person suffering from severe impairment of his or her sight;
(c) a person unable to hold or manipulate books or to focus or move his or
her eyes; or
(d) a person suffering from a perceptual handicap;
10.24 The Committee sought comments on whether this definition should be
recast and extended to refer to a person who has ‘perceptual
disabilities which limit their ability to follow a line of print or which affect
concentration’, as suggested by the Round Table on Reading
Materials for People with Print Disabilities Inc. An extension of
the definition
in this form was supported in five of the 10 submissions received (four
submissions did not discuss this question
and one submission queried its need).
The use of the term ‘disability’ to replace the term
‘handicap’ was
also supported in a number of submissions. The
Committee notes that the
implements such a change
in terminology but does not extend the definition beyond its current scope.
10.25 It was also suggested by LISWA that the words ‘or cognitive
disabilities’ be added to the definition to include
intellectually
disabled people. CAL queried the need for the words ‘or other disabilities
which limit their ability to follow
a line of print or which affect their
concentration’ and submitted
that reference to a person with
‘perceptual’ disabilities should be sufficient. CAL also noted that
s. 69(4)(e) of the
New Zealand
, which refers to a person who
‘suffers a handicap with respect to visual perception’ might provide
an appropriate model.
The Committee disagrees. It is of the view that it is
unclear whether the words used are sufficient to include a person with a
disability. Specific reference to such people should therefore be
included in the definition.
Recommendation
10.26 The Committee recommends the recasting and extension of the present
definition of a handicapped reader to include people who
have ‘perceptual
or other disabilities that limit their ability to follow a line of text or that
affect their
concentration’. The Committee also recommends that a
specific reference to people with ‘cognitive disabilities’
10.27 The Committee notes that, under the current definition of a
‘print–handicapped radio licence’ in s. 47A(11)(b),
reference is made to a licence granted for the purpose of making sound
broadcasts ‘to persons who by reason of old age, disability
or literacy
problems are unable to handle books or newspapers or to read or comprehend
written material’. This definition,
in effect, extends the prescribed
audience well beyond that which would be covered by the extended definition
proposed in paragraph
10.26. In particular, s. 47A(11)(b) includes
people unable to read or comprehend due to ‘literacy problems’. A
problem is probably not commonly regarded as a ‘perceptual or
other disability’ that limits a person’s capacity
to follow a line
of text or that affects their
concentration. The Committee notes,
however, that in today’s society a person with literacy problems suffers
from a significant
form of disability.
10.28 The Committee does not believe that the licensing schemes that operate
in relation to the broadcasting and copying of copyright
materials for the
disabled vary to the extent necessary to justify the significant differences in
their permitted audience or users.
The Committee understands that the schemes
are designed to aid people with disabilities in the comprehension of written
Accordingly, it considers that application of the schemes should be
harmonised and that a single definition should be used.
Recommendation
10.29 The Committee recommends the further extension of its proposal for a
recast definition to people who, ‘because of insufficient
literacy or
language skills, cannot comprehend written material’.
10.30 The Committee does not consider that specific reference is needed to
people of ‘old age’, as provided under s. 47A(11)(b):
people who suffer from a disability would be included in the extended
definition. The Committee notes that, in addition to
harmonising the
broadcasting and copying licensing schemes for the disabled, a single definition
would help to simplify the Act.
Recommendation
10.31 The Committee recommends that for the purposes of the Act a
‘person with a print disability’ be defined as
a person without
a person whose vision is
severely impaired;
a person who is
unable to hold or manipulate books or to focus or move their eyes;
a person who has perceptual, cognitive
or other disabilities that limit their ability to follow a line of text or that
affect their
concentration;
who because of insufficient literacy or language skills cannot comprehend
written material.
of formats of works covered by licence
10.32 The Committee sought comment on whether the right to reproduce under
the handicapped readers provisions should extend to any
appropriate format.
There was general support in the submissions from both users and copyright
owners for such an extension. The
ACC submitted that reproduction of copyright
material in a format appropriate for people with disabilities would be
acceptable if
the work is not commercially
available (including under a licence scheme) in the required
only a reasonable portion of a
commercially available work is
reproduced;
the copy is not used for
any other purpose;
the item is
the institution gives a
remuneration notice to the relevant collecting
Recommendation
10.33 The Committee recommends that the right to reproduce works and other
be extended to
include making a reproduction in any appropriate format.
10.34 The Committee also notes that the criteria identified by the ACC
overlap with those already specified in the existing schemes.
that may be made of material copied
10.35 There was general agreement in all the submissions received in relation
to use that may be made of material copied: the present
requirement that copies
may be used only for research, study or self-instruction was considered
unjustifiably restrictive. The Committee
Recommendation
10.36 The Committee recommends that the current provision requiring that
copies may be used only for research, study or self-instruction
be removed,
provided that no charge is made beyond the direct cost of making such
Destruction
of master copy
10.37 Removal of the present requirement for master copies to be destroyed
within three months was generally supported. The ACC submitted,
however, that
equitable remuneration should be paid in respect of master copies made under
ss. 135ZQ and 135ZT.
Recommendation
10.38 The Committee accepts the general view that master copies need not be
destroyed and recommends accordingly. It also agrees that
a remuneration notice
should be required in respect of master copies.
10.39 Comment was sought on whether copies made pursuant to the statutory
licence should be able to be sold on a cost-recovery basis
without attracting an
obligation to pay the copyright owners. Copyright owners and users all endorsed
cost recovery in respect of
copies made pursuant to the statutory licence.
Recommendation
10.40 The Committee recommends that institutions be allowed to charge on a
cost-recovery basis for their services, provided those
charges are limited to
incurred in making and supplying the copy.
Availability
of commercial copy
10.41 Under the statutory licence copying is permitted only if the person
making the copy is satisfied that a copy of the work in
the desired format is
not available in a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price. It was
suggested that the requirement to
burden on institutions. CAL submitted, however, that the requirement to make
inquiries should
be retained.
Recommendation
10.42 The Committee recommends retention of the requirement under the
statutory licence that the person making the copy be satisfied
that a copy of
the work in the desired format is not available in a reasonable time at an
ordinary commercial price.
10.43 To remove the requirement would vastly broaden the scope of the
licence. The Committee also agrees with CAL that (at least in
some cases)
removal of the requirement would act as a disincentive for rights holders to
create, invest in and make available quality
copies of works in the desired
10.44 The Committee sought comments on whether production standards,
formulated by the Round Table on Reading Materials for People
Disabilities Inc., should be given status as a legislative instrument. Although
most submitters who commented on this
were supportive of the standards in
principle, they did not support their incorporation in the Act. CAL commented
that in the interests
of simplification it would be inappropriate to incorporate
standards in the legislation. The Committee agrees.
Recommendation
10.45 The Committee recommends that production standards for reading
materials for people with print disabilities not be incorporated
69 of the New Zealand
10.46 The Committee sought comments on whether s. 69 of the New Zealand
, which concerns the provision of braille copies of literary or
dramatic works, might, if suitably modified to cover copying for the
intellectually disabled, provide the framework for a blanket provision dealing
with copying for people with disabilities. Most submissions
in this regard
agreed that s. 69 of the New Zealand Act provides a useful model.
10.47 It was also clear, however, that the provision could not be simply
adopted without a number of changes to accommodate Australian
circumstances. In
particular, CAL submitted that the present requirements under the Act should be
retained and noted that s. 69 does
not have marking or record-keeping
requirements, that it does not require the payment of equitable remuneration
and, in relation
to notification, s. 69(c) is inappropriate because in
Australia CAL represents right holders and institutions are required to notify
Recommendation
10.48 Having regard to the differences between the Australian and New
Zealand copyright legislation and the general level of support
for the merger of
the schemes in the Australian
, the Committee recommends that the
present framework in the Australian Act be the starting point for combining the
two schemes.
10.49 The Australian Caption Centre proposed a statutory licence for the
preparation of captioned works to assist the deaf or hearing
impaired. This
proposal was supported by user groups and strongly supported by FACTS (the
Federation of Australian Commercial Television
Stations). As noted in the issues
paper, the underlying basis of the submission is that the Act should make
provision for those with
a hearing disability in the same way that
does for people with a reading or intellectual disability. The Committee agrees.
Recommendation
10.50 The Committee recommends that, should its recommendation for the
combination of the two schemes be adopted, the revised scheme
provision for people with hearing disabilities. If the Government decides
against merging the two schemes, the Committee
recommends that provision
nonetheless be made for people with hearing disabilities.
of broadcasts by institutions assisting intellectually handicapped
10.51 In its issues paper the Committee noted that s. 200AA of the Act
is intended to supplement s. 135ZT but, because of the present
structure of
the Act, the sections appear in very different places. The Committee did not
receive many comments on s. 200AA. LISWA
noted, however, that s. 200AA
logically lies with the other provisions relating to copying for people with
intellectual disabilities.
CAL, which supported the section’s retention,
also suggested that it be incorporated in Division IV.
Recommendation
10.52 The Committee recommends that, should its recommendation for the
combination of the two schemes be adopted, a provision to replace
of the Act be included in the revised scheme.
A The Committee’s terms of reference and further matters for
consideration, as identified by the Copyright Convergence
The terms of reference
1. The CLRC, having regard to Australia’s international obligations as
a member of the relevant international multilateral conventions
protection of copyright
is to inquire into and report on:
(a) how to simplify the
to make it able to be
understood by people needing to understand their rights and obligations under
the Act, with particular attention
to simplification of the various provisions
and schemes that provide exceptions to the exclusive rights comprising
(b) whether the existing exclusive rights comprising copyright in works and
other subject matter under the
can realistically be
reduced to a smaller number of broadly based rights and, if so, what those
rights should be;
(ba) in advising on the redefining of the exclusive rights comprising
, how those
rights could implement the right of distribution provided for in Article 6 of
the WCT and Articles 8 and 12 of the WPPT;
(c) whether a more practical and suitable categorisation of protected
subject matter can be devised and, if so, how those categories
(d) outstanding issues identified by the Copyright Convergence Group in its
Highways to Change
to the extent that they are not the
subject of a specific request for consideration under this reference or
of other processes of Federal Government inquiry; and
(e) incidental matters arising from the examination of points (a) to (d) and
which are able to be addressed by the CLRC within the
time frame for the
2. In undertaking the inquiry the CLRC will have regard to:
(a) any amendments to the
that are introduced into Parliament,
or which the Government announces are proposed to be introduced or are being
considered;
(b) the recommendations and reports made to Government by other relevant
expert or advisory bodies in intellectual property;
(c) ongoing developments in the relevant international copyright forums;
(d) technological developments;
(e) the effect of any changes on the structure and operation of public and
private sector organisations;
(f) the possible effect of changes in the nature of rights in the
on other intellectual property regimes;
(g) the history and nature of amendments to the
since 1968 and the effect these changes have had on the understanding, use and
operation of the
(h) the possible effect on the operation and complexity of any future
new transitional
provisions to the
3. The CLRC must report to the Attorney-General by 30 June 1998.
identified by the Copyright Convergence Group
The matters the Copyright Convergence Group (CCG) identified in its report
Highways to Change
as requiring further consideration—referred to
in paragraph 1(d) of the Committee’s terms of reference—are as
the development of guidelines for
‘fair use’ of copying of materials by libraries and archives. In
particular, the CCG
identified the following matters as warranting
the copying of subject matter
other than works by libraries for the purposes of
preservation,
electronic transmission
of requests for materials for inter-library
viewing and copying of
electronically transmitted material held by
application of legal deposit
provisions in s. 201 of the Act to cover electronically networked
information,
the conditions applying to
the copying of works for preservation and other purposes in s. 51A in
relation to the reformatting of electronic
information, as well as standard
current preservation
techniques;
whether the statutory
licence scheme provided for in Part VA of the Act concerning the educational
copying of radio and television
programs, which is currently limited to services
delivered by wireless telegraphy, should be extended to include all broadcasts,
including pay television and narrowcasting services (paragraph 7.2 of the CCG
the scope of the existing
statutory licence schemes and exceptions to infringement, having regard to the
increasing use of electronic
transmission and copying of copyright materials
(including digital copying and electronic scanning of a work onto a database).
particular, the CCG identified the following
the statutory licences in
Part VB of the Act for the copying of works by
educational
institutions
institutions assisting handicapped readers
institutions assisting intellectually handicapped people,
those provisions in Division 5 of
Part III of the Act providing for the copying of articles, unpublished works,
and other works for
preservation purposes in libraries and
the copying by libraries or
archives of films and sound recordings pursuant to ss. 110A and
the copying of various materials
by parliamentary libraries for members of parliament pursuant to
whether the present
definition of ‘cinematograph film’, provided in s. 10 of the
Act, remains an adequate category of
be replaced by a new broad category of ‘audiovisual work’ to
expressly cover
multimedia works (paragraph
whether the present definitions,
in s. 10 of the Act, of a ‘record’ and a ‘cinematograph
film’ are sufficient
to provide for the protection of sounds and visual
images created and stored digitally having regard to s. 24 concerning
‘References
to sounds and visual images embodied in an
article’—the CCG took the view that it was unclear whether
s. 24 required
sounds and images to exist before their embodiment in the
article or thing from which they are capable of being reproduced;
whether there is a need to provide a
definition of ‘reproduction’ in the Act to ensure that new uses of
would be controllable by copyright owners (paragraph
the scope of the definition of
‘copy’, provided in s. 10 of the Act, which extends only to
cinematograph films, and whether
it does or should extend to material stored in
a non-permanent medium such as electronic memory—the CCG suggested that
matter be considered together with the scope of the ‘proposed right
of reproduction’ (paragraph
whether the definition of
‘publication’ in s. 29(1)(c) of the Act should be amended so as
to encompass the delivery of
sound recordings by digital or electronic means and
therefore provide copyright protection for sound recordings first distributed
the public in an intangible form (paragraph
whether the jurisdiction of the
include all forms of collective
licensing and, if so, whether this can be done
in keeping with Australia’s obligations under the Berne Convention
whether the
circumstances in which the broadcast of literary and dramatic works, sound
recordings and films that are performed or
exhibited to the public by means of a
receiving device constitute a public performance for the purposes of the
exemption under ss.
199(1), 1992(2) and 199(3), having regard to the
increasing number of types of electronic delivery of these materials and the
of the proposed broadening of the definition of ‘broadcast’
(paragraph 7.11);
whether there is a
need to provide a mechanism for the use of copyright material where the
traced (paragraph
whether the operation of
s. 23 of the Act, which in effect deems a sound recording that has been
synchronised with a film not to be
a sound recording, is justified (paragraph
whether the scope of the
statutory licence for the broadcast of sound recordings, provided under
s. 109 of the Act, should be extended
to include broadcasts offered for
valuable consideration (paragraph
the copyright treatment of
point-to-point transmissions where the originator or recipient is outside
Australia (paragraph 3.3).
B International obligations
B.1 The rights accorded copyright owners under
Australia’s
derive from a number of
international agreements for the protection of intellectual property to which
Australia is a party. The permissible
scope of any statutory exceptions to those
rights must also be determined by reference to the exceptions allowed for in
those international
agreements.
B.2 For the purpose of considering permissible exceptions to the exclusive
rights of copyright owners, the relevant international
agreements are the Berne
Convention, the Rome Convention and the TRIPS Agreement.
B.3 In December 1996 two new treaties—the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT)
and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT)—were
agreed to at
the WIPO Diplomatic Conference on Certain Copyright and Neighbouring Rights
Questions held in Geneva. Neither treaty
is yet in force since in each case 30
countries must have deposited instruments of ratification or accession for this
to occur. Australia
is yet to ratify them, so the obligations they contain do
not apply to Australia. The Committee understands, however, that the Government
will soon be considering whether Australia should become a party to the two new
treaties. For this reason, and having regard to the
Committee’s terms of
reference, which require it to have regard to ‘ongoing developments in the
relevant copyright forums’,
the potential impact of their provisions is
also considered here.
Berne Convention
B.4 The Berne Convention provides for protection of the rights of authors of
literary and artistic works. The works that are protected
are set out in
art. 2 of the Convention. In summary, the Convention requires members to
protect literary works, dramatic works, musical
works, artistic works and
cinematographic works. It does not require protection of sound recordings,
performances or broadcasts.
Permissible
exceptions to the rights of authors under the Berne Convention
B.5 Exceptions to the rights of authors are permitted under arts. 2(8),
, 9.2, 10 and 10
and by compulsory licences provided for in
(3) and 13. Article 9(2) is perhaps the most significant
exception: it applies to the reproduction right of all works protected under
Convention. The remaining exceptions are confined to certain special categories
of works in certain special cases.
B.6 Article 9.2 provides,
It shall be a matter for the legislation in the countries of the Union to
permit the reproduction of such works in certain special
cases, provided that
such reproduction does not conflict with a normal exploitation of a work and
does not unreasonably prejudice
the legitimate interests of the author.
Accordingly, exceptions to or limitations of the reproduction right of
authors are permitted only if three conditions are satisfied.
The Committee
notes that the scope of this provision is still the subject of dispute and that
each of the conditions it contains
raises its own problems of interpretation.
Further, the conditions are cumulative: each must be satisfied before an
exception can
be justified. The first condition is that the reproduction is
allowed only ‘in certain special cases’. This means that
circumstances justifying the making of an exception must be special or
exceptional. A broad kind of exemption would not appear
to be allowed and the
special case must be justified on the basis of clear public policy or other
exceptional circumstances. In his
book on the Berne Convention, Professor
Ricketson notes that the provision is not intended to exclude exceptions that
national legislation at the time of the 1967 Stockholm Revision
Conference, at which art. 9(2) was
introduced.
B.7 Second, the exceptions or limitations are permitted only where they
‘do not conflict with the normal exploitation of a work’.
Ricketson comments that no guidance is given about the meaning of the expression
‘normal exploitation of a work’.
In his view, however, the
expression probably refers simply to the ways in which authors might reasonably
be expected to exploit
their works. The determination of what is normal
exploitation would seem to depend on industry practice and the particular kind
B.8 Third, the exceptions or limitations to the reproduction right should
‘not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests
of the author’.
Professor Ricketson notes that any exception to the reproduction right
fundamentally prejudices the interests
of the author and for this reason the
qualification ‘unreasonable’ is added. Professor Ricketson considers
that unreasonable
prejudice can be avoided by the payment of
remuneration—for example, under a compulsory licence. But this does not
a use that conflicts with the normal use of a work can be justified by
the payment of royalties under a compulsory licence: such
a use could not be
regarded as part of the author’s normal exploitation of their work.
B.9 Article 2(8) provides that the protection of the Berne Convention does
not apply to the news of the day or to miscellaneous facts
having the character
of mere items of press information. Article 2
also provides for
possible limitations on the protection of certain works, including political
speeches and speeches given in the
course of legal proceedings, as well as
certain uses of lectures and addresses for informatory purposes.
B.10 Articles 10 and 10
allow certain free uses of works such as
quotations, illustrations for teaching (subject to the requirement that mention
of the source and the name of the author if it appears on the work),
reproduction by the press and the broadcast of news articles,
and the use of
works seen or heard in connection with current events. Article 11
allows member states to determine the regulation of ephemeral recordings made by
broadcasting organisations for their own broadcasts.
Article 13 provides for the
possible limitation of the right of recording musical works and any associated
Rome Convention
B.11 The exceptions provided for in art. 15 of the Rome Convention are
exceptions to the rights of performers (art. 7), phonogram
(art. 10) and broadcasting organisations (art. 13). These exceptions
are facultative. They apply only if provided for by
the national legislation of
the country in which the protection is claimed.
B.12 Article 15 provides,
1. Any Contracting State may, in its domestic laws and regulations, provide
for exceptions to the protection guaranteed by this Convention
as regards:
(a) private use;
(b) use of short excerpts in connection with the reporting of current
(c) ephemeral fixation by a broadcasting organisation by means of its own
facilities and for its own broadcasts;
(d) use solely for the purposes of teaching or scientific research.
2. Irrespective of paragraph 1 of this Article, any contracting state may, in
its domestic laws and regulations, provide for the same
kinds of limitations
with regards to the protection of performers, producers of phonograms and
broadcasting organisations, as it
provides for, in its domestic laws and
regulations, in connection with the protection of copyright in literary and
artistic works.
However, compulsory licences may be provided for only to the
extent to which they are compatible with this Convention.
B.13 The four purposes for which art. 15(1) allows member states, without
qualification, to make exceptions to the rights of performers,
producers of
phonograms and broadcasting organisations are discussed in the following
paragraphs.
B.14 The type of use contemplated by this provision is any use that is other
than public use or use for profit. In relation to performers,
the WIPO guide to
the Rome Convention notes that the exception arises only if their performances
are recorded. With the development
of recording technology since the date of the
Convention, private use (reproduction) of sound recordings and the fixation and
reproduction
of broadcasts has become widely available to the public.
of short excerpts for news reporting
B.15 This provision is modelled on art. 10
of the Berne
Convention. The use must be in connection with reporting current events and it
must be short.
fixations made by broadcasters for their broadcasting
B.16 The purpose of this exception is to meet the needs of broadcasting
organisations for time-delayed broadcasts.
solely for the purpose of teaching or scientific research
B.17 This exception allows member states to refuse protection against uses
that are solely for the purpose of teaching and research.
B.18 In addition, art. 15(2) allows members to provide the same kinds of
limitations on protection under the Rome Convention as they
do with regard to
are provided for in the Convention—see
art. 7.2(2) (‘The use by
broadcasting organisations of fixations made for broadcasting purposes’),
art. 12 (‘The
payment of equitable remuneration to performers and/or
producers of phonograms for the use of phonograms for broadcasting or any
communication to the public’) and art. 13(d) (‘Communication to
the public of television broadcasts if this is done in
places accessible to the
public on payment of an entry fee’).
Phonograms Convention
B.19 The Phonograms Convention is designed to resolve the problem of piracy
of sound recordings. Specifically, it requires member
states to protect
phonogram producers against the making of unauthorised or illicit duplicates of
their phonograms for distribution
to the public. Producers of phonograms are
protected against the making of illicit duplicates, their importation and their
distribution.
B.20 Article 6 of the Convention allows member states to provide the
exceptions that are allowed under art. 15(2) of the Rome Convention.
Compulsory licences are permitted, however, only if the three following
conditions are met.
The duplication is solely for
teaching or scientific research.
licence is valid only for that territory and does not extend to
Equitable remuneration is
Article 7(1) provides a safeguard for copyright and
neighbouring rights protected under any domestic law or international
TRIPS Agreement
B.21 Article 9 of the TRIPS Agreement sets out its relationship with the
Berne Convention. It requires members to comply with arts.
1 to 21 of the
Berne Convention and the appendix, with the exception of art. 6
(‘Moral rights’).
B.22 Article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement provides,
Members shall confine limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation
work and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right
In effect, the wording of this article extends the application of the
three-step test in art. 9(2) of the Berne Convention so as to
apply to all
the rights of authors of literary and artistic works, not just the reproduction
B.23 Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of art. 14 specify the rights to be enjoyed
by performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organisations.
14(6) provides,
Any member may, in relation to the rights conferred under paragraphs 1, 2,
and 3, provide for conditions, limitations, exceptions
and reservations to the
extent permitted by the Rome Convention. However, the provisions of Article 18
[‘Works existing on
the Convention’s entry into force’] of the
Berne Convention (1971) shall also apply,
mutatis mutandis
, to the rights
of performers and producers of phonograms in phonograms.
Accordingly, under the TRIPS Agreement Australia may still provide the
exceptions and limitations to the rights of authors of literary
and artistic
works recognised under the Berne Convention and to the rights of performers and
producers of phonograms recognised under
the Rome Convention.
December 1996 WIPO treaties
B.24 The WCT is both a protocol to the Berne Convention (between Berne member
countries that adhere to the WCT) and a free-standing
treaty between Berne
members and non-members and between non-member countries. Article 1(4) of
the WCT also requires non-member countries
to comply with arts. 1 to 21 of
the Berne Convention.
WIPO Copyright Treaty: limitations and exceptions
B.25 Article 10 of the WCT allows contracting parties to enact
‘limitations of’ or ‘exceptions to’ the rights
provides. It does so in the same manner as the three-step test in art. 9(2)
of the Berne Convention (see paragraph B.6). Article
10(1) of the WCT
(1) Contracting Parties may, in their national legislation, provide for
exceptions to the rights granted to authors of literary and
artistic works under
this Treaty in certain special cases that do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate
interests of the author.
B.26 The Committee understands that art. 10(1) was the subject of some
debate at the Conference. The debate was a result of concern
by some delegations
that art. 10(1) would introduce inconsistency between exceptions and
limitations under the WCT and those allowed
under the Berne Convention. The
article was, however, agreed to on the basis of an understanding, adopted by the
Conference, that
... the provisions of Article 10 permit Contracting Parties to carry forward
and appropriately extend into the digital environment
limitations and exceptions
in their national laws which have been considered acceptable under the Berne
Convention. Similarly, these
provisions should be understood to permit
Contracting Parties to devise new exceptions and limitations that are
appropriate in the
digital network environment.
Article 10(2) provides,
(2) Contracting Parties shall, when applying the Berne Convention, confine
any limitation of or exceptions to rights provided for
therein to certain
special cases that do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work and do
not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the author.
Article 10(2) requires the three-step test set out in art. 10(1) to be
applied to Berne limitations and exceptions. The effect of
art. 10(2) is
expressed in an agreed statement, adopted by the Conference, that it
‘neither reduces nor extends the scope of
applicability of the limitations
and exceptions permitted by the Berne Convention’.
WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty: limitations and exceptions
B.27 The WPPT is a free-standing treaty; it is intended to provide performers
and producers of phonograms with the same protection
as that provided under the
Rome Convention. The Rome Convention and TRIPS of course remain the operative
international instruments
in relation to the rights of broadcasters.
B.28 Article 16(1) of the WPPT carries the substance of art. 15(2) of
the Rome Convention over to the Treaty:
(1) Contracting Parties may, in their national legislation, provide for the
same kinds of limitations or exceptions with regard to
the protection of
performers and producers of phonograms as they provide for, in their national
legislation, in connection with the
protection of copyright in literary and
artistic works.
Article 16(2) provides,
(2) Contracting Parties shall confine any limitations or exceptions to rights
provided for in this Treaty to certain special cases
which do not conflict with
the normal exploitation of the performance or phonogram and do not unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate
interests of the performer or of the producer of the
Unlike art. 15(1) of the Rome Convention, art. 16(2) of the WPPT
does not expand the possibilities for exceptions to, and limitations
rights of performers and producers of phonograms. It simply imposes the
three-step test on the provision of ‘any limitations
of or exceptions to
rights provided by this Treaty’.
B.29 As discussed, Australia’s obligations to authors of literary and
artistic works are set out in the Berne Convention and
the TRIPS Agreement. It
is art. 13 of TRIPS that defines the scope of permissible exceptions to the
exclusive rights of authors.
The Committee notes, however, that art. 2(1)
of TRIPS provides that nothing therein ‘shall derogate from existing
obligations
that Members may have to each other under ... the Berne
Convention ...’ This suggests that authors from Berne Convention
countries remain entitled to the same minimum level of protection, in any
Berne Convention member country, as applied at the time
that country assumed its
TRIPS obligations.
B.30 The rights accorded performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting
organisations under the Rome Convention, the TRIPS Agreement
and the Phonograms
Convention are all expressed to be subject to the exceptions allowed under the
Rome Convention and it is those
limitations that currently apply. If, however,
the Government were to decide that Australia should become a party to the WPPT
appears that it would no longer be open to Australia to provide for the
specific classes of exceptions listed in art. 15(1) of the
Rome Convention.
As noted in paragraph B.28, art. 16 of the WPPT confines the permissible
exceptions to those allowed under the three-step
C International comparisons
C.1 Free use of copyright material is called
‘fair dealing’ in the United Kingdom and UK-derived legislation
Australian and New Zealand legislation) and ‘fair use’ in
US law. In other legislation it is described as ‘restrictions’
‘exceptions’.
C.2 According to Stewart the special cases of free use are of two kinds:
(i) free use for all classes of works for specific purposes such as reporting
news, research or study, etc.; and
(ii) free use for particular classes of works such as public speeches,
newspaper articles, broadcast commentaries,
C.3 Stewart notes that the various exceptional free uses of copyright
material found under international copyright legislation fall
within five
categories:
(i) exceptions for public speeches, lectures, speeches in legal
proceedings;
(ii) exceptions justified by the desirability of freedom of information in
press and broadcasts;
(iii) quotations (e.g. for the purpose of criticism);
(iv) research or study; and
(v) reproduction for personal or private use.
C.4 Stewart acknowledges that the exceptions were conceived mainly with
manuscript or typewritten copies in mind and that modern technology
has provided
new tools that create major challenges to the reproduction right.
C.5 In analysing the foreign legislation, this Committee report describes
only exceptions to the exclusive rights comprising copyright
that may fall under
a general ‘fair use’ exception. It does not attempt to describe
exceptions covered under remunerated
statutory licensing schemes.
legislation
C.6 Section 107 of the US
contains a non-exclusive
list of factors to be taken into account in determining fair use; this is
similar to the guidelines in s.
40(2) of the Australian
The notable difference between the US and Australian sets of factors is the
existence of s. 40(2)(c) in the Australian Act, which
has no counterpart in
the US legislation. Section s. 40(2)(c) provides for consideration by a
court of ‘the possibility of
obtaining the work or adaptation within a
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price’.
C.7 Section 107 of the US Act provides
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a
or phonorecords or
by any other means specified by that section, for purposes such as criticism,
comment, news reporting, teaching
(including multiple copies for classroom use),
scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright. In determining
the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors
to be considered shall include—
(1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a
commercial nature or is for non-profit educational purposes;
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work;
(3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for, or value of, the
The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair
use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the
above factors.
C.8 In the United States, the fair use doctrine is a general limitation or
‘equitable rule of reason’
and is not limited, as it is in Australia, to certain specific purposes. Nor
does the US law include the overall quantitative test
for fairness found in
s. 40(3) of the Australian Act, which applies notwithstanding the factors
to be taken into account in determining
fairness in s. 40(2).
C.9 The US provision specifically provides that the fact that a work is
unpublished shall not of itself be a bar to the finding of
a fair use in
relation to the work. This is similar to the Australian position, where no
specific bar is placed on the application
of the fair dealing provisions to an
unpublished work. The fact that a work is unpublished may be considered by a
court under s.
40(2)(b), ‘The nature of the work or
adaptation’, in determining whether a dealing with the work is a fair
dealing. It
should be noted that the quantitative test found in s. 40(3)
applies to published works. The first arm of the quantitative test,
s. 40(3)(a), refers to a ‘periodical publication’; the second
arm of the test, s. 40(3)(b), refers to a ‘reasonable
which is defined as being a reasonable portion of ‘a published
edition’ under s. 10(2). For further discussion
of the current
operation of s. 40(3) see paragraphs 4.11 to 4.14.
C.10 The Committee notes that differences between the US and Australian legal
systems are of particular significance in relation to
the operation of a
‘fair use’-style provision in Australia. According to
, the US law is interpreted by US
courts in a policy context that differs from the one in which the fair dealing
provisions are interpreted
in Australia. Lahore states that in the US the courts
are of the view that ‘Congress has thus far provided scant guidance for
resolving fair use issues’.
courts therefore play a more active role in providing solutions to major
technological innovations, such as reprographic reproduction,
which alter the
market for copyright materials. This must be contrasted with the Australian
position where the Copyright Act was
amended following the Franki report to
introduce a detailed system of copying under fair dealing provisions and
statutory licences
for the specific purpose of implementing the
Government’s policy on reprographic reproduction.
C.11 The Committee notes that one reason the US courts play a more active
role in providing solutions to technological innovation
may be that they are
more likely to adopt what has been called the ‘legal realist’
approach. This has been crucial, for
example, to the rapid development of US
jurisprudence on the scope of copyright protection of computer software. In
contrast, the
Australian courts have been more restrained, the judges being
concerned largely with the interpretation of statutory provisions and
parliament for explicit direction regarding the application of intellectual
property protection to new technologies. The
Committee considers that this
approach by the Australian courts is likely to continue.
C.12 The Committee notes a further difference between the US and Australian
legal systems that is of particular significance in relation
to the operation of
a ‘fair use’-style provision in Australia. The US doctrine of fair
use, and US copyright law generally,
operate against the background of
s. 8, art. 1 of the US
Constitution
, which sets out the purpose of
laws relating to intellectual property as ‘to promote the progress of
science and useful arts,
by securing for limited times to authors and inventors
the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries’. In
Australia there is no equivalent statement in the
Constitution
Australia’s copyright legislation must, however, be consistent with the
relevant international copyright conventions to which
Australia is a party.
C.13 The submission received from Mr Brian Fitzgerald of Griffith University
(submission 2) stated that s. 107 of the US Copyright
Act embodies the
essence of US copyright law and in a more general sense the American psyche. It
noted that there are at least three
American principles that are fundamental to
the understanding of s. 107: wealth maximisation, free speech and use, and
private immunity.
legislation
C.14 Under the UK
there is no
general limitation of fair use. Instead, as in the Australian Act, there are a
number of specific purposes relating to
‘fair dealing’. The specific
exceptions defined as a fair dealing are ‘research and private
study’ (s. 29)
and ‘criticism, review and news reporting’
(s. 30). In addition, although not actually defined as a fair dealing,
in works is not infringed by their incidental inclusion in an artistic
work, sound recording, film, broadcast or cable program. Similarly,
there is no
infringement for anything done for the purpose of parliamentary or judicial
proceedings.
C.15 Unlike the Australian Act, no statutory guidance is provided about what
factors are to be taken into account when determining
whether a dealing with a
particular work is in fact a fair dealing. Fair dealing is regarded by the
courts as a matter of fact and
Hubbard v Vosper
Lord Denning
It is impossible to define what is a fair dealing. It must be a question of
degree. You must first consider the number and extent
of quotations and extracts
... Next you must consider the proportions ... Other considerations may come to
mind also. But, after
all is said and done, it must be a matter of
impression.
C.16 The case law has developed the following factors that, among others, are
considered in determining whether the copying of a work
whether the work is published or
unpublished
the work has been improperly
economic implications of the use of the
C.17 It should be
noted that the UK Act provides for fair dealing for the purpose of
‘research and
study’ (s. 29) [emphasis added],
whereas the similar Australian provision provides for ‘research or
40). The Committee received a number of submissions
calling for re-insertion of the word ‘private’ before
in the Australian provision.
C.18 There are other differences between the UK and Australian Acts in
relation to fair dealing. Under the UK Act fair dealing for
the purpose of
research and private study (s. 29) does not apply to the use of a film,
sound recording, broadcast or cable program.
This must be contrasted with the
Australian position, which applies the fair dealing exception of ‘research
under s. 103C to an ‘audio-visual item’, which
is defined in s. 100A as ‘a sound recording, a cinematograph film,
sound broadcast or a television broadcast’.
C.19 In addition, under the UK Act fair dealing for the purpose of reporting
current events does not apply to the use of a photograph
(s. 30(2)). This
restriction is not provided under the related Australian provision (s. 42).
C.20 Finally, the Committee notes that the fair dealing provisions of the UK
Act do not refer to a quantitative test.
C.21 Under the UK Act it is specifically stated that it is not a fair dealing
to convert a computer program expressed in a low-level
language into a higher
level language (s. 29(4)(a)). Special provisions have been introduced for
back-up copying (s. 50A), decompilation
for interoperability (s. 50B),
and other acts permitted to lawful users (s. 50C).
C.22 The exceptions to the exclusive rights comprising copyright (including
the fair dealing provisions) under the UK Act have been
conveniently confined to
one area of the legislation (Chapter III—‘Acts permitted in relation
to copyright works’).
This must be contrasted with the location of the
exceptions under the Australian Act, which are scattered throughout the
legislation.
Zealand legislation
C.23 The fair dealing provisions of the New Zealand
are based on a combination of the fair dealing provisions that exist under the
UK and Australian legislation.
C.24 The general structure of the New Zealand exceptions to the exclusive
rights comprising copyright, including the fair dealing
provisions, is based on
the UK Act. The specific purposes defined as fair dealing under the New Zealand
Act are ‘criticism,
review and news reporting’(s. 42) and
‘research or private study’(s. 43), as also defined under the
C.25 Although worded differently, s. 42 is identical in effect to the
corresponding section of the UK Act (s. 30). Section 43 is also
the related UK provision (s. 29), in that it applies to
study. But s. 43 is broader than the UK provision, which applies only to
literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works and published
editions. In
contrast, s. 43 of the New Zealand Act, and the related Australian
provision (s. 40), apply to all forms of copyright
C.26 Section 43(3) of the New Zealand Act incorporates a list of factors to
be considered in determining whether a dealing for the
purpose of research and
private study is a fair dealing. The factors themselves are very similar to the
factors found in s. 40(2)
of the Australian Act. There is, however, a
notable difference in that under the New Zealand Act the list appears to be
an exclusive set of factors; the Australian factors are drafted as a
non-exclusive list.
C.27 The New Zealand legislation does not include a quantitative test in
relation to the fair dealing provisions.
C.28 In addition to the fair dealing exceptions, the New Zealand Act has
further exceptions, including ‘incidental copying of
(s. 41) and use of a work in ‘parliamentary and judicial
proceedings’ (s. 59).
C.29 Under the New Zealand Act it is not an infringement of copyright to make
a back-up copy of a computer program (s. 80). The Act
does not appear to
provide an exception allowing for decompilation for the purpose of
interoperability.
legislation
1992 Law on the Intellectual
Property Code contains a closed set of exceptions to the exclusive rights of
C.31 Article L.122-5 of the French legislation states that once a work has
been disclosed the author may not prohibit
private and gratuitous performances
carried out exclusively within the family
copies or reproductions
reserved strictly for the private use of the copier and not intended for
collective use, with the exception
of copies of works of art to be used for
purposes identical to those for which the original work was
on the condition that the name
of the author and source are clearly
analyses and short quotations
justified by the critical, polemic, educational, scientific or informatory
nature of the work in which
incorporated,
dissemination through press or
tele-diffusion, as current news, of speeches intended for the public made in
political, administrative,
judicial or academic
gatherings;
parody, pastiche and
caricature, observing the rules of the genre.
C.32 The French
legislation also provides exceptions in relation to computer programs. Article
L.122-6-1 permits the ordinary use
of software by the person entitled to use it
for its intended purpose, including error correction, back-up copying,
observation,
study, and testing of the functioning of a program in order to
determine the underlying ideas and principles for the purpose of
interoperability
(subject to a number of conditions).
C.33 The French Law does not describe the factors to be considered in
determining whether the exceptions to the copyright owners’
rights apply.
The parody exception is, however, qualified by the statutory requirement of
‘observing the rules of the genre’.
Macquarie Dictionary
defines ‘genre’ as a ‘genus, kind, sort or style’.)
C.34 The French legislation does not appear to provide for a quantitative
test in relation to the exceptions described.
legislation
C.35 The German Copyright Law of 1965
contains a closed set of
‘limitations’ on copyright owners’ commercial or
‘exploitation’ rights.The
moral rights of copyright owners remain
protected, however, where the owners’ exploitation rights have been
restricted.
C.36 The German legislation contains the following limitations on copyright
owners’ exploitation rights:
use of the copyright material for
the purpose of the administration of justice and public security, such as making
copies of a work
for use in proceedings of a court, tribunal or public authority
‘quotation’ and ‘borrowing’ from works for the purpose
of cultural or intellectual
freedom to quote a
work allows for the major quotations of scientific works, and the minor
quotations of literary works. Musical quotations
are also allowed (art.
freedom to borrow from a work in
the case of collections for religious, educational and teaching purposes (art.
46). The author must,
however, be paid equitable remuneration for the use of the
work (art. 53);
reproduction of a
single copy for private and other personal uses. The author is, however,
entitled to the payment of equitable remuneration
for the use of the work (art.
reproduction for private scholarly
or scientific use (art. 53);
make public information
reproduction of
speeches made at public meetings and in public or religious proceedings (art.
reproduction of articles from
newspapers concerning political, economic or religious issues of the day (art.
special provisions applying to
computer programs, including an ‘ordinary use’ provision, error
correction, back-up copying
(art. 69d) and decompilation for interoperability
(art. 69e).
C.37 The German legislation does not describe the
factors to be considered in determining whether the limitations to the copyright
owners’ rights apply. Article 51, in applying the exception relating to
quotations, does, however, make reference to a number
of acts in relation to the
quotation being ‘permitted, to the extent justified by the
C.38 The German legislation does not appear to provide for a general
quantitative test in relation to the limitations.
legislation
C.39 Canada’s
provides for a specified set of
purposes relating to ‘fair dealing’ in addition to a set of further
exceptions.
C.40 The purposes described as fair dealing are research or private study
(s. 29), criticism or review (s. 29.1) and news reporting
(s. 29.2). It should be noted that a dealing for the purpose of criticism
or review and news reporting will be regarded as fair only
if the source and the
name of the author, performer, maker or broadcaster are mentioned.
C.41 The Canadian Act does not specify any factors to be considered in
determining whether a dealing is a fair dealing: the factors
are therefore left
to the common law. The Canadian Courts have narrowly construed fair dealing and
consider such factors as the amount
of the original work taken, whether the work
is published, and whether the new work competes with the
C.42 It appears that the Canadian Act does not provide for any quantitative
test in relation to fair dealing.
C.43 The further exceptions specified in the Canadian Act are conditional on
the people or institutions conducting the activities
without ‘motive of
gain’ (s. 29.3(1)). The Act does, however, allow cost recovery by
such people or institutions (s.
29.3(2)). The exceptions are as
the copying by educational
institutions for educational purposes—for example, the production of
overhead transparencies (s.
29.4(1)(b)), performances (s. 29.5) and,
subject to certain limitations, the copying of news and commentary
the copying by
libraries, archives and museums of rare, unpublished or fragile works or works
that are in an obsolete format as long
as any intermediate copies are destroyed
when no longer needed
the making by a person
who owns an authorised copy of a computer program of a single reproduction of
the copy by adapting, modifying
or converting the computer program or
translating it into another computer language if the person proves
the reproduction is essential for
the compatibility of the computer program with a particular
the reproduction is solely
for the person’s own use,
reproduction is destroyed when the person ceases to be the owner of the copy of
the computer program (s. 30.6(a));
the making of a back-up copy of a
computer program (s. 30.6(b));
the incidental and accidental
inclusion of a work or subject matter in another work or subject matter
authorised ephemeral
recordings, which may be kept for 30 days without permission or payment of
royalties (s. 30.8);
reproduction of works, other than cinematograph works, into a more appropriate
format for people with perceptual disabilities
(s. 32(1))—this does
not include the making of a large-print book
(s. 32(2));
the disclosure or
production of certain works or copies pursuant to other legislative authority
the publication in a
newspaper of a report of a lecture delivered in public
(s. 32.2(1)(c));
the reading or
recitation in public by one person of any reasonable extract from any published
work—‘reasonable extract’
does not appear to be
defined—(s. 32.2(1)(d);
performance of a musical work at religious, educational or charitable gatherings
(s. 32.2(3)).
and Finnish legislation
Danish Copyright Act 1995
Finnish Copyright Act
appear to be very similar; they are discussed together here.
C.45 Both Acts have a closed set of ‘limitations’ to the
Chapter 2. Both
begin with a provision that specifically protects copyright owners’ moral
rights when applying the limitations
to their exclusive economic rights (art.
C.46 The two Acts then go on to specify a broad range of limitations:
the making of single copies of a
disseminated work for private use (but not including computer programs or works
of architecture)
(art. 12, both
reproduction in certain
institutions (hospitals, old people’s homes, prisons, and so on) (art. 15,
Finnish Act);
to quote from published
works in accordance with established practice and to the extent justified by the
purpose of the quotation
(art. 22, both
the use of public statements
made at meetings concerning matters of public interest (art. 25c, Finnish Act;
art. 26, Danish Act);
the showing of a
work as part of a current affairs program (art. 25b, Finnish Act; art. 25,
Danish Act);
the use of articles on a
current topic—newspaper and periodical articles on current religious,
political or economic topics
may be included in other newspapers or periodicals,
unless expressly prohibited (art. 23, Finnish
the use of a work for judicial
proceedings or public security (art. 25d, Finnish Act; art. 28, Danish
special provisions relating to
computer programs
the making of copies
of a program and such changes (including correction of errors) as are necessary
for the person acquiring the
program to use it in accordance with its purpose
(art. 25j, Finnish Act; art. 36, Danish
the making of a back-up copy
(subject to certain conditions) (art. 25j, Finnish Act; art. 36, Danish
the decompilation of a computer
program for the purposes of interoperability, subject to certain conditions
(art. 25k, Finnish Act;
art. 37, Danish Act).
C.47 The limitation
allowing for the right to make single copies for private use is subject to an
indirect form of remuneration to
video tapes and other similar devices that are distributed to the public must
set levy based on the playing time of the device. The sums raised are then
paid to collecting societies, to be distributed to the
owners of copyright
materials that have been privately reproduced.
C.48 The Danish and Finnish Acts do not appear to refer to a set of factors
that are to be considered in determining whether a particular
limitation should
apply. The limitation in relation to quotation is, however, qualified under the
Danish Act by reference to ‘the
established practice, and to the extent
which is justified by the purpose of the quotation’. The Finnish Act has a
qualification providing that a ‘disseminated work may be quoted,
in accordance with proper usage, to the extent necessary for
C.49 Both Acts do not refer to a general quantitative test in relation to the
limitations.
D Outline of Submissions on fair dealing
Introduction
D.1 In formulating its recommendations the Committee considered the
submissions it received in response to the issues paper entitled
Simplification of the Fair Dealing Provisions of the
as well as submissions that followed the public forum. It also took account of
submissions previously received in response to its
report entitled
Simplification of the
D.2 This appendix outlines the main submissions made to the Committee.
Chapter 6 provides an analysis of the issues raised in these
submissions
and presents the Committee’s response to them.
Simplification
of the fair dealing provisions
D.3 Submissions from users of copyright materials, such as libraries and
educational institutions, suggested the adoption of a US-style
use’ provision that would combine all possible fair dealing exceptions
into a single provision and subject these
exceptions to the same set of
statutory factors for consideration. This notion was commended as a direct means
of simplifying the
Act by reducing its length and applying a consistent approach
to the fair dealing exceptions.
D.4 With the exception of the submission from Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd
(PBL), submissions from broadcasters strongly opposed
adoption of a US-style
fair use provision. The majority submitted that introduction of such a provision
would mean that the traditional
distinction between research or study, criticism
or review and reporting the news would be removed from the Act. It was further
that introduction of a US-style fair use provision would substantially
limit the scope of the current operation of the criticism
or review and
reporting of news fair dealing exceptions. These objections are set out in
paragraphs D.37 to D.42.
D.5 Some submissions from libraries and educational institutions supported
broadening the fair dealing exception by drafting a non-exhaustive
circumstances in which fair dealing may arise. This is the approach used in
s. 107 of the US
. ACLIS stated, ‘Existing fair dealing
categories are inflexible and do not allow certain appropriations of materials
be consistent with the spirit of the fair dealing
[exception].’
D.6 The ACC and the LCA, however, were highly critical of an approach that
would provide a non-exhaustive list of fair dealing exceptions.
considered that the Act’s current approach of exhaustively listing the
specific purposes regarded as falling within
fair dealing ‘promotes much
greater certainty than a US-style ‘fair use’ system ever
D.7 The ACC further questioned whether a broadening of the fair dealing
provision would be in breach of Australia’s international
obligations, as
set out in art. 9(2) of the Berne Convention and art. 13 of the TRIPS Agreement.
These articles require that exceptions
to exclusive rights of copyright be
limited to certain special cases.
D.8 Chapter 6 provides the Committee’s conclusions about the US-style
fair use provision and whether permitting fair dealing
to apply to a
non-exclusive set of purposes will aid in simplifying the Act.
D.9 Other ways of simplifying the Act were put to the Committee. The LCA
submitted that all the fair dealing provisions for all copyright
material could
be collected in one part of the Act and apply to all types of rights.
Submissions from libraries, educational institutions
and the Communications Law
Centre proposed the use of supplementary regulations or guidelines for ancillary
matters such as the operation
of the quantitative test.
D.10 The inclusion of supplementary guidelines or regulations, especially for
a quantitative test, was commended by the NLA as ‘a
that would help simplify
the Act and provide the law with the flexibility to adapt to changes brought by
new technologies. LISWA
noted that ‘guidelines to address the needs of new
technologies would be easier to formulate and amend if not specifically
contained in the Act’ since this would allow ‘issues raised by
rapidly changing technologies to be addressed more
D.11 SBS and the LCA opposed the use of supplementary regulations or
guidelines to accompany the Act. SBS saw the use of such instruments
of merely shifting complexity from one legal document to another or, worse, as
‘an additional layer of
complexity’.
The LCA remarked,
‘The need to make reference to multiple documents (which are often of very
limited availability) will obscure
access, make comprehension more difficult and
increase costs.’
D.12 Paragraphs 6.31 to 6.33 provide the Committee’s assessment of the
advisability in using regulations and guidelines for
varying purposes.
dealing for research or study
quantitative test
D.13 The submissions claimed that the quantitative test provided in
s. 40(3) of the Act and the associated definition of a ‘reasonable
portion’ in s. 10(2) are extremely useful tools that copyright users
regularly rely on to determine what amount of copying
is permitted. The test was
described by libraries and educational institutions as
‘invaluable’
useful practical guide’
widely acknowledged limitation’
and an ‘administrative
LISWA stated that
‘it cannot be emphasised enough that libraries are constantly under
pressure to provide copying guidelines
to users’ and warned that
‘removal of quantitative guidelines altogether could create a chaotic
situation’.
There is strong
support among these bodies for retention of the quantitative test.
D.14 On the other hand, the Australia Council referred in its submission to
the ‘danger’ that the quantitative test poses
by permitting
without reference to the broader principles
of fair dealing provided under
CAL stated that the
quantitative test ‘cannot be reconciled’ with the common law
principles of fair dealing, which emphasise
a ‘case-by-case’
approach. CAL is concerned that the effect of the quantitative test ‘is to
encourage users to
systematically copy the substance of
D.15 Paragraphs 6.53 to 6.66 set out the Committee’s views on the
general application of the quantitative test to copyright
materials in digital
form. The distinction between the quantitative test and the general principles
of fair dealing is discussed
in paragraphs 6.67 and 6.68.
D.16 The quantitative test currently applies only to published literary,
dramatic and musical works. Submissions from libraries and
educational
institutions recognised that the usefulness of this test in its present form is
limited to printed texts such as books
and journals.
D.17 The difficulty of extending the quantitative test to artistic works,
audiovisual items and the digital environment was raised
in many submissions
from by libraries, archives and educational institutions as well as from the
International Map Trade Association,
the Australia New Zealand Land Information
Council, and the LCA.
D.18 In general, copyright users are keen to have comparable tests for other
form, added to the
Act, without interfering with the conventional practices that have developed for
fair dealing with printed texts.
Different materials were suggested as requiring
different quantitative tests.
D.19 Paragraphs 6.53 to 6.66 set out the Committee’s analysis of ways
of extending the quantitative test to copyright material
other than published
literary, dramatic and musical works.
quantitative test and artistic works
D.20 Submissions from users and owners of artistic works protected by
quantitative
test for artistic works, especially maps.
D.21 Concerns raised about the difficulty of estimating 10 per cent
of a mapping product related mainly to instances where maps are
presented in
digital form. The difficulties outlined—such as the potential to
manipulate the measurement of data through rescaling
or compression and the
problem of determining percentages of material stored on databases—are not
unique to maps but apply
to all material reproduced digitally.
D.22 Unlike printed texts such as books and journals, artistic works are not
divided into multiple units (such as pages). Artistic
works are usually
stand-alone works that do not lend themselves to obvious subdivision. The
Committee received no suggestions about
how the quantitative test could apply
generally to artistic works.
quantitative test and audiovisual items
D.23 Section 100A of the Act defines ‘audio-visual item’ as
‘a sound recording, a cinematograph film, a sound broadcast
television broadcast’. The National Film and Sound Archive expressed
reservations about the ease with which audiovisual
items would lend themselves
to a quantitative test. No submitters made suggestions about how a quantitative
test could apply to audiovisual
quantitative test and the digital environment
D.24 The AVCC submitted, ‘The single most difficult issue in relation
to fair dealing is its extension into the digital
environment.’
In its submission,
the APA described the recent development of digital technologies as having
created a ‘new digital paradigm’,
being ‘more in the nature of
a revolution in information dissemination than an
evolution’.
D.25 The AVCC and PBL submitted that there is no theoretical justification
for extending the quantitative test to the digital environment.
The AVCC stated,
‘There can be no doubt that the fundamental proposition underlying fair
dealing is unaltered by the technology
applying to the form of expression which
is the object of protection.’
Similarly, PBL submitted, ‘In an age of proliferation of sources of
communication, the fair dealing defences should apply whatever
technology is
D.26 Submissions from libraries and educational institutions supported
appropriate extension of the quantitative test to the digital
environment. The
Open Learning Institute of TAFE Queensland submitted, ‘Not to extend [the
quantitative test] to digitally
generated text is against the public interest,
punishes bona fide users and in effect quarantines copyright owners from an
of technological
D.27 Submissions acknowledged that the 10 per cent deeming
provision cannot be directly translated to the digital environment because
its fundamental differences with other presentation formats. The LCA noted,
‘The quantitative limits currently contained
in the Act are appropriate,
but require reworking to make them relevant in the digital
environment.’
The Australia
Council submitted, ‘In the digital environment the 10% deeming provision
is redundant.’
D.28 Submissions that dealt with extending the quantitative test to the
digital environment pointed out the difficulty of applying
a quantitative test
to digitally stored material, but none offered suggestions for quantifying this
Restoration
of the word ‘private’ before ‘study’
D.29 Restoration of the word ‘private’ before ‘study’
in ss. 40(1) and 103C was strongly opposed in the submissions
libraries and educational institutions, the LCA and the CLC. Libraries and
educational institutions were opposed to any alteration
to the Act that would
limit the present scope of the research or study fair dealing exception in this
D.30 Copyright owners and organisations representing the interests of
ss. 40(1) and 103C. The Australia Council was of the view that ‘there
is already concern in the arts industry that copyright
owners are unwillingly
subsidising the education system, because of the wide interpretation of
s. 40(1)’ and that ‘reintroduction
of the word
“private” before “study” may adequately tighten this
provision’.
D.31 Submissions suggested that the term ‘private’ is often
understood as distinguishing non-profit from commercial use.
University of Technology objected to the re-insertion of the word
‘private’ in ss. 40(1) and 103C because
‘difficulty of determining a borderline between commercial and
non-commercial research and
In its submission, the
AVCC explained,
It is the nature of research that the outcomes and the future application of
the results are in general unpredictable. To attempt
to qualify research as
‘private’ or otherwise introduces unnecessary uncertainty and places
an unworkable restriction
on an activity which is fundamental to
universities.’
ACLIS noted that the term ‘private study’, if used to denote a
non-commercial dealing, may give rise to confusion since
“private” itself is often used in such contexts as the
“private sector”, rendering the term
“private study”
ambiguous in this sense.’
D.32 The ACC made a suggestion for clearly defining a commercial dealing; it
submitted ‘that research conducted in the course
of employment, or in
return for valuable consideration, be deemed to be not fair
D.33 It also submitted,
... fair dealing for research or study should only be available to a person
making use of copyright material for his or her own research
or study, and ...
should not be available to a person making use of copyright material for another
person or entity (such as a
corporation).
This qualification of the present provision for fair dealing for research or
study is supported by other bodies representing the rights
of copyright owners.
D.34 CAL submitted that it does not support continuance of the fair dealing
exceptions. It contended that, if the research or study
exception were to remain
a recognised exemption from royalty-paid copying, this exception should not
include copying for any commercial
or government use. It proposed qualifying the
provision with not only the word ‘private’ but also the word
‘individual’.
AMPAL submitted, ‘The concept for the purposes of research and study
should not include the ability to make material
available to the
D.35 Further ambiguity in ss. 40(1) and 103C was noted in submissions.
ACLIS expressed concern that the concepts of research and study
amenable to any clear
distinction’.
Similarly, the NLA
submitted that re-insertion of the word ‘private’ in ss. 40(1)
and 103C ‘would seem to be unnecessary,
given that there is no comparable
proposal to define research as
“private”’.
terms are interchangeable, it was submitted, little effect would be produced by
adding ‘private’ before the
word ‘study’ only.
D.36 The question of whether restoration of the word ‘private’
before ‘study’ in ss. 40(1) and 103C is likely
to help simplify
the Act is discussed in paragraphs 6.112 to 6.117.
dealing for criticism or review and for reporting news
D.37 The submissions the Committee received from copyright users who rely on
the fair dealing exception for criticism or review and
for reporting news were
almost uniformly opposed to any alteration of ss. 41, 42, 103A or 103B.
Only one submitter, PBL, favoured
the introduction of a US-style fair use
D.38 Broadcasters were generally opposed to a US-style fair use provision
chiefly because of concern that well-established industry
practices would be
negated if the fair dealing provision for criticism or review is altered to
include statutory factors such as
those that currently apply to research or
study. Such action, it was claimed, would have an adverse and disruptive effect
industry practice. PBL submitted, however,
Users do generally take the [US] section 107 factors into account in deciding
what is fair. As a result, it is unlikely that the proposed
amendment would have
a dramatic outcome, although it would have the advantage of being simpler to
read, and easier to follow.’
D.39 PBL noted, though, that the terminology used in the current reporting of
news provision refers to ‘for the purpose of,
or associated with, the
reporting of news’. It submitted that, if the words ‘or associated
with’ are not maintained
in the Act, then the scope of fair dealing for
the purpose of reporting news may be limited.
D.40 Paragraphs 6.118 to 6.126 put forward the Committee’s views on
whether the provisions in the Act for the purposes of criticism
or review and
for reporting of news should be subsumed into a single fair dealing
D.41 In its submission to the Committee the ACC referred to the distinction
made in s. 42(1) between reporting of news in a newspaper,
magazine or
similar periodical and reporting of news by means of broadcasting or in a
cinematograph film. When reporting news in
a print medium, sufficient
acknowledgment of an embedded work must be made. This requirement does not apply
when news is reported
by means of broadcasting or in a cinematograph film. The
ACC submitted that there is no justification for the distinction.
D.42 Submissions from broadcasters were unanimous in rejecting a quantitative
test for the purposes of criticism or review and reporting
dealing for the purpose of giving professional advice
D.43 CAL criticised fair dealing for the purpose of giving professional
advice as having ‘no place within a modern copyright
regime’. It
submitted that this exception should be explicitly limited to judicial
proceedings that have already begun and
should apply only to copying made by a
court or court staff.
D.44 Rather than characterising this exception as a fair dealing, CAL
perceives it as the use of copyright material for the services
of the Crown and
submitted that provision for this copying would be better located within
s. 183 of the Act. CAL stated, ‘It
is not in the public interest that
certain professional groups should enjoy the privilege of making copies of
without the need to
D.45 The ACC noted the different approaches specified between the fair
dealing provisions for providing legal advice that apply to
literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic works (s. 43), and to audiovisual items, as defined in
s. 100A of the Act (s. 104):
Section 104 makes special provision for both seeking and giving legal advice,
whereas section 43 only makes special provision for
giving legal advice. Use of
material in connection with giving of professional advice under section 43 must
be fair, but this is
not a requirement under section
It submitted that there does not seem to be any good reason for the existence
of these differing approaches.
D.46 SBS submitted that there would be ‘no disadvantage to copyright
owners in removing the notion of fair dealing from s. 43(2)
and applying a
single section along the lines of s. 104 to all copyright
It also submitted that
a ‘sole purpose’ test, similar that already applied to legal
professional privilege, could apply
to this new fair dealing exception for
providing legal advice.
D.47 The Committee discusses the question of fair dealing for the purpose of
giving professional advice in paragraphs 6.135 to 6.140.
E Original submissions
Submission number
Zomba Production Music (Australia) Pty Ltd
Australian Toy Association Ltd
Institute of Faith, Education Archdiocese of Brisbane
Australian Caption Centre
Mr Mark Davison
IBM Australia Ltd
Australian Association of Broadcast Monitors
The Australian Map Circle
Uniloc Corporation Pty Ltd
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian Manufacturers’ Patents, Industrial Designs, Copyright and
Trade Mark Association
National Library of Australia & National Film and Sound Archive
Open Learning Institute of Research and Development, Charles Sturt
Prices Surveillance Authority
Canadian Copyright Licensing Agency
NSW Technical and Further Education Commission
CSIRO Australia
American Intellectual Property Law Association
The Commonwealth of Learning #1
Hydrographic Service, Royal Australian Navy #1
National Film and Sound Archive #2
Council of Australian University Librarians
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Council of Building Design Professions Ltd
Motion Picture Distributors Association of Australia &
Australasian Film and Video Security Office
Mr Alistair Little, Tress Cocks & Maddox Solicitors and Notaries
The Society of Advertising, Commercial and Magazine Photographers Ltd &
the Australian Institute of Professional Photography
Telstra Corporation Ltd
Australian Record Industry Association Ltd
Open Training and Education Network
Australian Bankers Association
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services #1
Submission number
Mr Jeff Catchlove
John XXIII Catholic Community
Powerhouse Museum
Australian Book Publishers Association Ltd
Australian Archives
Office of the Arts and Cultural Affairs, Northern Territory of
National Library of Australia
Fellowship of Australian Composers
Victoria University of Technology
Australian Council of Archives
International Business Communications Pty Ltd
Combined Newspapers and Magazine Copyright Committee of Australia
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd #1
The Royal Australian Institute of Architects
Australian Society of Archivists
New South Wales Parliamentary Library
Law Council of Australia, Intellectual Property Committee, Business Law
Queensland Parliamentary Library
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd #2
Australian Copyright Council
Independent Schools Teacher Librarians Network Group
Arts Law Centre of Australia
Queensland Government (Information Policy Board)
Association of Parliamentary Librarians of Australasia
National Amusement Machine Operators Association Ltd #1
Australian Council for Radio for the Print Handicapped
Oracle Systems Australia Pty Ltd
Mr Malcolm J Barstch
Learning Network Pty Ltd
Business Software Alliance &
Business Software Association of Australia Ltd
Dr Noris Ioannou #1
Australian Institute of Quantity Surveyors
Australian Library and Information Association
Australian Surveying and Land Information Group
Association de Gestion Internationale Collective des Œuvres
Audiovisuelles
Australian Disability Consultative Council
Round Table on Reading Materials for People with Print Disabilities
Film Australia Ltd
Northern Territory Library
Advertising Federation of Australia Ltd
The Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Ltd
University of New South Wales, Division of Information Services
Submission number
Australia Council for the Arts
Australian Information Industry Association
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee
Office of Regulation Review, Industry Commission
National Amusement Machine Operators Association Ltd #2
ACT Library Service
Ms Kathleen Crees #1
Mr David H Price
The Genealogical Society of Victoria Inc.
Dr Noris Ioannou #2
University of New South Wales
Council of Australian State Libraries
Australian National University (Library)
Hydrographic Service, Royal Australian Navy #2
Federal Libraries Information Network
Ms Jennifer Douglas
Australian Multimedia Enterprise Ltd
National Languages and Literacy Institute of Australia
Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Legal and Copying Department
Department of Lands
University of Melbourne
National Federation of Blind Citizens of Australia
The Commonwealth of Learning #2
National Tertiary Education Industry Union
The Commonwealth Treasury
Craft Australia
Kathleen Crees #2
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services #2
National Film and Sound Archive #3
Council of Australian University Librarians #2
Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
Mona Vale Hospital and Community Health Services
Round Table on Reading Materials for People with Print Disabilities
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia, NSW Branch Ltd
Australian Orthopaedic Association
Dietitians Association of Australia
Sydney Hospital–Sydney Eye Hospital
The Australian Manufacturers’ Patents, Industrial Designs, Copyright
and Trade Mark Association
Mooditj—Development Unit For Instructional Technology, University of
Western Australia
Australian and New Zealand Society of Nephrology
Medical Women’s Society of New South Wales
School of Health Sciences, Northern Territory University
Merck Sharp & Dohme Australia Pty Ltd
Monash University
Submission number
The Australian Manufacturers’ Patents, Industrial Designs, Copyright
and Trade Mark Association
Australasian Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine
Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
Mrs L Miles
Gregary Chase
Murray Mancha Pty Ltd
Advertising Federation of Australia Ltd #2
Geographe Replacement Parts Pty Ltd
Arts Libraries Society, Australia New Zealand
F Fair dealing submissions
Submission number
National Film and Sound Archive
Griffith University, Faculty of Law
University of New South Wales—Christine Page-Hanify
National Library of Australia
Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Legal and Copyright
The Commonwealth of Learning
Open Learning Institute of TAFE Queensland
Australian Manufacturers’ Patents, Industrial Designs, Copyright and
Trade Mark Association
Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners Society & Australian Music
Publishers’ Association Limited
Woodlands Publications Pty Ltd
Queensland University of Technology
National Library of Australia
Publishing and Broadcasting Limited
Council of Australian University Librarians
Library and Information Service WA
Network Ten Limited
Special Broadcasting Service
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services
Greater Union
Australian Council for the Arts
The Australian Manufacturers’ Patents, Industrial Designs, Copyright
and Trade Mark Association
Law Council of Australia
Communications Law Centre
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Surveying and Land Information Group
G Submissions received after the public forum
Submission number
International Map Trade Association, Australia and New Zealand
TAFE Queensland, ocational Education and Training Directorate
National Library of Australia
Queensland Department of Education
Archdiocese of Brisbane Catholic Education
NSW Department of Training and Education Co-ordination
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services
Australian Mechanical Owners Copyright Society
Council of Australian University Librarians
State Library of Victoria
National Council of Independent Schools Association
Murray Mancha Pty Ltd
State Library of New South Wales
State Library of New South Wales
Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations
Tasmanian Braille Writers Association Inc.
University of Melbourne
Department of Education, Community and Cultural Development, Tasmania
Library and Information Service WA
National Library of Australia and National Film and Sound Archive
TAFE Queensland, Vocational Education and Training Directorate
Visual Arts Copyright Collecting Agency
Australian Publishers Association
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee
Australian Council for the Radio and Print Handicapped Co-op. Ltd
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Limited
State Library of New South Wales
Law Council of Australia
State Library of New South Wales
Submission number
Australian Society of Archivists
Australia New Zealand Land Information Council
Association of Consulting Surveyors Australia
Combined Newspapers and Magazines Copyright Committee
Arts Law Centre of Australia
H Miscellaneous exceptions to exclusive rights submissions
Submission number
Queensland Parliamentary Library
Supreme Court of Western Australia
Australasian Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine, The Royal Australasian
College of Physicians
Australian Capital Territory Bar Association
National Federation of Blind Citizens of Australia
Arts Libraries Society, Australia and New Zealand
Supreme Court of New South Wales
NSW Parliamentary Library
Queensland Tourist and Travel Corporation
Art Gallery of Western Australia
Australasian Film and Video Security Office
University of Melbourne
National Library of Australia
University of New South Wales (Division of Information Services)
Open Learning Institute, Charles Sturt University
Monash University
Association de Gestion Internationale Collective des Oeuvres
Audiovisuelles
Victoria University of Technology
University of Melbourne (Registrar)
Australian National University
Monash University
University of New South Wales
State Library of Queensland
Australian Publishers Association
Powerhouse Museum
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee
Judicial Commission of New South Wales
Screen Producers Association of Australia
National Film and Sound Archive
Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
South Australian Tourism Commission
State Library of New South Wales
Victoria Parliament House Library
Submission number
ACT Supreme Court (Russell Fox Library)
State Library of Victoria
NSW Government Court
State Library of Tasmania
Museum & Art Gallery of the Northern Territory
Open Learning Institute of TAFE
Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
Australian Record Industry Association Ltd
Queensland State Archives
Northern Territory Library
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services
Joint Law Courts Library Sydney
Department of Primary Industries and Energy
New South Wales Department of Education and Training
Special Broadcasting Service
Law Council of Australia
The Victorian Bar
Arts Law Centre of Australia
Implications of the TRIPS Agreement on Treaties Administered by WIPO
Publication no. 464(E), World Intellectual Property Organisation, Geneva,
paragraphs 52, 53.
Attorney-General’s Department &
Department of Communications and the Arts 1997,
Digital Agenda: proposed transmission right, right of making available and
enforcement measures
, AGPS, Canberra.
Reproduction 1976,
Report of the Copyright Law Committee on Reprographic
Reproduction
, AGPS, Canberra—referred to here as the Franki
Provided under
ss. 31(1)(a)(i)
(1)(b)(i) of the
Franki report,
op. cit., paragraph
ibid., paragraphs 2.06, 2.64 and
ibid., paragraph 2.59.
(1990) 18 IPR 292 (Fed
University of London Press Ltd v
University Tutorial Press Ltd
[1916] 2 Ch 601
Sillitoe v McGraw-Hill
Book Co (UK) Ltd
[1983] FSR 545
Longman Group Ltd v Carrington Technical
Institute Board of Governors
(1990) 20 IPR 264.
Australian Copyright Council 1996,
Fair Dealing in the Digital Age
, Bulletin 92, ACC, Redfern, NSW,
Simplification of the Fair Dealing Provisions of the
Attorney-General’s Legal Practice, Canberra, paragraph 13.
Franki report, op. cit., paragraph
(1993) 27 IPR 441
Weekly Hansard, House of Lords, col.
1153, 23 February 1988.
(1878) 3 App Cas 483
(1990) 18 IPR 292 (Fed
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
[1983] FSR 545.
(1990) 18 IPR 292 (Fed
(1980)147 CLR 39.
(1990) 18 IPR 292 (Fed
C of A) at 301,
as noted also by the Australian Copyright Council (1996,
Fair Dealing in the
Digital Age
, Bulletin 92, ACC, Redfern, NSW, p. 23).
This exception is being extended to
include reference to professional advice by a ‘trade mark attorney’
by the Intellectual
Property Amendment Bill 1997.
Hubbard v Vosper
[1972] 2 QB 84
Under the US Act no distinction is made
between works and subject matter other than works. Section 102(a) of the Act
provides that
a ‘work’ takes in the following categories:
1. literary works;
2. musical works, including any accompanying words;
3. dramatic works, including any accompanying music;
4. pantomimes and choreographic works;
5. pictorial, graphic and sculptural works;
6. motion pictures and other audio visual works;
7. sound recordings;
8. architectural works.
Sony Corp of America v Universal
City Studios Inc
(1984) 2 IPR 225
at 245 (SC(USA)).
Agreed statement of the Diplomatic
Conference that adopted the WIPO Copyright Treaty.
(1994) 29 IPR 381
(1994) 29 IPR 381
at 389 whilst
referring to the cases of
Sony Corporation of America v Universal City
Studios Inc
[1984] USSC 14
S Ct 774 (1984) and
Twin Peaks Productions Inc v
Publications International Ltd
[1993] USCA2 755
996 F 2d 1366
, 1373 (2d Cir 1993).
1884, 67 (closing speech
to the 1884 Conference).
Campbell v Acuff-Rose Music Inc
114 S Ct 1164
at 1171–3 (1994);
American Geophysical Union v Texaco
(1994) 29 IPR 381
American Geophysical Union v Texaco
(1994) 29 IPR 381
Rosemont Enterprises Inc v Random
303 (1966);
Harper & Row Publishers v Nation
Enterprises
[1985] USSC 128
105, S Ct 2218
American Geophysical Union v Texaco
(1994) 29 IPR 381
ibid. at 396–7.
Campbell v Acuff-Rose Music Inc
114 S Ct 1164
at 1171 (1994);
American Geophysical Union v Texaco Inc
(1994) 29 IPR 381
De Garis v Neville Jeffress Pidler
(1990) 18 IPR 292
at 301, citing
Pacific & Southern Co Inc v
[1984] USCA11 1752
744 F 2d 1490
Hubbard v Vosper
[1972] 2 QB 84
British Broadcasting Corporation v British Satellite Broadcasting
[1992] Ch 141
Financial Information Inc v
Moody’s Investor Services Inc
[1986] USCA2 1050
808 F2d 204
Harper & Row Publishers v
National Enterprises
[1985] USSC 128
105 S Ct 2218
Laddie, H, Prescott, P &
Vitoria, M 1995,
The Modern Law of Copyright and Designs
Butterworths, London, paragraph 23.40.
Associated Newspaper Group v News
Group Newspapers Ltd
[1986] RPC 515
[1986] USCA2 841
803 F.2d 1253
571 F.Supp 144
558 F.Supp 1247
Commerce Clearing House Inc 1988,
, CCH, Chicago, p. 1933.
Harper & Row Publishers v
National Enterprises
[1985] USSC 128
105 S Ct 2218
Supermarket of Homes, Inc v San
Fernando Valley Board of Realtors
786 F2d 1400 (1986);
Update Art Inc v
Maariv Israel Newspaper Inc
635 FSupp 228
[1985] USSC 128
105 S Ct 2218
Salinger v Random House Inc
[1987] USCA2 415
Commerce Clearing House Inc 1988, op.
cit., p.1933.
Senate report no. 94-473.
[1972] 2 QB 84.
Beloff v Pressdram
[1973] 1 All
[1973] RPC 765
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39.
Australian Copyright Council 1996, op.
cit., p. 23.
Commerce Clearing House Inc 1988, op.
cit., p. 1953.
Supermarket of Homes Inc v San
Fernando Valley Board of Realtors
1400 (1986).
Sony v Universal City Studios
[1984] USSC 14
464 U.S. 417
Hustler Magazine Inc v Moral
796 F.2d 1148
[1972] 2 QB 84
De Garis v Neville Jefress Pidler
(1990) 18 IPR 292
at 302 (Fed C of A).
[1985] USSC 128
105 S Ct 2218
Maxtone-Graham v Burtchaell
[1986] USCA2 841
[1972] 2 QB 84
De Garis v Neville Jefress Pidler
(1990) 18 IPR 292 (Fed
[1985] USSC 128
105 S Ct 2218
(1985); also
American Geophysical Union v Texaco Inc
(1994) 29 IPR 381
Commerce Clearing House Inc 1988, op.
cit., p. 1953.
Senate report no. 94-473.
Commerce Clearing House Inc 1988, op.
cit., p. 1953.
Original Appalachian Artworks Inc v
Topps Chewing Gum Inc
642 F.Supp 1031
Dr. Pepper Co. v Sambo’s
Restaurants
517 F.Supp 1202
American Geophysical Union v Texaco
(1994) 29 IPR 381
at 402 (US Court of Appeals, 2nd Cir).
British Broadcasting Corporation v
British Satellite Broadcasting Ltd
[1990] Ch 141
Haines v Copyright Agency Ltd
(1982) 42 ALR 549
at 555 (Fed C of A).
Hubbard v Vosper
[1972] 2 QB 84
Section 40(3) and the definition of a
‘reasonable portion’ in s. 10(2) currently apply only to
published editions of
literary, dramatic and musical works.
Such criticisms were noted in the
article by T Power in
Digitisation of Serials and Publications: the seminal
objective of copyright law
([1997] 8 EIPR at 453).
The ‘three-step test’ under
art. 9(2) of the Berne Convention and art. 13 of TRIPS.
Statement agreed to at WIPO Diplomatic
Conference, December 1996, which adopted the WIPO Copyright Treaty.
Rothnie, W 1998, ‘The Future of
Fair Dealing?’, in D Saunders & B Shelman (eds),
From Berne to
Geneva: recent developments in international copyright and neighbouring
, Australian Key Centre for Cultural and Media Policy, Brisbane.
Mason, Sir Anthony 1997, ‘The
Users’ Perspective on Issues Arising in Proposals for the Reform of the
Law of Copyright’,
Sydney Law Review
, vol. 19, p. 71.
1884, 67 (closing speech
to the 1884 Conference).
Fair dealing submission from CAL,
Haines v Copyright Agency Ltd
(1982) 40 ALR 264
at 271 (SC(NSW)).
See Chapter 9.
Fair dealing submission from CAL,
Fair dealing submission from the
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee, 19.01.
Original submission from the Australian
Book Publishers Association, 38.16. The ABPA argued that, because of digital
publishing,
the sale of only part of a work is now possible either through CAL
under licence or by direct online sale. See also fair dealing
submission from
CAL, 14.06.
Fair dealing submission from the
Australian Council of Library and Information Services, 20.03.
Franki report, op.cit., paragraph
ibid., paragraph 2.18.
Working Group on Intellectual Property
Rights 1995,
Intellectual Property and the National Information
Infrastructure
, US Patent and Trademark Office, Washington DC,
ibid., page 87.
In this context the Committee
understands an economic rent to accrue when supply is restricted relative to
demand. This situation
may result from the absence of effective competition.
Information Infrastructure in the United States
[1996] 3 E.I.P.R. at
Such criticisms were noted by Power
(1997, op. cit.).
S Ricketson (1984,
Intellectual Property
, Law Book Co., Sydney, paragraph 10.5) states that, by
and large, the factors under s. 40(2) are similar to the types of factors
taken into account in the case law dealing with fair dealing in general.
Further, in Lahore (1996,
, Butterworths, Sydney,
vol. 1, paragraph 40, 115) it is stated that there is no reason to deny the
factors’ universal application,
where relevant, to all fair dealing
Franki report, op.cit., paragraph
US Working Group on Intellectual
Property Rights 1995, op. cit., p. 80.
Harper and Row Publishers, Inc v.
Nation Enterprises
[1985] USSC 128
Nimmer & Geller 1994,
International Copyright Law and Practice
, Mathew and Bender, New York,
pp. 13–197.
Hubbard v Vosper
[1972] 2 QB
On this point the Committee agrees
with the comments made in the submission from Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd
(PBL) to the effect
that in practice the media make reference to the current
statutory factors listed in s. 40(2) and that to include these factors in
relation to criticism or review will not substantially change current practices
in the media industry (see Appendix D, paragraph
Section 10(2) provides,
‘Without limiting the meaning of the expression “reasonable
portion” in this Act, where
a literary, dramatic or musical work is
contained in a published edition of that work, being an edition of not less than
a copy of part of that work, as it appears in that edition, shall be
taken to contain only a reasonable portion of that work if the
pages that are
copied in the edition:
(a) do not exceed in aggregate, 10% of the number of pages in that edition;
(b) in the case where the work is divided into chapters exceed, in the
aggregate, 10% of the number of pages in that edition but contain
only the whole
or part of a single chapter of the work.’
See, for example, fair dealing
submission from ACLIS, 20.02.
Suppose a digital literary work
consisted of 20 standard-sized pages of text within which was embedded an
illustrative digital image
of average resolution the size of a page. The amount
of information needed to display the graphic (for example, a jpg file of 160K)
would be approximately equivalent to the amount of information needed to display
the text (a text file of 160K)). If the 10 per cent
test were applied
to this work in printed form, only two pages could be copied, regardless of
whether or not the pages consisted
of the text, the image, or both. If, however,
the 10 per cent test were based on 10 per cent of the amount
of digital information
used to display the work, more than two pages containing
text could be reproduced, or only a portion of the image. From this simple
example it can be seen that a test based on the amount of information used to
display a digital work, especially where the work consists
of a number of
different data types, is not effective.
It was recently held, in the case of
Galaxy Electronics Pty Limited
Sega Enterprises Limited and Avel Pty
(1997) 37 IPR 462
, that the images and sounds produced by a
computer game stored in an integrated circuit fell within the meaning of
‘cinematograph
The Australian Mechanical Copyright
Owners Society and the Australian Music Publishers Association Ltd, in their
fair dealing submission,
paragraph 9.01, stated that copying for the purposes of
research and study should not include the ability to make material available
the public, in digital form or otherwise, since this would be a licensable
activity and would affect the commercial interests
of copyright owners.
Public forum submission, paragraph
ibid., paragraph 26.07.
Section 10(1)(a)
Ricketson, S 1984, op. cit.,
paragraph 9.36.
[1964] 1 WLR 273
(1996) 36 IPR 529
Fair dealing submission from CAL,
Computer Software Protection
, Attorney-General’s Department,
Canberra, paragraph 14.29. In that report electrocopying was described (in
paragraph 14.09)
as the transfer of copyright material ‘from hardcopy form
to machine-readable form, from one machine-readable form to another,
machine-readable form to a hardcopy form’.
(1990) 18 IPR 292
Australian Copyright Council 1996,
Fair Dealing in the Digital Age
, Bulletin 92, ACC, Redfern, NSW,
(1982) 40 ALR 264
Australian Copyright Council, op.
(1990) 20 IPR 264
No. 32 of 1989—
‘Fair dealing for the purpose of research or study’.
Parliamentary Debates
of Representatives, 9 May 1989, per the then Attorney-General Mr Lionel Bowen,
ibid., p. 2227.
Parliamentary Debates
of Representatives, 9 May 1989, per Mr NA Brown, p. 2226.
Franki report, op. cit., paragraph
Fair dealing submission from AVCC,
op. cit., paragraph 10.29.
Quotations include criticism and
As generally agreed by delegates and
stated in the report of Main Committee I, Records 1967, p. 1165.
Ricketson, S 1987,
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works:
, Kluwer, London, paragraph 8.105.
The Committee notes that
of the proposed moral rights provisions provides that there is no
infringement of the right of attribution of authorship if it was
reasonable not
to identify the author.
Committee Appointed by the
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth to Consider what Alterations are Desirable
to the Copyright Law of
the Commonwealth 1965,
, AGPS, Canberra,
paragraph 107—referred to here as the Spicer report.
ibid., paragraph 108.
Ricketson, S 1987, op. cit.,
paragraph 9.37.
An example of a provision that
includes the recommended changes to
has been provided—see
section (3) of the prototype provision in paragraph 6.143).
Items 1, 2, and 3 of Schedule 1.
The use of the term
‘communication to the public’ anticipates the adoption of a new
broadly based, technology-neutral
right of communication to the public, as
described in paragraph 6.03.
(1982) 40 ALR 264
; on appeal
42 ALR 549.
Macquarie Concise Dictionary
1988, 2nd edn, Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, Sydney.
Spicer report, op. cit.,
see also Copyright Committee 1952,
, CMND 8662, HMSO, London,
paragraphs 43 to 53—referred to here as the Gregory report.
(1990) 18 IPR 292
Public forum submission from ACLIS,
Public forum submission from the Law
Council of Australia, 32.03.
Berne Convention, art. (1).
Archives Act 1983
Berne Convention, art. 4(2).
Spicer report, op. cit., paragraph
op. cit., paragraph 2.47.
Public forum submission from
Screenrights, 30.04.
op. cit., paragraph 2.48.
This is the approach taken by the
Committee in connection with the organisation of the fair dealing provisions
(paragraph 6.29),
the libraries and archives provisions (paragraph 7.21) and the
educational copying provisions (paragraph 9.09). The Committee notes
approach to the organisation of copyright exceptions has been taken by the
United Kingdom in the
‘copyright work’ is used in the UK Act to refer to all subject
matter of copyright protection. While these
are all treated together in the UK
Act, the old distinction between works and other subject matter continues to be
relevant. Thus,
all the exceptions to copyright appear in Chapter III of the UK
Act, which is entitled ‘Acts permitted in relation to copyright
works’. Chapter III contains a number of titled but unnumbered divisions,
including the following: ‘General’ (ss.
dealing provisions), ‘Education’ (ss. 32–36),
‘Libraries and archives’ (ss.
‘Miscellaneous: literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works’
(ss. 57–65), ‘Miscellaneous:
sound recordings, films and
computer programs’ (ss. 66–67) and ‘Miscellaneous:
broadcasts and cable programmes’
(ss. 68–75).
Submission from Supreme Court of
Western Australia, 2.00.
Franki report, op. cit., paragraph
Ricketson, S 1984,
paragraph 10.79.
Submission from CAL, 46.01.
Submission from Monash University,
op. cit. The Committee notes also that the copyright laws of a number of
countries, including
the United Kingdom, Canada and Germany contain equivalents
[1980] R.P.C. 213.
(1996) 36 IPR 529.
Spicer report, op. cit., paragraph
Section 70 of the UK Act;
s. 112 of the US
; s. 30.9 (1) of
Canada’s Copyright Act (as amended in 1997); s. 55 of Germany’s
Highways to Change
, AGPS, Canberra, paragraph 6.2. This is a reference to
the reference given to the Committee in 1994 (since replaced by the present
reference) to conduct a general and wide-ranging review of the Copyright Act.
The Committee notes that the UK and
Canadian equivalents of s. 67 (s. 31 of the UK Act and s. 30.7 of
Canada’s Copyright Act)
appear together with the fair dealing provisions
of each country’s copyright legislation. In the US cases involving
copying are decided within the context of fair use: see, for example,
the recent decisions of
Sandoval v New Line Cinema Corp
, DC SNY, No.96
Civ.3145(SHS) (US District Court for the Southern District of New York) and
Ringgold v Black Entertainment Television Inc
, CA 2, No.96-9329 (US Court
of Appeals for the Second Circuit, 16 September 1997). The commentators in
Nimmer and Geller (op. cit.)
refer to the German equivalent of s. 67
(s. 57 of the Copyright Law) as falling within the heading of
‘incidental and other
“fair” uses’.
Lahore, J 1996, op. cit., paragraph
42030. The inclusion of the provisions in the Act was recommended by the Spicer
Committee in
its 1959 report, where it stated that s. 65 was primarily
concerned with statues and such like that were situated in public parks
streets and, as such, was a reasonable provision (Spicer report, op. cit.,
paragraph 219).
Australian Copyright Council 1997,
Artists and Copyright—a practical guide
, Publication 68v7, ACC,
Redfern, NSW, July, p. 3. Section 65 has also been criticised by Professor
Ricketson in
The Law of Intellectual Property
(1984, op. cit.,
p. 265) and by the Arts Law Centre of Australia in its submission to the
Committee, 54.10.
Spicer report, paragraph 219.
The Committee notes the submission
of the Screen Producers Association of Australia (paragraph 29.00), which urged
the retention
of s. 67 as a specific provision on the basis that the
certainty of the provision facilitates the securing of production investment
film and television producers. As the Committee has already stated, however, in
its view the exception provided by s. 67 clearly
falls within the realm of
fair dealing; provided that incidental use only is made of an artistic work, a
film or television producer
will continue to receive the protection of the
With respect to s. 69, the Committee notes that the new right of
communication to the public proposed by the Government in its announcement
April 1998 will replace the diffusion and other transmission rights.
The Committee notes that the copyright laws of a number of countries have
equivalents to ss. 65, 66, 68 and 69, including the UK (s.
62), Canada
(s. 32(2) of the
(as amended in 1997), Germany
(s. 59) and the Netherlands (art. 18 of the
Ricketson, S 1984, op. cit.,
paragraph 10.74.
Ricketson, S 1984, op. cit.,
paragraph 10.81.
[1997] HCA 41
Telstra v APRA
ibid., 42.07.
Submissions from the ACC, CAL and
the Open Learning Institute of TAFE Queensland.
Ricketson, S 1984, op. cit.,
paragraph 10.61.
Submission from ARIA, 42.03.
ibid., 42.02.
Spicer report
paragraph 69.
Submission from ARIA, 42.05.
cit., pp. 67–8. The Committee notes that s. 110 (5) of the US
Act provides that communication
of a transmission embodying a performance or
display of a work by the public reception of the transmission on a single
apparatus of a kind commonly used in private homes is not an
infringement of copyright unless a direct charge is made to see or hear
transmission or the transmission thus received is further transmitted to the
Submission from ARIA, 42.03.
op. cit., paragraph 2.33.
[1995] FCA 1092
(1995) 128 ALR 482.
Simpson, S 1995,
Australian Copyright Societies
, AGPS, Canberra—referred to here as the
Simpson report.
Ricketson, S 1987,
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
, Kluwer, London, pp. 477–548.
Stewart, S 1989,
International
, Butterworths, London, p. 83.
Sony Corp of America v Universal
City Studios Inc
(1984) 2 IPR 225 (SC(USA))
Lahore, J 1996,
, vol. 1, Butterworths, Sydney, pp. 40, 135.
American Geophysical Union v
1994 29 IPR 381
[1972] 2 QB 84.
Beloff v Pressdram
All ER 243.
Sillitoe v McGraw-Hill Book Co
[1983] FSR 545.
Stewart, S 1993,
International
, 2nd edn, Butterworths, London,
Fair dealing submission from ACLIS,
Fair dealing submission from the
LCA, 24.02.
Fair dealing submission from the
National Library of Australia, 4.01.
Fair dealing submission from the
Library and Information Service WA, 16.01, 16.03.
Fair dealing submission from SBS,
Fair dealing submission from the
LCA, 24.03.
Fair dealing submission from the
National Library of Australia, 4.01.
Fair dealing submission from the Qld
University of Technology, 11.01.
Fair dealing submission from the
Council of Australian University Librarians, 15.03.
Fair dealing submission from the
Australian Vice-Chancellors’ Committee, 19.02.
Fair dealing submission from LISWA,
Fair dealing submission from the
Australia Council, 22.01.
Fair dealing submission from CAL,
Fair dealing submission from the
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee, 19.02.
Public forum submission from the
Australian Publishers Association, 25.06, 25.05.
Fair dealing submission from the
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee, 19.02.
Fair dealing submission from PBL,
Fair dealing submission from the
Open Learning Institute of TAFE Queensland, 7.01.
Fair dealing submission from the
LCA, 24.06.
Fair dealing submission from the
Australia Council, 22.01.
Fair dealing submission from the
Australia Council, 22.01.
Fair dealing submission from
Queensland University of Technology, 11.01.
Fair dealing submission from the
AVCC, 19.02.
Fair dealing submission from ACLIS,
Fair dealing submission from the
ACC, 26.03.
Fair dealing submission from the
ACC, 26.03.
Fair dealing submission from CAL,
Fair dealing submission from AMCOS
and AMPAL, 9.02.
Fair dealing submission from ACLIS,
Fair dealing submission from the
National Library of Australia, 4.01.
Fair dealing submission from PBL,
Fair dealing submission from CAL,
Fair dealing submission from the
ACC, 26.05.
Fair dealing submission from SBS,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (1.06 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter