URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/TASLRI/2020/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:49:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of the Judicial Review Act 2000 (Tas) [2020] TASLRI 29
Judicial Review Act 2000
Final Report no. 29
January 2020
Information about
the Tasmania Law Reform Institute
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute was established on 23 July 2001 by
agreement between the Government of the State of Tasmania, the
University of
Tasmania and the Law Society of Tasmania. The creation of the Institute was part
of a Partnership Agreement between
the University and the State government
signed in 2000. The Institute is based at the Sandy Bay campus of the University
of Tasmania
within the Faculty of Law. The Institute undertakes law reform work
and research on topics proposed by the government, the community,
the University
and the Institute itself.
The work of the Institute involves the review of laws with a view to:
• the modernisation of the law
• the elimination of defects in the law
• the simplification of the law
• the consolidation of any laws
• the repeal of laws that are obsolete or unnecessary
• uniformity between laws of other States and the Commonwealth.
The Institute’s Director is Associate Professor Terese Henning. The
members of the Board of the Institute are Associate Professor
Terese Henning
(Chair), Professor Tim McCormack (Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University
of Tasmania), the Honourable Justice
Helen Wood (appointed by the Honourable
Chief Justice of Tasmania), Ms Kristy Bourne (appointed by the
Attorney-General), Associate
Professor Jeremy Prichard (appointed by the Council
of the University), Mr Craig Mackie (nominated by the Tasmanian Bar
Association),
Ms Ann Hughes (appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board), Mr Rohan Foon (appointed by the Law Society of Tasmania), Ms
Baumeler (appointed at the invitation of the Institute Board) and Ms Rosie Smith
(appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board as a member of the Tasmanian
Aboriginal community).
The Board oversees the Institute’s research, considering each reference
before it is accepted, and approving publications before
their release.
Acknowledgments
This Final Report was prepared for the Board by Dylan Richards. The Issues
Paper that preceded this Report was prepared for the Board
by Mr Michael Stokes.
Valuable contributions in the preparation of these documents were provided by
the reference group established
to provide feedback on the issues it deals with:
Mr Benedict Bartl, Professor Matthew Groves, Ms Claire Bookless and Associate
Terese Henning.
Background to this
In 2016, the Institute received a request, initially from Ben Bartl of the
Tenants’ Union of Tasmania and, subsequently, also
from Community Legal
Centres Tasmania and the Law Society of Tasmania, to undertake a review of the
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas). In making this request it was submitted
that the enactment of the Commonwealth
Administrative Decisions (Judicial
Review) Act 1977
was heralded as one of the most important legal reforms of
the twentieth
Its objectives were to enhance access to justice for individuals aggrieved by
government action or inaction and to promote and affirm
the importance of legal
accountability for public administration. Subsequently, similar legislation was
introduced in other jurisdictions
However, in the almost fifty years since the passing of the Commonwealth Act,
the capacity to review government decision-making under
this and like
legislation has been eroded by decisional
social change including the significant outsourcing of government work to
private and not-for-profit organisations. The transfer
of government power in
this way means that private bodies undertake decision-making that involves the
exercise of ‘public’
powers and functions and which significantly
affects individual’s rights and interests but where there is no recourse
to judicial
review. Additionally, many decisions that are authorised by sources
other than statute (for instance, contract law or ‘soft’
instruments such as guidelines and policies) are not subject to judicial review.
Courts’ restrictive readings of judicial
review legislation have been
criticised extensively as undermining the original intent of the
legislation.
They eliminate much
administrative decision-making from potential judicial review. Additionally, the
impact of social change on the
effectiveness of the legislation suggests that it
is timely to review the Act with a view to its modernisation.
The proponents of the reference submitted that the inability to hold many
decision-makers exercising public powers and functions to
account is of concern
and that amendments to the
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be
investigated by the Tasmanian Law Reform Institute (‘TLRI’) as a
means of reinvigorating transparency
and accountability in government
decision-making.
The TLRI Board agreed that the TLRI should undertake this reference and Terms
of Reference were formalised with its proponents. They
are set out below. Mr
Michael Stokes agreed to write the Issues Paper on this reference for the TLRI
and Mr Dylan Richards agreed
to undertake the community consultation and to
write the Final Report for the reference. An application was made to the Law
of Tasmania for $21 345.00 to fund the reference. This application
was successful. An expert reference group consisting of Professor
Groves, Mr Benedict Bartl, Ms Claire Bookless and Associate Professor Terese
Henning was established to provide feedback
and advice during the writing of the
Issues Paper.
The Issues Paper sought submissions on the desirability or otherwise of
amending the
Judicial Review Act
. It also sought feedback on what form
those amendments might take. Due to the complexity of the topic and in order to
comment, the Issues Paper set out a number of questions addressing
possible components of reform.
The Institute received six
submissions,
each offering
perspectives on a selection of the 13 questions asked in the Issues Paper. While
responses were limited, the majority
of submissions either expressed
dissatisfaction with the current judicial review regime or were broadly
supportive of reform in this
area. Based on the responses to the Issues Paper
and its options, the Final Report sets out a number of recommendations for
in this area.
Terms of Reference
1. Whether there is a need to reform the
Judicial Review Act 2000
2. In the event that reform is warranted, to which decision-makers the
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should apply;
3. What the test for a reviewable decision should be — for example,
whether the test should be that the rules of natural justice
apply to the
decision-making or whether a public function test should be applied;
4. Who should be able to seek review of a reviewable decision;
5. What should be the relationship between the
Judicial Review Act
(Tas) and the prerogative writs;
6. Any other relevant issues that arise in relation to the terms of
This Report discusses the
Judicial Review Act 2000
’) and examines whether there is a need to reform the
was passed in 2000 with the aim of simplifying the law with
respect to judicial review of government action. By necessity, the Report
considers elements of the common law. Principally this is in the form of the
prerogative writs, mandamus, prohibition and certiorari,
along with the
equitable remedy of injunction.
The Supreme Court has always had the power to review government action to
determine whether the government has acted legally or not,
but the law here is
complex. The legal standards with which government must comply are complicated
and not easy to apply. Although
it lists these standards, a useful reform in
itself, the
does not attempt to simplify them or to reduce their
Instead, the
seeks to simplify the rules which determine when an
individual who is affected by government action can ask the Court to determine
whether that action was authorised by law. Before the
was enacted, an
individual who wanted to challenge the legality of government action had to show
that his or her case fell within
the scope of one of the old common law
remedies, often a complicated legal task.
aimed to make it easier for litigants to sue the government by
replacing all the old remedies with one simple statutory remedy. This
designed to ensure that old technical limitations on the right to sue did not
stop the individual from having the Court determine
whether the government
action which affected him or her was legal.
However, decisions with respect to the
and similar legislation in
the Commonwealth and in Queensland, (the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial
Review) Act
Judicial Review Act 1991
(Qld)) have imposed a raft of technical
limitations on the right to sue under the
, making it as complex as
the old remedies.
This Report identifies the limitations which the courts have placed on the
scope of judicial review, considers whether those limitations
are justified and
suggests ways in which those which are not justified may be removed. Because the
limitations are complex and technical,
the discussion of them and of the ways in
which they might be removed is complex and technical.
The most important way in which the
aimed to simplify judicial
review of administrative decision-making was by replacing a number of
complicated old common law remedies,
mandamus, prohibition, certiorari, quo
warranto and scire facias,
with a simplified statutory procedure for an
order of review.
That attempt failed in part because the Act, if interpreted consistently with
that aim, ruled out any possibility of challenging the
legality of government
action in too many cases. The Tasmanian Supreme Court was not prepared to accept
that outcome. It interpreted
not as replacing the old remedies
with a simplified procedure but as supplementing them with that procedure.
The second reason why the attempt failed is that the constitutional landscape
within which the
operates changed radically in 2010. Before 2010, it
was assumed that a State government could limit the scope of a State Supreme
Court’s power to determine the legality of government action. However, in
that year the High Court held in
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of
’) that the jurisdiction of a State Supreme Court
in this area, as defined by the old common law remedies, was constitutionally
protected. Hence, a State parliament had limited power to reduce its scope. That
decision entailed that it is impossible for a State
parliament to abolish the
old remedies unless it provides an alternative remedy equal in scope. As the
exact scope of these remedies
is not clear and is tending to expand, it is
difficult for a parliament to do that.
It is clear that the
does not replicate the jurisdiction which the
old remedies granted the Court. Instead, it is narrower in some crucial
respects. Hence
the Supreme Court was faced with the option of holding the
attempt to abolish the old remedies with a statutory procedure invalid
inconsistent with the
Constitution
or to interpret the
supplementing the old remedies rather than replacing them.
Many of the issues dealt with in the Report are, or appear to be, legally
complex but can be dealt with through relatively straightforward
Reforms of this type will, if implemented, eliminate much of this complexity.
The approach laid out in this Final Report
is intended to allow the
to start over from zero, restoring the original aim of providing a simple way in
which an affected individual may challenge the lawfulness
of government
This Report is structured around the questions posed by the Issues Paper for
consideration:
Is it feasible and desirable to abolish the prerogative remedies
completely and to replace them with the one simple procedure for
judicial review
under the Act?
A consideration of whether the stated aim of the
, to abolish the
old remedies and replace them with a simplified statutory procedure for review,
is achievable. Given that to abolish
these remedies poses constitutional issues,
to do so requires that the
replicates the jurisdiction which they
grant in full. As the scope of review under those remedies is not well defined
and is continuing
to expand, it is not feasible to replicate them in
This Report considers the relationship between the
and the old
remedies, discussing two options. First, it may be possible to incorporate the
old remedies into the
. Second, the old remedies may be retained in
addition to the to the
. The Institute recommends the incorporation of
the prerogative remedies into the
as this represents the most
effective and simplest solution to the issue.
If we decide to retain the prerogative remedies, is legislation
required to put them on a firm legal footing?
The arguments the Supreme Court relied on to save the prerogative remedies
’s attempt to abolish them are weak. They do not
provide the remedies with the secure foundation which they need given their
constitutional importance since
. As such, should the prerogative
remedies not be incorporated into the
they will need to be embodied
in separate legislation in order to provide firm legal footing for the Court to
continue using them.
As the Institute believes that incorporation of the old remedies into the
is a key plank in any effective reform of the judicial review regime,
it has not provided a recommendation on this issue. This discussion
is retained
in order to provide guidance to policymakers in the event they do not accept the
Institute’s recommendation.
Is there jurisdiction under the JRA where the Act in question does not
require a decision? If not, should there be jurisdiction in
Some cases might involve circumstances in which there is arguably no
administrative decision. Typically, this occurs in cases in which
individuals
act in a way which changes their legal position with the government, often to
their detriment. It is arguable that the
does not permit review in
these cases because it is the behaviour of the citizen, not an administrative
decision, which changes their
legal position. Often, however, an administrator
needs to decide that the citizen has in fact acted so as to change his or her
position before the law can be enforced. The Institute recommends that
review be available in these circumstances.
Should all decisions of an administrative character made under an
enactment count as decisions for the purposes of the JRA? Or should
some additional characteristics such as being ‘final and
operative’?
The Report also deals with the issues raised by the decision of the High
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
That case decided that not all administrative decisions made under an enactment
are reviewable under the
. To be reviewable, a decision must be
final and operative, at least in a practical sense. The purpose of the
requirement that the
decision be final and operative was to prevent challenges
to every step in complicated administrative procedures which were designed
frustrate the procedure rather than to vindicate the rights of the
complainant.
The Institute takes the view that there is no settled interpretation of the
requirement that the decision must be final and operative.
As a result, it has
complicated, rather than simplified, the operation of the
. It is also
not needed in Tasmania because s 13 of the
, which has no equivalent
, gives the Supreme Court a power to dismiss actions which
are premature and designed to disrupt the administrative process. As s
provides a better remedy for the problem of premature and disruptive litigation
tends to undermine the operation of s 13,
the Institute
recommends that the
be amended to reverse the
decision in
Should the definition of enactment in s 3 of the JRA be amended to
include instruments as well as statutory rules and to make it clear
government rules and by-laws are enactments although they are not statutory
The current definition of enactment in s 3 of the
is limited to
Acts and statutory rules. This definition is narrow in some respects, excluding
local government rules and by-laws.
Arguably it also excludes planning
instruments as well. To resolve the issues this narrow definition raises, the
Institute recommends
that the definition of enactment be amended to include
instruments as well as statutory rules and to ensure that local government
by-laws are enactments. It makes this recommendation in such a way so as to
retain all the material covered by the current definition.
Is the source of power approach the appropriate approach for
determining whether a decision is made under an enactment?
One of the key technical issues facing judicial review is the idea that a
decision is only made under an enactment if the enactment
is the source of the
legal power to make the decision. That idea has led to a number of complex and
technical restrictions on the
scope of review. The Institute recommends
reforming the
to provide for review based on whether a body is
exercising a public power or functions of a public nature.
Where there is more than one source of the legal power to make a
decision, and one source of power is an enactment, in what circumstances
the decision be considered as made under an enactment for the purposes of the
The source of power approach tends to exclude review in cases in which the
decision is made in the exercise of contractual powers
but the power to contract
is conferred by statute. The Report argues that there is no easy answer to these
cases and accepts that
there should be different approaches to different classes
of government contract. The Institute then provides a recommendation for
that attempts to find a balance between these different classes of contract.
Should a decision made in pursuance of an enactment which affects
interests but does not affect anyone’s rights or obligations
be a decision
under an enactment?
After considering review of government contracts, the Report also considers
whether review should be extended to cases in which the
decision does not affect
anyone’s rights and duties but does affect the complainant’s
interests. In
Griffith University v
the High Court held that decisions which
affected interests but did not affect rights and duties were not made under an
and hence were not reviewable. The Report concludes that there is no
justification for that limitation on the scope of the
. The Institute
recommends that the
be amended to expand the definition of
‘decision’ with the effect of reversing
Should a decision made under the general law but given effect to by
statute be reviewable?
The idea that a decision is only made under an enactment if the enactment is
the source of the power to make the decision has been
used to exclude review
where general law rather than an enactment is the source of the power to make a
decision, although the enactment
attaches legal consequences to the decision
which it otherwise would not have. The leading case on this point is
Domestic Trading v AWB
In that case, the Wheat Export Authority, a government agency, had no power
to permit the export of bulk wheat unless the AWB, a private
corporation listed
on the stock exchange, gave its approval to the wheat’s export. The High
Court held that the AWB’s
decision to refuse to allow the export of wheat
in the case in question was not a decision under an enactment because the
itself was made in the ordinary exercise of the corporation’s
power rather than under an enactment. The enactment in question
merely attached
additional legal consequences to the decision.
The Report argues that the decision is difficult to justify because AWB would
have had no reason to make the decision if the Act in
question had not given it
a power to veto the export of wheat. Without that power, the decision would have
been merely an expression
of opinion which had no legal consequences. The
Institute recommends that the
be amended to reverse the decision in
Are there classes of legislation which should not be considered as an
enactment for the purposes of the JRA?
The wording of the
suggests that administrative decisions which
meet requirements such as those laid down in the
tests are reviewable regardless of the type of enactment under which they are
made. However, that may not be the case. It is not
clear that decisions made by
government administrators under private law statutes such as the
Goods Act 1896
(Tas) and other consumer protection laws or the
Residential Tenancy Act 1997
ought to be reviewable. There
is an element of arbitrariness in allowing review in these cases because review
cannot extend to administrative
decisions made under the common law because they
are not decisions under an enactment. Whether or not an area of private law has
been embodied in a statute depends upon accidents of history. It is arguable
that the availability of public law remedies should
not depend upon such
On the other hand, sometimes officials are required to apply private law in a
large number of cases in the administration of a government
programme. It is
arguable that review should be available in such cases and that it is wrong to
deny it simply because private law
is central to the administration of the
programme. This issue arose in the case of
King v Director of Housing
in which a public housing tenant sought review of a decision not to review
her lease and to evict her. The Court held that the decision
was not reviewable
because it was made under the general law. However, the general law of landlord
and tenant in Tasmania is embodied
in a statute, the
Residential Tenancy
and the decisions not to renew the lease and to evict her were taken
under that Act. The judgments did not explain why these decisions
qualify as decisions made under an enactment for the purposes of the
One can only assume that it was because they were of the view that
review should not extend to decisions made under private law statutes such as
Residential Tenancy Act
The Report argues that review under the
should be available in
cases where, as in
, the decision was administrative and made in the
implementation of a government programme. If they are not reviewable, it may be
very difficult to compel the government to administer such programmes according
to law. The Institute recommends that the
be amended to account for
this possibility.
Should the scope of the JRA be extended to cover administrative and
governmental decisions whether made under an enactment or not?
The issues discussed above may be seen as aspects of the one bigger issue
— should the scope of the
be extended to all administrative
or governmental decisions, whether made under an enactment or not.
Governments have become increasingly reliant on sources of power other than
legislation, such as prerogative powers and powers conferred
by contracts and
other agreements, to implement programmes and to control the delivery of
services. Governments are also tending
to outsource service delivery to a
greater extent than they have in the past.
It is arguable that the rule of law requires that decisions made under
prerogative powers and under contract plus decisions of service
providers acting
on behalf of government should be subject to judicial review. If they are not so
subject, there is no way of ensuring
that the government and its servants and
agents are not exceeding their legal powers. Individuals who are adversely
affected by these
decisions should have some recourse to an independent
procedure for resolving their complaints.
Ultimately, the Institute believes that its recommendations will have the
effect of providing sufficient access to judicial review
that requiring specific
action on this issue is unnecessary.
If the scope of the JRA is extended to all decisions made in the
exercise of public power, should that grant of jurisdiction replace
addition to the existing grant of power and other grants of jurisdiction
suggested in the above discussion?
If the scope of the
is extended to all decisions made in the
exercise of public power, it will be necessary to decide whether to add the
additional grant
of jurisdiction to that already in the Act and others proposed
in the Report or to replace the existing and proposed grants of jurisdiction
with one broad grant designed to cover all cases. However, as the Institute does
not recommend extending the
’s operation to all decisions in the
way discussed by Issue 11, further reform is unnecessary.
Recommendations
Recommendation 1
Judicial Review Act
(Tas) should be amended to
incorporate the prerogative remedies excluded by
of the Act by providing an
additional grant of jurisdiction in cases where a prerogative remedy would
Recommendation 2
Judicial Review Act 2000
should be amended to include an expanded definition of decision so that
decision under an enactment
’ includes a decision or
action that is necessary for the implementation of a statutory provision which
operates on the actions
of a person to change the legal position of that
Recommendation 3
In addition to the expansion of the definition recommended in Recommendation
Judicial Review Act 2000
should be amended to expand the
definition of ‘
decision under an enactment
’ to include
a decision made in the course of a proceeding under an enactment whether or not
the decision is substantive or
procedural, final and operative or required by
the enactment.
Recommendation 4
The definition of enactment in
Judicial Review Act 2000
should be amended to read:
means an Act, statutory rule or instrument, and
includes a part of an Act, statutory rule or instrument;
Recommendation 5
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be amended to include an
additional ground for review based on whether a body is exercising powers or
functions of a
public nature. Powers or functions of a public nature should be
defined in accordance with Victoria’s
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
Recommendation 6
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be amended to
incorporate an expanded definition of decision that includes a decision of an
administrative character
made, or proposed to be made, by, or by an officer or
employee of, the State or a State authority or local government authority under
a non-statutory scheme or program involving funds that are provided or obtained
(in whole or part) —
(i) out of amounts appropriated by Parliament; or
(ii) from a tax, charge, fee or levy authorised by or under an enactment.
Recommendation 7
Judicial Review Act 2000
should be amended to reverse
the application to the
of the decision in
Griffith University v
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
so that a person whose interests are adversely
affected need not show that a decision changed their legal rights or
obligations.
Recommendation 8
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be reformed to reverse the
decision in
NEAT Domestic Trading Pty Limited v AWB Limited
[2003] HCA 35
by including a provision that allows for a review in cases where a
decision is made under the general law but given effect by statute.
Recommendation 9
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be reformed to include a
provision that establishes that a decision made under a private law enactment
constitutes a
decision under an enactment for the purposes of the
Review Act 2000
(Tas) if that decision is properly regarded as
administrative or has a public, regulatory aspect.
Introduction
The aim of the
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) and the extent to which it has achieved
Judicial Review Act 2000
was passed in 2000 with the aim of simplifying the law with respect to judicial
review of government action. Judicial review
is a key component in the
functioning of our democracy, founded in the distinction between the legal
position of government compared
to that of individuals. Individuals are entitled
to do anything which is not legally prohibited. So long as their actions are not
prohibited, they do not need to identify a law which authorises or permits their
actions. Government actions, on the other hand,
are legal only if the government
is able to point to a law which authorises the actions in question. If there is
no law which authorises
the government action, the action is illegal. Judicial
review is the means by which the legality of government action can be
2.1.2 The Supreme Court has always had the power to review government action
in order to determine whether the government has acted
legally or not. The law
in this area is complex because the legal standards with which government must
comply are complicated and
not easy to apply. Although it lists these standards,
a useful reform in itself, the
does not attempt to simplify them or
to reduce their number.
2.1.3 Instead, the
seeks to simplify the rules which determine
when an individual who is affected by government action can ask the Court to
whether that action was authorised by law. Before the
enacted, an individual who wanted to challenge the legality of government action
had to show that his or her case fell within
the scope of one of the old common
law remedies, such as mandamus, prohibition and certiorari. Each of these
remedies only applied
in certain specific situations. A litigant who could not
bring his or her case within one of the remedies could not sue, even if
she could show that the government’s action was illegal.
aimed to make it easier for litigants to sue the
government by replacing all the old remedies with one simple statutory remedy.
was designed to ensure that old technical limitations on the right to sue
did not stop the individual from having the Court determine
whether the
government action which affected him or her was legal.
2.1.5 However, decisions with respect to the
and to matching
provisions in similar legislation in the Commonwealth (
Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Queensland (
Judicial Review Act 1991
(Qld)) have imposed a raft of
technical limitations on the right to sue under the
. As a result, it
is now not easier to ask the Court to consider the lawfulness of government
action under the
than it is under the old remedies. Both avenues to
judicial review are littered with traps for the unwary litigant and with
limitations which may prevent the Court from determining whether the
government has acted unlawfully or not.
2.1.6 The aim of this Final Report is to suggest reforms to the
which restore the original aim of providing a simple way in which an affected
individual may challenge the lawfulness of government
action. To do this, the
Report identifies the limitations which the courts have placed on the scope of
judicial review, considers
whether those limitations are justified and suggests
ways in which those which are not justified may be removed. Because the
limitations
are complex and technical, the discussion of them and of the ways in
which they might be removed is complex and technical. This puts
the lay person
at a disadvantage but cannot be helped.
2.1.7 The most important way in which the
aimed to simplify
judicial review of administrative decision-making was by replacing a number of
complicated old common law remedies,
mandamus, prohibition, certiorari, quo
warranto and scire facias,
with a simplified statutory procedure for an
order of review.
2.1.8 The attempt failed in part because the Act, if interpreted consistently
with that aim, ruled out any possibility of challenging
the legality of
government action in too many cases. The Supreme Court was not prepared to
accept that outcome. It interpreted the
not as replacing the old
remedies with a simplified procedure but as supplementing them with that
2.1.9 The second reason why the attempt failed is that the constitutional
landscape within which the
operates has changed radically. Before
2010, it was assumed that a State government could limit the scope of a State
Supreme Court’s
power to determine the legality of government action.
However, in that year the High Court held
that the jurisdiction of a
State Supreme Court in this area, as defined by the old common law remedies, was
constitutionally protected.
Hence, a State parliament had limited power to
reduce its scope.
2.1.10 It is clear that the
does not replicate the jurisdiction
which the old remedies granted the Court. Instead, it is narrower in some
crucial respects. Hence
the Supreme Court was faced with the option of holding
the attempt to abolish the old remedies with a statutory procedure
unconstitutional
and invalid or to interpret the
as supplementing the
old remedies rather than replacing them. It chose the latter option.
2.1.11 The failure of the
to abolish the old remedies raises the
issue of whether that goal is achievable and desirable. This Final Report
concludes that it
is not feasible, because the scope of review under those
remedies is not well defined and is continuing to expand, making it very
difficult to replicate in a statute. This makes it difficult to abolish the
remedies without breaching the
Constitution
2.1.12 However, the fact that it may not be possible to replace the old
remedies completely does not entail that the passage of the
exercise in futility. It is worthwhile to expand the scope of the
provide a simplified alternative to the old remedies because their complex
nature adds to the time and expense of litigation.
This Report considers the
relationship between the
and the old remedies, discussing two
options. Firstly, it may be possible to incorporate the old remedies into the
. This is the option the Institute prefers because it simplifies the
law to the greatest extent possible. Secondly, the old remedies
may be retained
in addition to the
. This may be the preferred option because it is
the one which has been adopted in other jurisdictions.
2.1.13 This Report argues that if the old remedies are retained in addition
, they need to be embodied in new legislation. The arguments
the Supreme Court relied on to save them after the
’s attempt to
abolish them are weak. They do not provide the remedies with the secure
foundation which they need given their
constitutional importance.
2.1.14 After considering the relationship between the
and the old
remedies, the Final Report considers problems which have arisen in the
interpretation of the
and the legislation on which it is modelled,
and Queensland’s
Judicial Review Act 1991.
These Acts have been interpreted in ways which greatly reduce their scope and
usefulness. As these interpretations have been followed
in Tasmania, they have
reduced the scope of the
and made it more complex than it ought to
2.1.15 Parts 4 and 5 consider some of these technical interpretations and the
problems to which they give rise, and also suggest solutions.
Part 4 examines
some problems which have arisen in the interpretation of the term
‘decision’. This is a key term in the
and in the Queensland
Judicial Review Act
because those Acts
limit review to decisions, conduct in the making of decisions and failure to
make decisions
focuses on the requirement that to be reviewable, decisions
must be made under an enactment, and considers the technicalities which
encrusted that requirement. Those technicalities have been based on the idea
that a decision is only made under an enactment
if the enactment is the source
of the legal power to make the decision. That idea has led to a number of
complex and technical restrictions
on the scope of review.
analyses these
restrictions and suggests amendments to deal with them. In doing so, it examines
the extent to which
review should be available to challenge
government decisions with respect to the making and implementation of contracts.
2.1.17 The Final Report argues that there should be different approaches to
different classes of government contract. In this respect,
the Report firstly
considers tenders and procurement contracts, contracts of employment, and
contracts and other arrangements for
the delivery of government benefits and
2.1.18 After considering review of government contracts, the Report then
considers whether review should be extended to cases in which
the decision does
not affect anyone’s rights and duties but does affect the
complainant’s interests. In
Griffith University v
the High Court held that decisions which
affected interests but did not affect rights and duties were not made under an
and hence were not reviewable. This Report concludes that there is no
justification for that limitation on the scope of the
and that the
decision in
should be reversed.
2.1.19 The idea that a decision is only made under an enactment if the
enactment is the source of the power to make the decision has
been used to
exclude review where general law rather than an enactment is the source of the
power to make a decision, although the
enactment attaches legal consequences to
the decision which it otherwise would not have. The Final Report argues that
this approach
is difficult to justify because if an enactment had not attached
extra legal consequences to the decision, there would have been
no point in
making it. Hence the
should be amended to ensure that such decisions
are treated as ones made under an enactment.
2.1.20 The wording of the
suggests that administrative decisions
which meet requirements such as those laid down in the
Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
tests are reviewable regardless of the type of enactment under
which they are made. However, that may not be the case. It is not
decisions made by government administrators under private law statutes such as
Sale of Goods Act 1896
(Tas) and other consumer protection laws or
Residential Tenancy Act 1997
(Tas) ought to be reviewable.
2.1.21 In this respect, the arguments for and against review are considered
and the Report concludes that review under the
should be available in
these cases where the decision was administrative and made in the implementation
of a government programme.
If they are not reviewable, it may be very difficult
to compel the government to administer such programmes according to law.
2.1.22 The issues discussed above may be seen as aspects of the one bigger
— should the scope of the
be extended to all
administrative or governmental decisions, whether made under an enactment or
2.1.23 Governments have become increasingly reliant on sources of power other
than legislation, such as prerogative powers and powers
conferred by contracts
and other agreements, to implement programmes and to control the delivery of
services. Governments are also
tending to outsource service delivery to a
greater extent than they have in the past.
2.1.24 It is arguable that the rule of law requires that decisions made under
prerogative powers and under contract plus decisions
of service providers acting
on behalf of government should be subject to judicial review. If they are not so
subject, there is no
way of ensuring that the government and its servants and
agents are not exceeding their legal powers. Besides, individuals who are
adversely affected by these decisions should have some recourse to an
independent procedure for resolving their complaints.
2.1.25 The need to provide a remedy in these cases suggests that the scope of
should be extended to cover decisions made in the exercise of
non-statutory governmental powers. If the
were extended, it would
extend judicial review to many situations in which the power on which the
government was relying was not
a statutory power.
2.1.26 The Final Report considers various reform proposals before concluding
that the best option for extending the
beyond the situations outlined
above is by extending judicial review to decisions and conduct made in the
exercise of public power,
regardless of its source.
2.1.27 If the scope of the
is extended to all decisions made in
the exercise of public power, it will be necessary to decide whether to add the
additional grant
of jurisdiction to that already in the Act and to others
proposed in the Final Report or to replace the existing and proposed grants
adopts the first option because there is much
to be gained from keeping the
existing jurisdictional formula which is well understood and gives rise to no
problems in the majority
of cases. It may also be worthwhile to extend that
a final general grant.
2.1.28 There are other issues arising under the
which have not
been dealt with in this Final Report. In particular, the Report does not deal
with the issue of standing under the
. It was decided not to cover
standing because standing under the
is an aspect of a much bigger
subject, standing in public law in general. Standing in public law needs to be
examined as a whole
because each public law remedy has tended to develop its own
rules of standing. Those rules vary from the very broad approach taken
prohibition, in which any person has standing regardless of whether they have an
interest in the issue or not, to the narrower
interest tests used for mandamus
and injunction. A sensible law of standing should adopt a more coherent approach
based on when standing
is justified rather than on the way each remedy has
developed over time. Standing under the
needs to be fitted into that
coherent overall approach. Hence, rather than dealing with standing in this
reference, the Tasmania
Law Reform Institute (‘TLRI’) would prefer
to consider these issues in a separate reference with respect to standing
2.1.29 Similarly, this Report does not consider whether the
be extended to judicial as well as administrative decisions. The old remedies of
certiorari, mandamus and prohibition empowered
the Supreme Court to review the
decisions of lower courts. It may seem that the
should give the Court
that power as well. However, the Supreme Court’s review powers under the
old remedies were largely limited
to jurisdictional error, that is to ensuring
that lower courts acted within their jurisdiction. Although the scope of
error is expanding, the role of the Supreme Court in preventing a
lower court from exceeding its jurisdiction is different in theory
from its role
on appeal. In the former case, it is preventing the lower court from exercising
powers it does not have, while in the
latter case it is simply correcting
allows review for errors of law as well as
administrative
decisions, it would in effect give the Supreme Court a new and
general power to hear appeals from the decisions of lower courts with
any error of law. It is not clear how that grant of a general right of appeal
would relate to existing appeal rights.
As it would extend to errors of law,
there is no difference in theory between it and many existing appeal rights. In
many cases it
would simply duplicate them. Therefore, any proposal to extend
review under the
to judicial decisions needs to be examined as part
of a more general consideration of appeals from lower courts.
2.1.31 One way to simplify the operation of the law with respect to the
review of government decisions would be to extend the scope
of merits review
Magistrates Court (Administrative Appeals Division) Act (2001)
(Tas). That Act, in s 26, permits the Magistrates Court, when determining an
administrative appeal, to exercise all of the functions
that are conferred or
imposed by any relevant enactment on the decision-maker who made the decision.
In other words, the Court is
empowered to stand in the shoes of the
decision-maker and to make what it considers to be the correct decision all
things considered.
It is able to consider not only whether the decision appealed
against is lawful, but also whether, all things considered, it is the
2.1.32 Review which considers not only whether a decision is lawful but also
whether it is the best decision is often called merits
review. Usually,
individuals who challenge government decisions prefer merits review to review
which is limited to determining whether
the decision was lawful. They want the
decision remade in their favour, something which a merits review tribunal has
the power to
do. A court whose role is to determine whether a decision is lawful
does not have the power to remake the decision, even if it decides
decision was not lawful. In that situation, the court’s power is limited
to setting the decision aside and ordering
the official who made it to remake it
according to law. There is no guarantee that this will result in a decision in
the individual’s
2.1.33 Merits review tends to be simpler, quicker and less expensive than
judicial review because it focuses on whether the decision
being reviewed was
the right one rather than whether it was lawful. Hence it tends to avoid the
complex legal issues which arise
in judicial review.
2.1.34 Although it has many advantages over review under the
merits review under the
Magistrates Court (Administrative Appeals Division)
is limited in scope. Section 10 of the
Magistrates Court
(Administrative Appeals Division) Act
limits review to decisions which are
made under Acts which specifically authorise review. Many Acts do not authorise
review. As a
result, review under the
Magistrates Court (Administrative
Appeals Division) Act
is much narrower in scope than review under the
which extends to all administrative decisions except those which are
specifically exempted from review.
2.1.35 The limited scope of merits review under the
Magistrates Court
(Administrative Appeals Division) Act
has created a situation in which
review of the legality of a government decision under the
the only remedy available to individuals whom the decision adversely affects.
It would simplify review of government decisions if the scope of merits
review under the
Magistrates Court (Administrative Appeals Division) Act
were extended so that review under the
was limited to cases in
which the major issue was the legality rather than the merits of the
administrative decision.
2.1.36 However, whether the scope of merits review should be extended raises
many questions including complex ones about the impact
of merits review on the
efficiency of government administration. These questions merit a separate paper
and hence are not considered
in this Final Report.
Judicial Review Act
Introduction
3.1.1 This Part of the Final Report considers the stated purposes of the
and the extent to which it has achieved those purposes. It concludes
that those purposes were basically procedural and that it was
assumed to have
little or no impact on the substantive law of judicial review. To that extent,
its aims were perceived to be different
from the Commonwealth
which it was based.
3.1.2 The Commonwealth Act was intended to make substantive as well as
procedural changes to the law of judicial review. It introduced
changes, abandoning the distinction between jurisdictional errors and other
errors of law, allowing review for both, and
repealing most privative clauses in
Commonwealth legislation.
3.1.3 The State Act also abandoned the distinction between jurisdictional
error and other errors of law. As will be shown below, neither
the Minister
responsible for the Act nor the Parliament were aware of the significance of
this change. Unlike the Commonwealth Act,
it did not repeal most privative
clauses but retained them, showing that it was not intended to expand the scope
of judicial review
to any great extent. In fact, by attempting to repeal the
prerogative writs without removing some of the major limitations on judicial
review which it copied from the Commonwealth Act, including the limiting of
review to review of decisions under an enactment and
the requirement that
reviewable decisions be of an administrative character, it had the unintended
consequence of narrowing the scope
3.1.4 It is not surprising that the Supreme Court found a way to revive the
prerogative remedies to permit review in cases where the
remedies have
traditionally allowed it but the Act denies it, especially in cases where the
decision being reviewed is judicial rather
than administrative in character.
More controversially, the Court has used the prerogative remedies to allow
review in cases where
review is expressly excluded under the Act. The result is
that although the Act clearly intended to abolish them, the prerogative
are now used both as an alternative to the Act and as a way of extending review
to cases in which it is not available under
The purposes of
Judicial Review Act
as indicated in the second reading speech and
subsequent parliamentary consideration, especially in committee
3.2.1 The Second Reading Speech of the
set out its purposes clearly and succinctly. Firstly, it set out the
assumptions on which the common law of judicial review was based,
the assumption
that the courts are to ensure that administrative decisions comply with the law,
but not to reconsider the merits
of those decisions:
The role of the court is to ensure that decisions comply with the law, so
that the rights and interests of individuals are not subjected
to unauthorised
interference. This role may be distinguished from that of merits review, in that
the court is limited to ascertaining
whether the decision made was within the
range of possible decisions allowed by the law, rather than seeking to reach the
or preferable decision. In the event that a decision is found to be
outside the range acceptable by law, the court can nullify the
decision and
order that it be remade according to law. Examples of decisions that involve
errors of law include decisions made for
an improper purpose, decisions made
following the denial of procedural fairness, and decisions that are based upon a
misinterpretation
legislation.
3.2.2 Secondly, the speech summarised the perceived defects in the common law
remedies, each of which was commenced by a separate
writ and had its own limits
and procedural rules. As a result, the focus of the cases tended to be on the
procedural rules and limits
rather than on the substantive law:
The grounds on which the Supreme Court can review administrative decisions
and the procedures which must be followed are complex and
often confusing to
lawyers as well as non-lawyers. The reasons for this complexity and confusion
lie in the way in which the common
law powers of judicial review have developed
historically. The procedures and remedies have been developed by the common law
case-by-case basis over centuries. In the process they have become
encrusted with technicalities and fine distinctions which have
been dictated
more by the course of their historical development than by logic.
Much of the problem with judicial review arises because the common law powers
of review have developed around particular procedures,
and the remedies which
result from those procedures rather than substantive grounds of deficiency in
the administrative decisions
sought to be reviewed. There are technical rules of
law which are associated with the procedures by which the common law remedies
must be sought, so that too often the difficulty which a person seeking review
and his or her legal advisers face is not whether
there is a substantial defect
in the decision concerned which would justify review by the courts, but whether
the situation can be
brought within the scope of an existing procedure, and the
remedy available as a result of that procedure.
With the emphasis on procedures and remedies, the substantive law has largely
developed as an adjunct to the forms of relief. Another
unfortunate consequence
of this remedy-oriented approach, is that the merits of the case are sometimes
overshadowed by issues of
procedure. The technicalities and fine distinctions
which relate to the grant of prerogative writs tend to put the focus of judicial
review proceedings on the character of the remedy being sought, instead of on
the substance of the
3.2.3 To rid the law of its undue emphasis on procedures and remedies, the
Act abolished the common law writs. As it was later argued
that the Act did not
intend to abolish the common law remedies completely, it is fair to point out
that the Second Reading Speech
makes it plain that this was the Act’s
intention: ‘The bill overcomes these problems by abolishing the use of
prerogative writs and providing for an order of review by the Supreme
3.2.4 The speech outlined the remedies which the Act adopted to cure the
weaknesses in the common law, which were to adopt a new simplified
covering the whole of judicial review, including decisions which have been made,
decisions in the process of being made
and failure to make a decision, to
abolish the old common law remedies and to set out the substantive grounds of
review. The aim
was to simplify administrative law and to make it more
accessible, moving the focus from the procedural law surrounding the old writs
to the substantive law. To demonstrate that the focus was now on the substantive
law and to educate the public and the profession,
the Act listed the grounds of
The bill covers decisions which have been made, decisions in the process of
being made, and where a person has a duty to make a decision
but has failed to
do so. Other administrative acts which can be challenged include the making of
reports and recommendations required
by legislation and conduct engaged in for
the purposes of making a decision. The bill covers a wide range of
administrative decisions.
The equivalent provisions in the Commonwealth act have
been interpreted widely and the legislative phrases describing the range of
reviewable decisions lend themselves to a flexible interpretation. The
advantages of this simplified procedure are as follows:
(a) it will allow the court in judicial review proceedings to focus on the
substance of an applicant’s grievance free of technical
issues as to the
availability of common law remedies;
(b) it will provide for an array of flexible, remedial powers; and
(c) by describing the most important grounds of review in summary form and
reasonably comprehensive language, it will have an educational
presentational advantage for administrators and citizens as to the matters that
would render an administrative decision contrary
3.2.5 The Minister responsible for the Bill, the Hon Peter Patmore, the
Minister for Justice, saw the major benefits of the Bill as
procedural; the
Second Reading Speech made no mention of the major substantive reforms which the
Bill made to the substantive law
of judicial review, especially the extension of
review to all errors of law. With one exception, the old writs had limited
review to jurisdictional errors, that is errors which were so serious
that they fell outside the powers or the jurisdiction of the
administrator.
Errors which fell within the jurisdiction of the administrator could not be
challenged unless they were apparent on
the face of the record of the decision.
The new Act extended review to all errors of law, whether or not they were
and whether or not they were apparent on the face of the record.
This reform expanded the scope of judicial review considerably and
removed many
technical limitations. It is surprising that the Minister made no mention of
this reform. He did not mention the many
fine distinctions and complexities
surrounding the notion of jurisdictional error and error of law on the face of
the record as defects
in the old remedies or mention their removal from the new
In fact, he did not seem to
be aware of the change, stating in committee that there was nothing new in the
Act and that all it did
was to simplify what was already
He added that the best
way to describe the Act was that cl 18 of the Bill (s 17 of the Act) is
certiorari, cl 19 (s 18 of the Act)
is prohibition and cl 20 (s 19 of the Act)
is mandamus.
3.2.6 The Minister did not see the Act as in any
way guaranteeing judicial review. Although it extended judicial review to
which were not previously reviewable, such as decisions of the
Governor in Council,
Commonwealth
it did not repeal privative clauses in other legislation. Instead, Schedule 2
listed Acts containing privative clauses and s 15(2)
of the Act stated that the
Act did not affect their operation, thus retaining the limits they imposed on
judicial review.
Retaining the
privative clauses was consistent with the view that the Act’s effects were
procedural and that it made no changes
to the substantive law of judicial
review. To this extent, the Act and the reforms it was intended to implement
were narrower than
those of the Commonwealth
which had and was
intended to have substantive and procedural effects
3.2.7 Although the
was not intended to have the impact on the
substantive law which the
had, it was intended to have a greater
impact on procedural law than did the Commonwealth Act. The Commonwealth Act did
not attempt
to repeal the prerogative remedies, probably because two of them,
mandamus and prohibition, are entrenched in the
Constitution
Instead, it was
hoped that they would become obsolete as litigants came to rely on the simpler
and more comprehensive remedies which
the Act provided. However, that proved not
to be the case and the Commonwealth Parliament added s 39B to the
giving the Federal Court power to review the actions and
decisions of Commonwealth officers by means of prohibition, mandamus and
injunction.
3.2.8 The debates tend to show that the Act, especially the attempt to
abolish the prerogative remedies, was ill-conceived. No one,
apart from Don Wing
MLC, seemed to have had any understanding of the implications of their
abolition. Nor was there any appreciation
of the problems to which the
interpretation of key terms such as
‘decision’,
‘administrative
‘under an enactment’
had given rise, let alone any consideration of changes made to similar Acts in
other jurisdictions to deal with the problems.
The intended
scope of the Act
3.3.1 Section 43 of the
abolished many of the prerogative writs in
Tasmania. That section reads: ‘The prerogative writs of mandamus,
prohibition, certiorari,
quo warranto and scire facias are no longer to be
issued by the Court.’
3.3.2 The Act, in s 48 and Schedule 4 also repealed
Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
which regulated the Supreme
Court’s power with respect to these remedies. These provisions were
designed to abolish the prerogative
remedies so that the only remedies available
for challenging the lawfulness of government actions would be orders under the
3.3.3 It is worth noting, given the constitutional importance of habeas
corpus in enabling a person to challenge the legality of an
arrest or taking
into custody, that
does not purport to abolish
If it had done so, it
probably would be invalid to that extent. In
Kirk v Industrial Relations
Commission of New South Wales
’), the High Court
held that it was beyond the constitutional competence of a State Parliament to
abolish habeas corpus because
it is a constitutionally protected defining
characteristic of State Supreme
is in almost identical terms to s 41(1) of the Queensland
Judicial Review Act
However, the
effect of the two provisions differs. The Queensland provision is limited to
procedure and does not abolish the remedies,
only the writs as a means of
obtaining the remedies.
Section 41(2)
makes that clear by substituting orders in
the nature of mandamus, prohibition and certiorari for the writs. The Tasmanian
Act contains
no equivalent provision providing an alternative procedure for
obtaining the prerogative remedies. Instead, its repeal of Part VII
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
which, as noted above, regulated the
Supreme Court’s power with respect to the remedies, demonstrates an
intention to abolish
the remedies rather than to regulate the procedure for
obtaining them.
3.3.5 Schedules 1 and 2 of the
limit the court’s power to
review under the Act. Schedule 1 lists classes of decision, including decisions
with respect to
the investigation and prosecution of offences, tax assessments,
and some decisions made under a range of Acts including the
Commission Act 2009
Coroners Act 1995
(Tas) and the
Industrial Relations Act 1984
Section 4(2)
excludes these decisions from the definition of decisions to which
the Act applies, excluding them from review under the Act. As
Don Wing MLC
pointed out in the Legislative Council debate on the Bill, these exclusions
coupled with the repeal of the prerogative
remedies made it impossible for a
taxpayer to challenge the legal validity of a tax assessment in
The same held true for
the other excluded decisions. In response, the Deputy Leader for the Government,
Doug Parkinson, MLC, made
it clear that it was the government’s intention
to rule out legal challenges in these
3.3.6 A Schedule similar to Schedule 1 was added to the Commonwealth Act in
Both list classes of
decisions to which the Act does not apply. However, the Commonwealth Schedule
differs in effect from Schedule
1 of the Tasmanian Act. The Commonwealth Act
does not purport to abolish the prerogative remedies, something the Commonwealth
no constitutional power to do. Hence, including a class of decisions in the
Schedule only excludes review under the Act, not review
under the prerogative
remedies. However, because the Tasmanian Act was intended to abolish the
remedies, inclusion of a class of
decisions in Schedule 1 was designed to make
those decisions unreviewable, as Doug Parkinson MLC’s comments make
3.3.7 Schedule 2 of the
lists Acts which provide for no review or
limited review of decisions, including the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
Associations Incorporation Act 1964
Electoral Act 2004
Magistrates Court (Civil Division) Act
Magistrates Court (Small Claims Division) Act
(Tas) and the
State Policies and Projects Act 1993
(Tas). Section
15(2) of the Act provides that the Act has no effect on the operation of these
laws, thus retaining any limits on the
those Acts contained. Although Schedule 2 was not discussed in the parliamentary
on the Bill, no doubt the government intended that it, like Schedule 1,
would exclude or limit the review powers of the Supreme Court
under the Act.
Why the Act
failed in its attempt to abolish the prerogative remedies
3.4.1 Soon after the adoption of the Act, it was
discovered that it had the unintended consequence of leaving persons who wanted
challenge a government decision made before the Act was passed, but who had
not commenced litigation when the Act came into effect,
without any
The Act stated in s
17(3) that it did not apply to any decisions made before it came into effect,
but s 43 abolished the prerogative
writs from the date it commenced. Hence, it
was not possible to challenge a decision made before the Act commenced unless
the challenge
was initiated before the Act came into
Tasman Quest v Evans
Full Court of the Supreme Court concluded that Parliament had not intended to
make decisions made before the Act came into effect
unreviewable once the Act
commenced but had simply failed to consider the
The Court ensured that
these decisions were reviewable by adopting a narrow, literal reading of s 43 of
the Act. It held that as
s 43 only referred to the prerogative writs, it did not
abolish the power to quash a decision under
s 627(2)(a)
Supreme Court
(Tas) where a complainant had sought relief similar to
certiorari, mandamus or prohibition under
3.4.3 Although there are doubts as to the correctness of this
the result is
consistent with the High Court’s approach to interpreting attempts to
deprive State Supreme Courts of their supervisory
Casino v NSW Casino Control
case, the High Court held that ‘privative clauses, whether in State or
Commonwealth legislation, are construed “by
reference to a presumption
that the legislature does not intend to deprive the citizen of access to the
courts, other than to the
extent expressly stated or necessarily to be
3.4.4 The Court has followed
Tasman Quest
in later cases to allow
prerogative remedies in situations in which it has limited or no jurisdiction
As Estcourt J pointed
R v Tasmanian Industrial Commission;
ex parte the Minister
Administering the
State Service Act 2000
Tasmanian Industrial
Commission Case
since the decision in
the Court has
had little option but to find a way of enabling itself to exercise review for
decided that:
Legislation which would take from a State Supreme Court power to grant relief
on account of jurisdictional error is beyond State legislative
3.4.5 The way which his Honour chose was to follow the decision in
that prerogative orders remained available under
Supreme Court Rules
in those cases which were exempt from review under
3.4.6 The Supreme Court has relied on the decision in
Tasman Quest
that the Act did not completely abolish the prerogative remedies both to
allow the prerogative remedies as an alternative to review
under the Act and to
justify review where it is not available under the Act. In some of the cases,
R v Resource Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal; ex parte North
West Rendering
Branch-Allen v Easther
review may have been available under the Act, but the Court simply followed
Tasman Quest
in allowing the prerogative remedies as an alternative. In
others, such as
Abblitt v The Anti-Discrimination
Commissioner
Police Review Board
Oates v Parole Board
the Act and the prerogative remedies were both pleaded. In
Resource Management and Planning Appeal
took the view that the prerogative remedies are an alternative to the
to its logical conclusion, holding that, in that case at least, the fact
that the prerogative remedies provided effective relief was
a good reason for
denying relief under s 12(b) of the Act. That section permits the Court to
refuse relief under the Act where ‘adequate
provision is made by a law,
other than this Act, under which the applicant is entitled to seek a review of
the matter by the Court
or another court or a tribunal, an authority or a
3.4.7 In other cases, the Court has used the prerogative remedies to provide
review in situations which fall outside the scope of
the Act. The most obvious
of these is where the challenge is to a decision of a lower court, which makes
decisions of a judicial
rather than administrative character. Hence, in
Anthony v Maxam Australia Pty Ltd; R v Registrar of the Magistrates Court of
Tasmania at Burnie
certiorari was used to challenge the decision of a magistrate
Stalheim v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner &
the Court suggested
the prerogative remedies as the basis for orders which may have fallen outside
the scope of the
Similarly, in
Swanton v Resource Management and
Planning Appeal Tribunal
the Court held that the prerogative remedies were available in a case in
which there were doubts about the application of the Act
because the decision
may have been of a judicial rather than an administrative
Skilltech Consulting Services Pty Ltd v Bold Vision Pty
Macdessi; ex parte
granted certiorari to quash the decision of an adjudicator whose role was to
settle disputes as to payment under the
Building and Construction Industry
Security of Payment Act 2009
R v Pettersson; ex parte Fenshaw Pty
the Court accepted that
certiorari was available for that purpose. Although the judgments do not discuss
the issue, the cases may
have been framed under
Supreme Court
rather than under the Act because of concerns that the decision being
reviewed was judicial and hence fell outside the scope of the
Act. The fact that
decisions settling disputes under the
Building and Construction Industry
Security of Payment Act 2009
are ‘adjudications’ is not a bar to
although it almost
certainly rules out review under the Act.
3.4.9 Perhaps the most controversial use of the prerogative remedies has been
to allow review of decisions which have been expressly
excluded from review
As discussed above, the
contains two Schedules
limiting the Court’s power to review under the Act, Schedules 1 and 2.
Schedule 1 lists classes of decision
which are excluded from review under the
Act. The effect was to make these decisions
unreviewable.
3.4.10 Schedule 2
as noted above, lists Acts which provide for no
review or limited review of decisions. The Act has no effect on the operation of
laws, thus retaining any limits on the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
which those Acts contained. No doubt the government intended
that it, like
Schedule 1, would exclude or limit the review powers of the Supreme Court.
3.4.11 In the
Tasmanian Industrial Commission
Estcourt J held
that certiorari was available to quash a decision of the industrial Commission
made under the
Industrial Relations Act 1984
although all
decisions made under that Act are exempt from
review by s 4 and
Schedule 1 of the latter Act. In doing so, he merely commented that: ‘The
prosecutor has made application
to this Court for relief in the nature of
certiorari as the
Judicial Review Act 2000
is not engaged in the
case of the decision purported to be made by President
3.4.12 He did not consider why the Act was not
engaged, in particular whether that evinced an intention that decisions made
Industrial Relations Act 1984
(Tas) should not be subject to
judicial review. However, as pointed out above, he had to find a way for the
Court to exercise review
for jurisdictional error because it is beyond the
powers of a State Parliament to legislate to remove that power from the State
intended to abolish the prerogative remedies and replace
them with remedies under the
. However, because that led to a
significant and probably unintended reduction in the scope of judicial review,
the Supreme Court
found that the
had not abolished the prerogative
remedies, only the writs. Cases since 2012 suggest that it may not be
constitutionally possible
to abolish the prerogative remedies or at least the
the Supreme Court.
3.5.2 The failure of the attempt to abolish the prerogative remedies in the
and the basis on which the Supreme Court revived the remedies places
the law in Tasmania in an unsatisfactory position, especially
constitutional significance which the High Court has attached to those remedies.
It gives rise to a number of issues relating
to the feasibility of abolishing
the prerogative remedies and if they are not abolished, how they should relate
. These issues are considered in the next Part.
Judicial Review
and the Prerogative Remedies
Is it feasible and desirable to abolish the
prerogative remedies completely and to replace them with the one simple
procedure for
judicial review under the Act?
4.1.1 Section 43 of the
attempts to abolish the prerogative writs.
For reasons set out in Part 2, that attempt failed, the Supreme Court holding
effect of the section was procedural, preventing the issue of the writs
but not the making of orders of certiorari, mandamus and
prohibition under
Supreme Court Rules 2000
This part of the Final Report
considers whether the aim of the Act to abolish the prerogative remedies is
feasible and desirable and
whether it should be pursued again in any revision of
4.1.2 The major reason for abolishing the prerogative remedies when the Act
was passed in 2000 was to simplify
procedures.
That remains a
desirable goal. In his Second Reading Speech, the then Attorney-General made the
point that the remedies were arcane
and complex, not well understood by lawyers,
let alone members of the public.
Supreme Court
Civil Procedure Act 1932
Supreme Court Rules 2000
had removed some of the
complexities but some remained.
4.1.3 Even if all the complexities surrounding the writs are removed, it is
arguable that while the remedies remain as an alternative
law remains more complex than it need be because litigants must choose which
remedy to pursue or pursue both. Even if the scope
is expanded
so that it covers most cases, there will be cases in which the prerogative
remedies remain the better or only alternative.
There will also be cases in
which it is not clear which remedy is the better, the
prerogative remedies.
4.1.4 However, there are constitutional difficulties which make the goal of
simplification by repealing the prerogative remedies difficult
to achieve. It
may be simpler to expand the scope of the Act to cover most cases but to retain
the remedies to ensure constitutional
compliance if holes are found in the Act.
As the modern history of judicial review in Australia suggests that it is
difficult to
predict in advance whether any such holes exist, caution on this
issue seems sensible. Alternatively, it may be better to incorporate
remedies in the Act so that it meets all constitutional requirements.
A. The abolition of the prerogative remedies and constitutional protection
of the supervisory jurisdiction of State Supreme Courts
4.1.5 The constitutional landscape has changed since the
enacted in 2000. At that time, constitutional orthodoxy was that a State
parliament had the power to amend or repeal aspects
of the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court of the State concerned, including its jurisdiction to review the
legality of government
However, in
in 2010, the High Court held that the supervisory
and the decisions of lower courts and tribunals for jurisdictional error
was a constitutionally protected characteristic of such
As a result, the
Tasmanian Parliament no longer has the power to remove or limit the jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court to review
government and lower court decisions for
4.1.6 The key aspects of
are clear, but the detail is not. In
prevents the abolition of the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court to invalidate government decisions and actions for jurisdictional
but does not rule out the abolition of the traditional mechanism for exercising
that jurisdiction, the prerogative writs. They
may be abolished as long as the
Court is given some other mechanism for exercising the jurisdiction, such as
orders having the same
effect as the writs. In
, the plurality of
French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ stated that:
A defining characteristic of State Supreme Courts is the power to confine
inferior courts and tribunals within the limits of their
authority to decide by
granting relief in the nature of prohibition and mandamus, and, as explained
further in these reasons, also
certiorari, directed to inferior courts and
tribunals on grounds of jurisdictional
4.1.7 Despite the reference to prohibition, mandamus and certiorari, the
focus of the passage is the power of the Supreme Courts to
confine inferior
courts and tribunals within the limits of their authority and to correct any
and tribunals may
The passage permits the
abolition of the prerogative remedies, as long as the Supreme Court retains the
power to grant relief with
respect to jurisdictional error ‘in the nature
of’ these remedies.
passages in the judgment similarly emphasise that the
Constitution
the supervisory jurisdiction of State Supreme Courts to correct jurisdictional
errors as exercised by the grant of prerogative
relief or orders in the nature
of that relief.
In the view of
the TLRI, the paragraphs stress that it is the supervisory jurisdiction which is
entrenched, rather than the prerogative
remedies which simply define the scope
of the entrenched jurisdiction. However, the abolition of the prerogative
remedies will only
be constitutional if the Act confers as wide a jurisdiction
over jurisdictional error as that conferred by the prerogative remedies.
makes it clear that those remedies define the scope of the
constitutionally protected supervisory jurisdiction and because, for reasons
out below, the scope of that jurisdiction is not clear and is unlikely to be
clarified in the future, it will be very difficult
to define that jurisdiction
without reference to those remedies. Hence it may be sensible to retain those
remedies in some form or
4.1.8 The above quote also makes it clear that
gives constitutional status and protection to the concept of
the observations made about the constitutional significance of the
supervisory jurisdiction of the State Supreme Courts point to the
continued need
for and utility of, the distinction between jurisdictional and
non-jurisdictional error in the Australian constitutional
context. The
distinction marks the relevant limit on State legislative power. Legislation
which would take from a State Supreme Court
power to grant relief on account of
the availability
of relief for non-jurisdictional error of law appearing on the
face of the record is not beyond
4.1.9 When the
was adopted, the drafters followed the Commonwealth
in allowing review for errors of law whether or not they
were jurisdictional. Although it does not seem to have been an explicit
the drafters of the
and no mention was made of it in the Second
Reading Speech, the
had the potential to reduce greatly the
importance of jurisdictional error in Tasmanian administrative law. That would
a major improvement, because the indeterminacy of the concept adds to
the uncertainty of the law of judicial review. Although the
categories of
apply. As the High Court said in
, ‘it is neither necessary,
nor possible, to attempt to mark the metes and bounds of jurisdictional
4.1.10 The scope of jurisdictional error differs depending on whether the
decision-maker is an inferior court or a tribunal or some
other type of
decision-maker.
Inferior courts
can commit two types of jurisdictional error. Firstly, it is jurisdictional
error for an inferior court to claim
to deny jurisdiction which they in fact have. Secondly, it is jurisdictional
error if inferior
courts exceed the limits to the jurisdiction which they do in
fact have or exercise that jurisdiction improperly:
An inferior court falls into jurisdictional error if it mistakenly asserts or
denies the existence of jurisdiction or if it misapprehends
or disregards the
nature or limits of its functions or powers in a case where it correctly
recognises that jurisdiction does
4.1.11 Tribunals and other decision-makers are in a different position.
Unlike courts, as a general rule they do not have any jurisdiction
errors of law. As a result, most errors of law which they make are
At least in the absence of a contrary intent in the statute or other
instrument which established it, an administrative tribunal lacks
either to authoritatively determine questions of law or to make an order or
decision otherwise than in accordance with
the law. ... If such an
administrative tribunal falls into an error of law which causes it to identify a
wrong issue, to ask itself
a wrong question, to ignore relevant material, to
rely on irrelevant material or, at least in some circumstances, to make an
finding or to reach a mistaken conclusion, and the tribunal’s
exercise or purported exercise of power is thereby affected,
it exceeds its
authority or powers. Such an error of law is jurisdictional error which will
invalidate any order or decision of the
tribunal which reflects
4.1.12 At the Commonwealth level, because of the constitutional entrenchment
of the separation of powers, and in particular, because
only a court constituted
in accordance with Chapter 3 of the
Constitution
may exercise judicial power,
tribunals and other executive decision-makers cannot be given the jurisdiction
to make final, binding
determinations of the law. Hence, they cannot be given
of law are jurisdictional.
4.1.13 State Constitutions, on the other hand, do not entrench a strict
separation of powers. Hence it is not so easy to distinguish
between the
may authorise a tribunal to authoritatively
determine questions of law and hence
to make an order or decision otherwise than in accordance with
4.1.14 Although the concept of jurisdictional error is ill-defined and
deliberately left its precise scope
has marked the boundary of State legislative power, the States having the power
to prevent review for errors of law but not for
Whether or not the
attempts to abolish the prerogative remedies, any attempt to reform
must take into account the newly acquired constitutional
significance of jurisdictional error.
4.1.15 Assuming that the
Constitution
permits the abolition of the
prerogative remedies, one factor which favours their abolition is that there is
substantial overlap
between them and the remedies which the
Prohibition allows the Supreme Court to order an official, tribunal or lower
court not to purport to exercise a power or
to make a decision which it does not
have jurisdiction to make. Mandamus permits the Court to order an official,
tribunal or lower
court to exercise a power or make a decision which they have a
legal duty to exercise or make and certiorari authorises the Court
decisions by an official, tribunal or lower court which are tainted by
Sections 17
and 19 of the
give the Supreme Court power
to make orders which are similar to those which can be made under the
prerogative remedies. In some
respects, the Act confers a broader jurisdiction
than the old remedies because it confers jurisdiction with respect to errors of
law, whether or not they are jurisdictional and whether or not they appear on
the face of the record.
irrelevant to the constitutionality of any attempt to abolish the prerogative
4.1.17 In other respects, the jurisdiction conferred by the
narrower than that conferred by the prerogative remedies. The
confers jurisdiction over decisions under an enactment whereas in the United
Kingdom certiorari may now be used to review the
exercise of prerogative and
other public powers.
Australian courts may well follow the UK on this point, it may be
unconstitutional to abolish the prerogative remedies without
enactment, such as decisions made in the exercise
of the prerogative.
4.1.18 The Act is also limited in its scope to decisions of an administrative
character, whereas the prerogative remedies extend to
decisions of inferior
courts and of other officials who are acting judicially. Historically,
certiorari and prohibition were limited
to the control of inferior courts and
similar bodies. Although they have now been extended in scope to other
they play an
important role in ensuring that inferior courts do not exceed their
, the High Court held that the power of State
Supreme Courts to enforce the legal limits on the powers of the State executive
State courts other than the Supreme Courts themselves, was a defining
characteristic of those courts under the
Constitution
. Hence, State parliaments
have no power to abolish it.
Therefore, if the writs are abolished, the Act needs to be amended so that it
provides for review of decisions of a judicial as well
as of an administrative
character. Otherwise, it would result in a breach of the
Constitution
4.1.19 The Act also only applies to decisions, conduct relating to decisions
and failure to make decisions. This has raised problems
with respect to cases in
which no decision is legally required or could be made. Cases of this sort tend
to fall into a number of
classes, including cases in which the decision-maker
wrongly believed that the Act they were implementing required a decision and
cases in which statutes are self-executing, in the sense that no decision is
required for legal consequences to follow. Situations
in which no decision is
required or could be made are discussed in detail in Part 4.
4.1.20 The prerogative remedies may be available in some of these cases. For
example, in
QGC v Bygrave (No
Reeves J held
that a decision which the Delegate purported to make under the
Native Title
(Cth) was not made ‘under an enactment’ for the
purposes of s 5 of the
because that Act did not require
or authorise any decision on the issue in
However, he held that
he had jurisdiction under
Judiciary Act
made orders quashing the decision and ordering the official in question to
perform the duties required by the
Although he did not name
the orders, they are clearly orders of certiorari and mandamus respectively, no
doubt issued pursuant to
the power which
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
(Cth) confers on the Federal Court to make such orders as
it thinks appropriate.
4.1.21 Extending the scope of the
to situations where the
enactment in question does not require a decision, and to decisions other than
those made under an enactment
are major changes which are considered at length
. It is not clear whether adopting these changes will be
sufficient to ensure that the Supreme Court retains all of its constitutionally
protected supervisory jurisdiction if the writs are abolished. It is difficult
to guarantee that will be the case, regardless of
the extent to which the scope
is extended because the prerogative remedies are common law
remedies which can be adapted to new situations which we may not foresee.
4.1.22 Past experience suggests that it is very difficult to predict
may lead to the Act’s being
sidelined or evaded. For example, the Commonwealth
embodied the
then well-settled common law rule that decisions of the Queen’s
representative, the Governor-General, were not
reviewable.
A few years later,
the High Court reversed the old rule, holding that the decisions of the
Queen’s representative in a State,
the Governor, were
reviewable.
reluctance to legislate to extend the jurisdiction of the courts, the
has yet to catch up with the common law on this point. It is one reason
for doubts as to the Act’s continued relevance.
4.1.23 Besides, the
and the prerogative remedies which define the
scope of the Supreme Court’s constitutionally protected supervisory
use different criteria for determining when a government action is
reviewable. The
focuses on whether there has been a decision, conduct
relating to a decision or failure to make a decision, while the prerogative
remedies focus on whether there have been certain types of jurisdictional error,
error in refusing to perform a legal duty, error
in making a decision or
exercising a power, and error in assuming jurisdiction which one does not have.
Although there is considerable
overlap, there may always be cases where the
prerogative remedies are available but the
fails to provide a
4.1.24 For these reasons, even if the scope of the
is extended in
the ways outlined, there may always be cases which fall within the Supreme
Court’s constitutionally protected
does not provide a remedy. Because review for
prerogative remedies may run into constitutional difficulties unless it
allows for review in all cases of jurisdictional error.
B. Alternatives to abolition of the prerogative remedies
4.1.25 As noted in the Introduction, the main reason for abolishing the
prerogative remedies was to simplify the law. There are two
ways in which that
may be achieved while avoiding the constitutional difficulties to which
abolishing the remedies may give rise.
The first is to extend the scope of the
to cover almost all conceivable cases while leaving the remedies as a
safety net to catch any cases which fall outside the scope
The second is to incorporate the prerogative remedies into the
Issue 1(1) – Should the scope of the JRA be extended with the
prerogative remedies kept as a safety net?
4.1.26 Retaining the prerogative remedies as a safety net has the advantage
that it is consistent with the administrative law reforms
which have been
enacted in the rest of the country. Only Tasmania has attempted to abolish the
prerogative remedies, and for reasons
dealt with in Part 2, that attempt failed.
All other jurisdictions which have introduced an Act regulating judicial review
have retained
the prerogative remedies as an alternative.
4.1.27 The Commonwealth, which was the first jurisdiction to reform the law
of judicial review, had no alternative because
Constitution
entrenches two of the prerogative remedies, mandamus and prohibition. The
Commonwealth Act, the
, recognises this by stating in s 10
that the rights which the Act confers are in addition to, and not in derogation
of, any other
rights that the person has to seek a review, whether by the court,
by another court, or by another tribunal, authority or person.
The section goes
much further than retaining the prerogative remedies in order to avoid
constitutional invalidity. It embodies a
deliberate decision that the
remedies were to be in addition to any other remedies available, whether
in a court or in some other forum.
4.1.28 Other State and Territory legislation has followed the Commonwealth
model in retaining other existing review rights. Both the
Queensland and the ACT
Acts, which are modelled on the
contain a provision
similar to s 10 of the
Both Acts go further by
making it clear that the prerogative and other remedies exist side by side with
the Act. Section 10(2) of
the Queensland Act states that ‘the existence of
a remedy by way of an application for review does not exclude any jurisdiction
of the [Supreme] court to grant other relief,’ including prerogative
relief, while the ACT Act, s 8(3) makes it clear that
other rights to review
include the prerogative orders as well as the declaration and injunction.
4.1.29 The Queensland
Judicial Review Act 1991
not only retains the
prerogative remedies but reforms them by replacing the writs with
‘prerogative
procedural reform, the effects of which are similar to those of the
Court Rules 2000
It allows the Court to provide the most
appropriate prerogative remedy, whether that was the remedy sought. It does not
incorporation of the prerogative remedies into the Act in the sense
discussed below as the remedies must still be separately pleaded.
4.1.30 The Victorian
Administrative Law Act 1978
introduced procedural
reforms, providing a simplified form of review in cases involving
‘decisions’ by tribunals but
did not purport to abolish or provide
an alternative to the prerogative and equitable remedies. It created no new
remedies but expressly
retained the prerogative and equitable remedies,
empowering the Court in cases brought under the Act to grant remedies in the
of certiorari, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto, injunction or
declaration but not exercise any other jurisdiction or power or
grant any other
After the Act was passed
it remained possible, and given the narrow scope of the Act, necessary, to bring
common law actions for
the prerogative remedies. As the
Supreme Court Act
(Vic) simplified the
procedure for bringing such
replacing the old writs with orders, there is no longer much procedural
advantage in relying on the
Administrative Law Act 1978
follows the Commonwealth
extent that, in general, the review rights which it confers do not replace but
are in addition to other rights to
However, as noted above,
makes an exception of the prerogative writs. Instead of retaining
them as an alternative, it sought to repeal
Part 2 above explains why
the Supreme Court refused to accept their repeal and how it revived them.
4.1.32 It is arguable that Tasmania should put the prerogative remedies on a
firmer legal footing as alternatives to the
in order to ensure that
its approach is consistent with that of the Commonwealth and the other States.
If the scope of the
is widened as suggested above, they could act as
a safety net, permitting review in cases which fall outside the scope of the
but within the constitutionally protected supervisory jurisdiction of
the State Supreme Court. It may be necessary to establish that
safety net to
ensure that legislation with respect to judicial review in Tasmania confers on
the Supreme Court all the jurisdiction
necessary to ensure that it is able to
exercise its constitutionally guaranteed supervisory jurisdiction. Otherwise, we
risk the Courts’ imposing their own solution, as they did in
Tasman Quest.
4.1.33 There is a risk in retaining the prerogative remedies as a safety net.
The risk is that they will become the preferred alternative,
so that the
is rarely used. This has happened at the Commonwealth level, where
the alternative jurisdiction based on the prerogative writs conferred
Judiciary Act
has become as popular if not more popular
4.1.34 It is arguable that there are advantages in allowing competition
between alternative remedies. Traditionally, the law developed
as a result of
competition between differing remedies such as trespass and case. In
Commonwealth administrative law, it may be that
available as an alternative to the
permitted the law of judicial review to continue to evolve and has prevented it
from ossifying as it was in the 1970’s.
4.1.35 Having alternative remedies available comes at a cost, especially if
neither is available in every case. It adds to the complexity
and hence to the
expense of litigation. That is not in the interests of citizens who wish to
challenge government action which affects
them or of the public at large, who
must ultimately foot the bill where the government or a government agency are
4.1.36 Having alternative remedies requires that the alternatives be
separately pleaded. Where it is not clear which is the appropriate
remedy, both
may need to be pleaded. Usually, if one alternative is not pleaded, it is not
available. As a result, there will be
the occasional case in which the
complainant will fail without the merits of the case being considered because he
or she selected
the wrong remedy. If changes to the
are well drafted,
such cases may be rare. But if the
is extended successfully to cover
most cases, lawyers will tend to rely on it alone rather than plead the
prerogative remedies, making
it more likely that the remedies will not be
pleaded in cases which fall outside the scope of the
Issue 1(2) – Should the prerogative writs be incorporated into
4.1.37 The second alternative is to incorporate
the prerogative remedies into the
itself. If this can be done, it
will ensure that the
itself confers on the Supreme Court all the
supervisory jurisdiction which the
Constitution
requires the Court to have. As
that jurisdiction is conferred by the
itself, the prerogative
remedies will not exist as separate alternatives and hence will not have to be
separately pleaded. To that
extent, this alternative is superior to that of
retaining the prerogative remedies as separate remedies outside the scope of the
4.1.38 Another advantage of incorporating the prerogative remedies into the
is that it limits the opportunity for persons to bring more than one
action in order to delay government action which affects their
interests. The
as it has been interpreted
like similar legislation
in other jurisdictions in that it does not replace the prerogative and other
remedies, but supplements them.
This raises the possibility that a person will seek multiple remedies to
maximise their chances of success and to frustrate government
4.1.39 The drafters of the
anticipated this possibility and gave
the courts a power to dismiss an action under the
if the complainant
had sought another remedy or if another adequate remedy was
and gave the court a
power to dismiss an action for a remedy other than those available under the
if an action had been brought under the
The exercise of these powers takes time and adds to the expense of litigation.
Incorporating the prerogative remedies into the
reduces the
opportunity for such multiple actions. Hence it makes it more difficult for
litigants to frustrate government action by
bringing multiple actions and
reduces the delay and expense involved in dealing with such situations.
4.1.40 A simple way to incorporate the prerogative remedies into the
is to add an additional grant of jurisdiction in every case in which
a prerogative remedy would have been available. The Administrative
Council (‘ARC’) made a similar recommendation with respect to
expanding the scope of the
to encompass the High Court’s
Constitution
expanded in that way, the ARC noted that it would enable applicants to bring
their action under the
without having to plead
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) in the
alternative.
4.1.41 It may be necessary to ensure that a grant of jurisdiction in all
cases in which a prerogative remedy would have been available
is not limited to
decisions, conduct relating to decisions and failure to make decisions as the
prerogative remedies may be available
to review cases which fall outside these
categories. Besides, the categories reflect the
and we should
not assume that the common law will evolve to sit comfortably with them. To
ensure that the grant is not limited in
these ways, it should be in a separate
section of the
rather than in ss 17, 18 or 19.
4.1.42 It may also be necessary to ensure that the grant is not limited to
administrative decisions as prerogative writs have traditionally
been available
to challenge the judicial decisions of lower courts.
emphasised that
the power of the State Supreme Court to supervise the jurisdiction of lower
courts was part of the constitutionally
protected jurisdiction of the Supreme
As limiting the
many decisions of inferior courts,
which are judicial rather than administrative
in nature, it has the potential to be unconstitutional. Hence it would be
to incorporate the totality of the supervisory jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court into the
, regardless of the nature of the decision
appealed from.
4.1.43 At the same time, the prerogative remedies
should not be confined to a separate part of the Act as is the case under the
Judicial Review Act 1991
That is not true incorporation and
does not confer any advantages over and above those which would be gained by
re-establishing the
prerogative remedies in their own separate Act. In
particular, they would have to be pleaded in the alternative.
If we decide to retain the prerogative
remedies, is legislation required to put them on a firm legal
4.2.1 There are good reasons for providing a firm legal foundation for the
prerogative remedies if we decide to retain them.
State Supreme Courts have a constitutionally guaranteed power to review State
government decisions for jurisdictional error,
a power which State parliaments
cannot abolish. In those cases which fall outside the scope of the
the prerogative remedies may be the only remedies available to challenge
government decisions for jurisdictional
4.2.2 The current legal basis for the prerogative remedies lies in
Supreme Court Rules 2000
subordinate legislation made under the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
It is clear that s 43 of the Act
was intended to abolish the prerogative remedies and it is arguable that as a
Supreme Court Rules
is no longer valid.
4.2.3 Even if we ignore the doubts about the validity of
Supreme Court Rules
, there are good reasons for embodying the prerogative
remedies in an Act of parliament. As noted, they are constitutionally important,
as the only remedy in many cases for the citizen who wishes to challenge
government action for jurisdictional error. Hence, it is
not appropriate that
their legal foundation is in a statutory rule which is much more easily changed
than is an Act of parliament.
4.2.4 Besides, there is need to clarify the constitutional relationship
between parliament and the Supreme Court in Tasmania. As noted
above, parliament
does not have the constitutional power to take from the Supreme Court its power
to review government action for
the constitutional power to deny the Court the power to review government action
for other errors of law. It is not clear that Supreme Court is recognising that.
There are intimations that certiorari may be available
to correct errors of law
on the face of the record as well as jurisdictional errors in cases where the
Act ruled out review. Legislation
may be needed to clarify the situation so that
parliament’s intention to exercise its constitutional power to exclude
other than for jurisdictional error is not ignored.
4.2.5 If parliament legislates to place the prerogative remedies on a solid
legal foundation, it can fashion that foundation and define
the relationship
between it and the courts within the constitutional framework which
established. Currently, it has surrendered that power to the Supreme Court with
results which defeat its intentions, not only about
the prerogative writs but
also about exclusions from review. Legislation is likely to lead to a better
outcome from the government’s
perspective.
The current legal status of the prerogative
4.2.6 The current legal basis for the prerogative remedies in Tasmania is
weak, easily changed and open to challenge. As noted above,
abolished the prerogative writs of prohibition, mandamus, certiorari, scire
facias and quo warranto in Tasmania and repealed
Part VII of the
Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
regulating the Supreme Court’s powers
with respect to these writs.
government argued that the combined effect of these provisions was to abolish
the prerogative remedies in Tasmania. The Court
rejected the argument, holding
’s effect was limited to procedure, taking away the Supreme
Court’s power to issue writs of mandamus, certiorari and prohibition,
not affecting its power to make orders similar to mandamus, certiorari and
prohibition under the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
Similar to Certiorari, Mandamus and Prohibition and Writs of Habeas Corpus.
4.2.8 The Court’s reasons for this conclusion were not compelling. The
government argued that
Supreme Court Rules
invalidated by the
It had a strong argument. The
Supreme Court
are made under the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
, which is a power ‘to make rules not inconsistent with and for
the purposes of this Act ... with respect to any part of the
Court (original or appellate) which is subject to this Act’. After the
Judicial Review Act
repealed the provisions of the
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act 1932
regulating the prerogative remedies,
arguable that judicial review in general and the prerogative writs in particular
ceased to be subject to the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
there is a strong argument that
Supreme Court Rules
longer for the purposes of the Act or with respect to any part of the
that Act. If that is the
Supreme Court Rules
is no longer authorised by the
Act and is invalid.
Tasman Quest
, the Supreme Court appeared to recognise the
strength of this argument because it sought to base Part 26 of the Rules on the
Australian Courts Act 1828.
That Act conferred all the powers and
including the power
of the Court of Kings Bench to issue the prerogative
The Court held that as
that Act remained in force in Tasmania, Part 26 of the Rules also remained in
Since the 1828 Act remains in force, the jurisdiction to grant relief in the
nature of certiorari under r 627(2)(a) has survived the
commencement of the
Judicial Review Act
4.2.10 This argument is difficult to accept. The
Australian Courts Act
was British imperial legislation applying in Australia. As the
Supreme Court Rules
are an exercise of the rule making power conferred by
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
their validity depends
upon their consistency with that Act. It is not to the point that rules with a
similar content could have been
made under other legislation or be seen as
implementing that legislation.
4.2.11 Besides, since the passage of the
Australia Acts 1986
the Tasmanian Parliament has had full power to amend or repeal Imperial
legislation applying in the
Hence, when the
was passed, the Tasmanian Parliament had full power to amend or repeal the
Australian Courts Act 1828.
No special procedure was required to do so.
Section 43 of the
which abolishes the prerogative writs,
does so in very general language, which, if given its natural meaning,
appears wide enough to repeal the grant of jurisdiction to
issue the prerogative
writs which the
Australian Courts Act
4.2.12 However, the High Court in recent cases has applied the principle that
privative clauses, and, by implication, other legislation
limiting or ousting
the supervisory jurisdiction of the courts, is to be interpreted by reference to
a presumption ‘that the
legislature does not intend to deprive the citizen
of access to the courts, other than to the extent expressly stated or
necessarily
arguable that the principle requires that the supervisory grant of jurisdiction
Australian Courts Act
can only be repealed by express reference to
the Act, not just to the supervisory jurisdiction it confers. On this view, ss
are sufficient to repeal the provisions regulating
mandamus, prohibition and certiorari in the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
because they expressly refer to those provisions, but not to repeal the
power to grant the prerogative writs in the
Australian Courts Act.
4.2.13 The difficulty this argument faces is that it leaves s 43 of the
with no work to do. Section 48 and Schedule 4 are sufficient in
themselves to repeal the provisions with respect to mandamus, prohibition
certiorari in the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
repeal the grant of jurisdiction with respect to these remedies in the
Australian Courts Act
it does nothing. As it was clearly intended
to be an important provision, that conclusion is difficult to justify.
4.2.14 Even if we accept the argument that s 43 does not repeal the grant of
it is not sufficient to preserve the power to make
prerogative orders conferred by the
Supreme Court Rules
from repeal.
Their repeal or invalidity follows the repeal of those parts of the
Court Civil Procedure Act
dealing with the Court’s jurisdiction with
reference to the prerogative writs. Instead, the argument would preserve the
prerogative
writs in the form they took when the
Australian Courts Act
was enacted in 1828 with all the procedural and other traps which encumbered
them at that time.
4.2.15 These considerations cast doubt on the reasoning in
. However, the decision may be defensible on the grounds that a State
parliament does not have the constitutional power to deprive
the Supreme Court
of the State of its ability to grant relief for jurisdictional
or to impose limits on
the administrative authority of a body with the intention that any breach of
those limits would lead to invalidity
and at the same time, deprive the Supreme
Court of the State of the authority to declare and enforce those
Estcourt J came to
that conclusion in the
Tasmanian Industrial Commission
allows for review for lack of jurisdiction and for
errors of law, including jurisdictional
Therefore, it may seem
that it confers more than enough jurisdiction on the Supreme Court to meet the
constitutional requirements
it does not permit judicial review of all decisions, being limited to
administrative decisions under an enactment. Besides,
it contains a list of
decisions which are exempt from review in Schedule 1 and a list of Acts to which
it does not apply in Schedule
2. Either these exemptions from review
unconstitutional and invalid or the
Constitution
requires that prerogative
review remain available for jurisdictional error in these cases.
4.2.17 Estcourt J in the
Tasmanian Industrial Commission Case
the latter alternative, accepting the correctness of the decision in
Supreme Court Rules
survived despite the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
on which they depended for their validity. A better argument may have been
abolishing the prerogative writs and that part of
Schedule 4 which repealed the provisions of the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure
regulating the prerogative writs were invalid under the
doctrine. By protecting the provisions on which
Supreme Court
depend for their validity it would also have saved those
provisions.
4.2.18 Estcourt J probably accepted the conclusion in
Tasman Quest
despite the flaws in the reasoning because it has been accepted in a number of
later decisions, including
R v Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Tribunal; ex parte North West
Stalheim v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner &
Civil Aviation
Safety Authority v
Illingworth
Branch-Allen v
Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Macdessi; ex parte
Consulting Services Pty Ltd v Bold Vision Pty
However, the
decision in
Tasman Quest
does not leave the law in a settled or
satisfactory state.
The need for legislation establishing a firm
legal basis for the prerogative writs
4.2.19 Although the conclusion in
Tasman Quest
has been accepted in
later cases, its reasoning is flawed and the issue is likely to be reopened in
some later case.
the reasoning in
Tasman Quest
is flawed, there is need for parliament to
legislate to make it clear that the prerogative remedies are available in
Tasmania and
to define the scope of the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction. If
were repealed, the need would be much greater. Without clarifying
legislation, doubts will remain about the legal basis of the Supreme
Court’s constitutional jurisdiction to give relief for jurisdictional
4.2.20 Given that the
Constitution
requires that State Supreme Courts have
the power to review government actions for jurisdictional error and the
importance of judicial
review in ensuring the rule of law, the Supreme
Court’s jurisdiction to grant the prerogative remedies needs to be defined
in an Act of parliament, rather than in
Supreme Court Rules
of doubtful
validity. It may appear that the
Supreme Court Rules
are an appropriate
place for regulations dealing with the writs because the
be changed by the judges of the Supreme Court with the approval of the Rule
Committee which consists of the judges and four
practitioners.
They may be
more likely to be aware of the constitutional and legal significance of changes
to fundamental features of the legal
system such as the prerogative writs than
is parliament. Parliament had little understanding of the implications of what
it was doing
when it attempted to abolish the prerogative remedies in the
Judicial Review Act
4.2.21 This argument ignores the fact that the rule making power of the
judges is not a free-standing law making power, but a power
which parliament has
conferred on them and which parliament can take
As argued above,
parliament may already have done that with respect to the power to make rules
there is nothing to be gained by having
Supreme Court Rules
as the legal basis for the prerogative
4.2.22 Legislation is needed not only to provide a sound legal basis for the
prerogative remedies but also to define their scope.
The Court has held that
, the remedies are available not only for jurisdictional error, but
that certiorari is available for error of law on the face of the
Hence, it is
available to do more than implement the Court’s constitutional
This is appropriate in cases
such as review of decisions of a judicial rather than of an administrative
character, which fall outside
the scope of the Act entirely. However, it may not
be appropriate in cases involving review of legislation which falls within
1 and 2 of the Act. Parliament’s intention was that decisions
under this legislation were to be unreviewable or that review
was to be limited
in various ways and that intention should be respected to the extent that it is
consistent with the constitutional
limits on parliament’s power to exclude
provides no justification for permitting review in cases
where parliament intended to exclude review for non-jurisdictional errors
law. Under the
doctrine, parliament has no power to exclude review
for jurisdictional error. However, parliament does have the power to exclude
review for other errors.
it has expressed a clear and unambiguous intention to do so, the Court should
respect that intention.
recognised that the categories of
has expanded and
will continue to do so. As it does so, the scope of
non-jurisdictional errors of law and of parliament’s power to exclude
will contract. However, as noted
the distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional errors and that
that distinction marks the boundaries of
parliament’s jurisdiction to
exclude judicial review.
4.2.24 Despite these considerations, there is nothing in Estcourt J’s
judgment in the
Tasmanian Industrial Commission
that certiorari is not available for error of law on the face of the record in
cases where review under the
is excluded under Schedules 1 and 2.
There are good reasons for that. Once
Supreme Court Rules
is interpreted as an alternative to the
, there is no reason why a
section of the
which excludes or limits review under that Act should
be interpreted as limiting review under other legislation, such as the
Supreme Court Rules
4.2.25 Allowing review for error of law on the face of the record defeats
parliament’s intention to exclude or limit review
in these cases. There is
no constitutional warrant for it under the
doctrine. However, as
noted above, it is difficult to reach any other conclusion once
Supreme Court Rules
is interpreted as an alternative to the
Hence legislation may be needed to implement parliament’s intentions in
these cases. That legislation could be included in
any legislation putting the
prerogative remedies on a proper legal foundation.
4.2.26 Since 2010, the jurisdiction of State Supreme Courts to correct
Therefore, if the
prerogative remedies are abolished, it will be necessary to ensure that the
provides a remedy in every case in which the prerogative remedies may
have been available. If this is not done, it will create constitutional
difficulties, forcing the courts to find a way to provide a remedy where the
Constitution
requires it. This could lead to a case being taken to the High
Court to determine whether relief remains available in cases where
does not allow it.
4.2.27 There are two ways in which parliament could avoid such an outcome.
The first is not to abolish the prerogative remedies but
to keep them as a
safety net for cases of jurisdictional error which fall outside the scope of the
. The second is to incorporate them into the
means of a grant of jurisdiction under that Act in every case in which a
prerogative remedy would have been available.
4.2.28 Of the two, the second is preferable because it involves greater
simplification of the law. If the two causes of action, that
and that under the prerogative writs, are retained, they have to be
separately pleaded. If the wrong one is pleaded, an action may
fail without
being considered on its merits. That adds to the complexity of the law and the
expense of litigation.
4.2.29 If the prerogative remedies are incorporated into the
the way suggested, they will not have to be separately pleaded, simplifying
procedures and reducing the cost of challenges to
government decisions and
actions. This approach may also avoid the common practice at the federal level
of proceeding in the
or under the
Judiciary Act
pleading the other in the alternative but keeping it in abeyance.
practice has the potential to add to the complexity and expense of litigation by
requiring counsel to prepare an argument which
may never be used or to ask for
an adjournment if they find that they do need to use the argument.
4.2.30 Incorporating the prerogative remedies into the
the advantage that it reduces the opportunity for litigants to bring separate
actions under the
and for a prerogative remedy in order to frustrate
government action and to maximise their chances of success. Although the
allows the court to dismiss one or other of such
that causes delay
and adds to the expense of litigation. A better solution is to reduce the
possibility of bringing such multiple
actions by incorporating the remedies into
4.2.31 Because other jurisdictions which have adopted an Act regulating
judicial review have chosen to retain the prerogative remedies
as separate
remedies rather than incorporate them into judicial review legislation,
parliament may opt for uniformity and do likewise.
If parliament chooses to
retain the prerogative remedies as separate remedies rather than incorporate
them into the
, it needs to place the remedies on a stronger
constitutional footing.
(a) Is it sensible and feasible to abolish the prerogative remedies? How
could this best be done? Do the advantages of doing so outweigh
disadvantages?
(b) Is it more sensible and feasible to retain the prerogative remedies?
What are the advantages and disadvantages of doing so?
(c) If so, how is this best done — by incorporation into the
or by being kept separate? What are the advantages and disadvantages
of the two options?
4.2.32 In response to Question 1, the Tasmanian Water and Sewerage
Corporation (‘TasWater’) submitted that the prerogative
should be retained, and that the most sensible and feasible approach to
retaining these remedies is to incorporate them
4.2.33 In terms of incorporating the prerogative writs into the
TasWater agreed with the TLRI’s reasons provided in the Issues Paper.
These reasons are detailed above at [
] of this Report; broadly it is the
Institute’s view that incorporating the prerogative writs into the
would simplify the judicial review regime, while also allowing the
Supreme Court to retain its constitutionally required supervisory
4.2.34 The Institute’s view is that there are advantages to
incorporating the prerogative remedies into the
and that the Act
should be reformed on this basis. While it may not possible to completely
replace the prerogative remedies as was
intended when the
introduced, unless the
be so significantly amended that it
effectively replicates those remedies, they can, however, be eliminated as an
alternative to the
, meaning that they need not be separately pleaded.
Other benefits include eliminating the possibility of a complainant bringing
than one action in response to a particular government action.
4.2.35 The Institute recommends that any such incorporation of the
prerogative remedies into the
follow the model set out by the ARC in
respect of the federal
In this model, an
additional grant of jurisdiction in every case in which a prerogative remedy
would have been available would be
added to the
4.2.36 This approach is preferable due to it being
an effective simplification of the law: reducing the cost of, improving
accessibility
to and eliminating confusion surrounding such an important process
as judicial review.
Recommendation
Judicial Review Act
(Tas) should be amended to
incorporate the prerogative remedies excluded by s 43 of the Act by providing an
additional grant of jurisdiction
in cases where a prerogative remedy would
4.2.37 While the majority of submissions did not address this question
directly, the majority did express the opinion that the
reform to better operate. It is the Institute’s view that any reform that
does not first address the issue of the
prerogative remedies is incomplete, and
even if no other reform of the
were to be pursued, the prerogative
remedies should be incorporated.
If it is decided to keep the prerogative remedies separate from the
, is it necessary to put them on a stronger legal footing by embodying
them in legislation? Or is their current basis sufficient?
4.2.38 The Institute did not receive any submissions on this topic directly,
however TasWater noted that its response to the first
question posed in the
Issues Paper covered this second question.
4.2.39 As per the Institute’s recommendation above, the prerogative
remedies should be incorporated into the
. In the event that they are
not incorporated in the Act, the Institute’s view is that they should
otherwise be put on a firmer
legal footing.
4.2.40 Currently, the legal basis for using the prerogative remedies lies in
Supreme Court Rules 2000
. Even setting aside the issue
contradicts
, as a statutory rule it is more
easily changed than an Act of parliament. Given the constitutional importance of
the prerogative
remedies, as established in
, it would be appropriate
for the remedies to be embodied in an Act of parliament.
4.2.41 As any such new legislation would need to account for s 43 of the
, it is most sensible to incorporate the remedies into that Act
through amendment.
Limitations on the Scope of
Review under the
Judicial Review Act 2000
Introduction
5.1.1 There are a number of limitations placed on the scope of review under
1. Only decisions, conduct related to the making of a decision and failure to
make a decision are
reviewable.
2. To be reviewable, a decision, conduct relating to a decision and failure
to make a decision must be of an administrative
3. To be reviewable, a decision, conduct relating to a decision and failure
to make a decision must be under an
5.1.2 This Part considers whether these limitations ought to be altered or
removed entirely, and if so, what limits should replace
The meaning of ‘decision’ in the
5.1.3 ‘Decision’ is a key term in defining the scope of judicial
review under the
, because its jurisdiction is limited to
‘decisions’, ‘conduct relating to a decision’ and
5.1.4 The centrality of the concept of ‘decision’ to
1. Is there jurisdiction under the
where the Act in question does
not require a decision? If not, should there be jurisdiction in these cases?
2. Do all decisions of an administrative character made under an enactment
count as decisions for the purposes of the
? Or must they have some
additional characteristics such as being ‘final and operative’?
5.1.5 These controversies raise a number of issues which need to be
considered in any reform proposals. The issues are considered
in turn below.
decision? If not, should there be jurisdiction in
these cases?
5.2.1 These two questions are, for reasons set out below, better formulated
Issue 3(1) – Is there jurisdiction under the JRA where the
provision in question operates to change the legal position of a
person without
any administrator having to make a decision?
Issue 3(2) – If not, should the definition of decision be
broadened to include a decision that is necessary for the implementation
statutory provision which operates to change the legal position of a person
without any administrator having to make a decision?
5.2.2 Aronson, Groves and Weeks argue that there is a long tradition in
administrative law of regarding some statutes as self-executing;
changing legal rights and obligations by the operation of law if certain facts
occur without any administrator having
They are critical of the theory and point out that it has been used to exclude
review under the
, which, like the
, is limited to
review of a decision, conduct relating to a decision and failure to make a
decision. If a statutory provision is self-executing
in the way described,
review under the
may be ruled out because there is no decision
5.2.3 The issue is yet to arise in Tasmania. However, as the wording of the
with respect to the need for a decision follows that of the
, it is also likely to be interpreted as not authorising review where the
statutory provision in question operates to change the legal
position of a
person without any official having to make a decision.
5.2.4 It would simplify the law and remove an unjustifiable gap in the
confers if the definition of decision were
extended to allow review in cases in which a statutory provision operates to
legal position of a person without any administrator having to make a
decision. The cases on this point under the
are complex and
contradictory, drawing many fine distinctions. They suffer from a failure to
analyse the issue correctly. That failure
tends to hide what is at stake and why
legislation is needed to plug the jurisdictional gap.
5.2.5 A possible distinction between a statute which is self-executing and
one which is not is that there is no discretion under the
former and there is a
discretion under the latter.
lays down that ‘decision’ extends to
situations in which the statutory provision in question does not confer a
discretion,
it covers both
self-executing statutes are identified as ones
which do not confer a discretion,
they may still require decisions which are reviewable under the
5.2.6 Some of the cases and some commentators have analysed the problem in
terms of statutes which are ‘self-executing’
in that they operate to
change the legal relationship of a person to the state if certain circumstances
exist without any administrator’s
having to make a decision or take any
As the Court said in
Australian Postal Corporation v Forgie
when comparing s 14 of the
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(Cth) with s 37(1) of that
Indeed, all three have about them much the same self-executing element as s
37(7): Comcare
liable if certain circumstances exist, Comcare
liable if certain other circumstances exist, just as rights
suspended under s 37(7) if certain circumstances
5.2.7 The forfeiture provisions of the
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) appear
to be self-executing in this sense. A series of cases has held that as no
‘decision’ need be made for forfeiture
to occur, the validity of
forfeiture cannot be challenged under the
As Spender J pointed
Re Whim Creek Consolidated NL v
’) goods are forfeited under s 229 of that Act on
the occurrence of particular acts without any official action needing to be
Section 229
Customs Act 1901
did not authorise or identify
any official who had the power or the duty to declare that goods were forfeited.
Where goods were forfeited
or a customs officer reasonably believed that they
had been forfeited, the officer had the power to take further action to seize
the goods but need not have done
In some cases it may have
been reasonable not to seize the goods. However, the goods remained forfeited so
that the person who retained
possession of them could not sell them because he
or she was not the owner and could not pass a good title to them to the
5.2.8 The Court in
held that as
forfeiture under the
Customs Act 1901
occurred by operation of law
without any official making a decision, there was no decision which could be
challenged under the
that the seizure of goods which were forfeited under the
Customs Act
different in that it did not happen by operation of law but only occurred if an
authorised officer made a decision to seize the
That decision was one which was reviewable under the
In reviewing that
decision, the Court may need to determine whether the goods were in fact
forfeited, permitting incidental review
of that decision. But the forfeiture
decision itself is not reviewable under the Act.
5.2.9 As noted above,
Spender J in
analysed the problem as one in which the existence of
specified circumstances or the occurrence of certain events triggers the
of the law. This analysis suggests that the law can operate without
any human intervention. Such an analysis suggests an analogy
with what Aronson,
Groves and Weeks call the long-discredited mechanical or purely declaratory
theories of adjudication.
5.2.10 The analogy with declaratory theories of adjudication suggests that an
improved analysis which takes into account that in most
cases of so-called
‘self-executing’ statutes the law is not self-executing but involves
official choice and action to
implement it will reveal that there are decisions
which are reviewable under the
. That is not always the case, in
that some so called ‘self-executing statutes’ are not ones which
operate by means of
official intervention which is necessary for their
implementation but which the statute does not specify. Instead, they are
under which persons, through their own actions and without any
official intervention, can change their legal position with respect
to the state
or to one of its agencies.
5.2.11 In private law, situations in which persons can change their legal
position with respect to other persons without any administrative
intervention
are common. Some, such as contract law, involve the deliberate use of legal
powers to make intentional changes. But
this is not always the case. The law of
negligence assumes that people, by their actions, can unintentionally change
their legal
relations with others, usually to their own detriment.
5.2.12 Many of the provisions which are misleadingly analysed as
self-executing are ones under which persons can unintentionally change
legal relations with the state or with an agency of the state, often to their
detriment. An example is
s 229(1)(a)
Customs Act 1901
referred to above, which provided for the forfeiture of imported goods when an
attempt had been made to smuggle them into Australia
or to avoid duty by
under-declaring their value.
5.2.13 It is easy to understand why these cases fall outside the scope of the
. These Acts focus on official action,
providing for review of official action which involves a decision, conduct
relating to a decision
and failure to make a decision. Where there is no
official action, but it is the actions of the person which operate to change his
or her legal position, there can be no review under either Act. Any attempt to
interpret the
or the Act under which review is sought so as to
allow for review is likely to distort one or the other provision. Amending the
so as to provide for review in these cases would require radical
change, extending its scope to cases in which there was no official
decision or
action. It is not clear how this should be done.
5.2.14 However, it is necessary to ensure that there are adequate remedies
available to allow persons to obtain an authoritative ruling
as to whether their
actions have changed their legal position in relation to the state. Consider
Customs Act 1901
(Cth). Under that section, a
person’s goods were forfeit to the Crown if the person attempted to
smuggle them into Australia
or understated their value in an attempt to avoid
duty. No official had the power or the duty to declare the goods forfeit.
acts such as seizure may but need not have followed
forfeiture.
Hence, it was
possible for forfeiture to occur without any person being aware of the fact. A
third party such as an intending purchaser
who was concerned that the seller may
not have been able to pass on a good title might have been the first to raise
the issue. In
this situation, it is only fair that individuals who have an
interest in the goods have a remedy which enables them to ask the court
the owner of the goods, the Crown or another person.
5.2.15 There is no reason why that remedy has to be a public law remedy, let
alone one under the
. The most appropriate
remedies are private law remedies for determining title to goods, such as
detinue, conversion, or where the
Crown has not seized the goods, a declaration.
5.2.16 Not all provisions which have been analysed as self-executing are ones
in which the actions of a person change their legal
relations with government
without any official intervention. Some of these provisions involve situations
in which although a person’s
actions change his or her legal position with
respect to the state, official action is needed make the change effective. As
action is necessary to implement the provision, whether the provision
expressly stipulates the action to be taken or not, review
should be available.
5.2.17 Examples of this type of provision were
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(Cth). These sections
suspended an injured employee’s right to worker’s compensation if he
or she failed to take part
in a rehabilitation programme or to undergo a medical
examination without reasonable excuse. Although the employee’s action
not taking part in a rehabilitation programme or in not undergoing a medical
examination triggered the suspension of compensation,
official action was needed
to implement the suspension and to cut off payments. A number of cases had held
that as these provisions
were self-executing and did not require the making of a
decision, review under the
5.2.18 These cases were considered in
Australian Postal Corporation v
review was available with respect to
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
(Cth) because they
impliedly required that a decision be made as to whether compensation payments
to the person in question were suspended
and that decision was a reviewable
decision. In coming to this conclusion, the Full Court of the Federal Court
placed considerable
weight on the fact that if a person had a reasonable excuse
for not attending a rehabilitation programme or a medical examination,
payment of compensation was not suspended. The Court held that determining
whether an excuse was reasonable or not required that
someone exercise judgment
and that that exercise of judgment entailed a reviewable decision:
The way in which
must operate also suggests that a
‘determination’ is required. The inclusion of the words
‘without reasonable excuse’
introduces a distinctive requirement for
some deliberative human action. An assessment needs to be made at some point
a person — as to a refusal or failure to undertake a
rehabilitation program, and to the reasonableness or unreasonableness
refusal or failure. Such a process requires that the person at least consider
the circumstances surrounding the employee’s
failure or refusal to
undertake a rehabilitation program and to evaluate what is reasonable in the
circumstances. This intellectual
process involves matters of judgment and
degree. The suspension of rights under
can only occur by force of law
once some such assessment has been made. The process cannot be conducted in a
manner analogous to
the mechanistic operations of a sorting machine. The process
that is required would seem unequivocally to fall, at least, within
AAT Act definition of ‘decision’
as ‘doing or
refusing to do any other act or thing’ and hence within the definition of
‘determination’ under
5.2.19 Although the Court stressed the element of deliberation and judgment
involved in determining whether an excuse was reasonable,
there are good reasons
for assuming that a suspension or refusal of compensation or of a benefit should
be reviewable even if no
deliberation or judgment is required. Refusal or
suspension can only be implemented by a decision to refuse or suspend and there
is no reason why that decision should not in principle be reviewable, even
though the refusal or suspension flows automatically from
the operation of the
provision on the actions of the person who receives the compensation or benefit.
The fact that no element of
judgment may be required is not a reason for
regarding such a decision as unreviewable, given that the
extend to decisions which are not discretionary as well as ones
5.2.20 There is nothing in
which requires a
different conclusion. Although that case limits decisions which are reviewable
and hence the
to ‘final and
operative’ decisions, that is decisions which are determinative of the
issue, the court stressed that this
only need be in a practical sense:
That answer is that a reviewable ‘decision’ is one for which
provision is made by or under a statute. That will generally,
but not always,
entail a decision which is final or operative and determinative, at least in a
practical sense, of the issue of fact
falling for consideration. A conclusion
reached as a step along the way in a course of reasoning leading to an ultimate
would not ordinarily amount to a reviewable decision, unless the
statute provided for the making of a finding or ruling on that point
so that the
decision, though an intermediate decision, might accurately be described as a
decision under an
5.2.21 The implementation of a refusal or suspension of compensation or of a
benefit may not be legally operative to determine the
rights and duties of the
parties where the refusal or suspension flows automatically from the operation
of the relevant provision
on the actions of the recipient of the compensation or
benefit. However, it is operative in a practical sense, in that, until an
official implements the refusal or suspension, the compensation or benefit will
continue to be paid. Hence it meets the criteria
for a decision which
5.2.22 Despite the decision in
Australian Postal Corporation v
the matter should
be put beyond all doubt by amending the
to make it clear that
decisions and action needed to implement a change in the legal relationship
between a person and the state
brought about by the person’s actions are
reviewable. That could be done by amending the definition of
to include a decision or action which is necessary for
the implementation of a statutory provision which operates on the actions
person to change the legal position of that person.
was invited with respect to the following question
Should the definition of decision be broadened to include a decision or
action that is necessary for the implementation of a statutory
provision which
operates to change the legal position of a person without any administrator
having to make a decision so that such
decisions are reviewable? If so, how
should such a definition be worded?
5.2.23 TasWater submitted that the definition of decision should be
broadened. In its view the definition should include a decision
or action that
is necessary for the implementation of a statutory provision. TasWater did not
believe that it is necessary for an
administrator to make a decision for that
decision to be available to review. It agreed with the reasons laid out by the
in the Issues Paper.
5.2.24 TasWater further submitted that the distinction drawn between
self-executing statutes and other statutes is an artificial one.
5.2.25 The Institute concurs with TasWater and concludes that the definition
of ‘decision’ should be broadened. Review
should be allowed in
circumstances where statute operates to change the legal position of a person
without needing an administrator
to make a decision. While the issue of
self-executing statute described by Aronson, Groves and
has yet to arise in
Tasmania, it remains that there is a jurisdictional gap in the
is unjustifiable.
Recommendation
Judicial Review Act 2000
should be amended to include
an expanded definition of decision so that ‘
decision under an
’ includes a decision or action that is necessary for the
implementation of a statutory provision which operates on the actions
person to change the legal position of that person.
Should all decisions of an administrative
character made under an enactment count as decisions for the purposes of the
JRA? Or should
they have some additional characteristics such as being
‘final and operative’?
Why the issue is important
5.3.1 The broader the definition of decision, the greater the scope for
persons to challenge government decisions in which they have
an interest. Given
that the aim of the
is to make it easier for
persons to challenge government actions in the courts, there are good reasons
for adopting a broad definition
of decision. However, there has been concern
that a very broad definition will permit litigation designed to obstruct the
decision-making
process rather than to challenge the legality of the government
action in question.
5.3.2 Much government action is the result of a long decision-making process.
That process often results in a decision which is final
and operative in the
sense that it affects the legal position of the parties. Other decisions,
especially of fact, may be made in
the process of arriving at that final
decision. A broad definition of decision is likely to permit challenges to those
Allowing those challenges may enable a litigant who is determined to
frustrate the process to challenge every decision up to and
including the final
decision. It is not in the public interest to allow government administration to
be frustrated by such a string
of challenges.
5.3.3 Hence the courts, the ARC and State legislatures which have adopted
measures such as the
have come to the conclusion that the courts need
a screening device to rule out premature challenges and to prevent the misuse of
the Act to frustrate the administrative process. The High Court has adopted a
narrow definition of decision to rule out challenges
to decisions made in the
course of a process of decision-making and restrict challenges to decisions
which are final and
The Tasmanian
Parliament copied s 14 of the
Judicial Review Act
(Qld) in s 13 of the
which gives the Court the power to dismiss challenges to decisions
made in the process of arriving at a final and operative decision
where, in the
circumstances it is in the interests of justice to do so. Most radical of all,
the ARC considered, but did not recommend,
a proposal to require all
applications under the
to have the leave of the
5.3.4 This Part of the Report considers the effectiveness of these measures,
whether all are needed, and whether they go too far in
complicating the
operation of the
The current position – Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
5.3.5 In the early case of
Court of the Federal Court held that reviewable decisions under the
and, by implication, the
, were not limited to decisions which
finally determine rights and obligations, or which are in some sense ultimate
and operative:
In our opinion, there is no limitation, implied or otherwise, which restricts
the class of decision which may be reviewed to decisions
which finally determine
rights or obligations or which may be said to have an ultimate and operative
effect. Such a conclusion is,
in our opinion, in accordance with the plain
legislative intention revealed by the words of the
5.3.6 The Court recognised that the broad interpretation which they had
adopted opened up the possibility that litigants would raise
numerous challenges
to an administrative process, not with any hope of success but in order to slow
down the process or bring it
to a halt. It also recognised that the broad
interpretation which they were proposing could lead to so many challenges that
down the Court’s hearing of such cases:
We acknowledge that to some the giving of a wide meaning to
‘decision’ in the Act may be disturbing. There will be concern
the proper administration of government will be unduly delayed, and in some
cases stultified, by a proliferation of applications
to the Court, some perhaps
made without any real prospect of success, but in the hope that the very making
of them may tend to achieve
an applicant’s purpose. There will be concern
also that the Court’s list will become unduly congested making it less
able to provide the expeditious service which is so clearly desirable in this
field. And there will finally be anxiety that the limited
funds of legal aid
agencies may be unnecessarily depleted by premature, and even baseless,
applications.
5.3.7 However, the Court held that these considerations did not outweigh the
clear and unambiguous words of the Act, which showed
that decision was to be
interpreted broadly. The Court had no power to limit the scope of the Act for
fear of opening the floodgates.
Besides, administrative law required a balance
between ensuring that government policies were implemented efficiently and
effectively
and protecting the interests of individuals whom those policies
affected by ensuring that the administration was acting within its
By implication, the
Court was of the view that the balance required a broad interpretation of
5.3.8 The Court was fortified in its opinion by its decision that it had a
broad discretion to refuse relief if an application for
review was premature or
had the potential to lead to a stream of similar applications. It held that the
power to refuse relief was
the appropriate way to control premature actions and
suggested that it might not have adopted such a broad interpretation of the
decision if it had only had a limited discretion to refuse relief:
To those who have the concerns which we have mentioned we would say that it
should not be overlooked that we have earlier concluded
that this Court has
conferred upon it a wide discretion to grant or refuse relief in a particular
case. It is in the exercise of
that discretion that the Court will exercise
control over the circumstances in which and the stage at which judicial review
be embarked upon. Furthermore, it should be understood that the
Court’s discretion is not limited to what is to occur when
it comes to the
question of whether to grant or refuse final relief. By s.15 of the Act there is
no automatic stay of the operation
of a decision upon the making of an
application to the Court. It will always be for the Court carefully to consider
whether a stay
should be granted. One of the matters that will be taken into
account is whether the application has been made prematurely. Whilst
opportunity to apply for a stay would always be permitted, except perhaps in the
most exceptional circumstances, if the opportunity
is not availed of there may
be no reason why ongoing proceedings, such as committal proceedings, should not
be continued.
Lamb v Moss
assumed that the discretion which the
conferred to refuse a remedy was a sufficient screening
There is no doubt
that the discretion to refuse a remedy which the
confer on the courts is sufficiently broad to enable the courts to
dismiss premature and unmeritorious claims. The Federal Court
Lamb v Moss
and the High Court in
were agreed on
5.3.10 The broad interpretation of decision adopted in
Lamb v Moss
rejected by the High Court in
In that case,
the High Court held that the term ‘decision’ for the purposes of the
had to be at least in a practical sense, final and operative,
that is determinative of the issue at hand and that it had to be a
decision with
respect to substantive rather than procedural matters.
5.3.11 Unlike the Federal Court in
Lamb v Moss
which held that
the words of the
required a broad interpretation of the term
decision, the High Court held that the words, especially the fact that the
decision was
to be under an enactment clearly indicated a narrow interpretation.
To qualify as a decision under an enactment, a decision had to
be one for which
provision is made under or by a statute. Usually that will be a final and
operative decision which determines at
least in a practical sense, the issue at
The policy arguments do not, in my opinion, call for an answer different from
that dictated by the textual and contextual considerations.
That answer is that
a reviewable ‘decision’ is one for which provision is made by or
under a statute. That will generally,
but not always, entail a decision which is
final or operative and determinative, at least in a practical sense, of the
issue of fact
falling for consideration. A conclusion reached as a step along
the way in a course of reasoning leading to an ultimate decision
ordinarily amount to a reviewable decision, unless the statute provided for the
making of a finding or ruling on that point
so that the decision, though an
intermediate decision, might accurately be described as a decision under an
5.3.12 In Mason CJ’s opinion, the policy arguments he identified, which
were similar to those which the Federal Court considered
Lamb v Moss
were evenly balanced and were not sufficiently strong to justify a departure
from the clear meaning of the words:
The relevant policy considerations are competing. On the one hand, the
purposes of the
are to allow persons aggrieved by the
administrative decision-making processes of government a convenient and
effective means of
redress and to enhance those processes. On the other hand, in
so far as the ambit of the concept of ‘decision’ is extended,
is a greater risk that the efficient administration of government will be
impaired. Although Bowen C.J. and Lockhart J. appeared
to emphasize the first of
these considerations in
Australian National University v Burns
(1982) 64 FLR 166
, at p 172;
[1982] FCA 191
, at p 30, there
comes a point when the second must prevail, as their Honours implicitly
acknowledged. To interpret ‘decision’
in a way that would involve a
departure from the quality of finality would lead to a fragmentation of the
processes of administrative
decision-making and set at risk the efficiency of
the administrative process.
The policy arguments do not, in my opinion, call for an answer different from
that dictated by the textual and contextual
considerations.
5.3.13 The High Court in
, to the extent that that case was
determined on policy grounds rather than the words of the
was less sanguine
As a result, it adopted a narrower
interpretation of two key terms in the
defining the court’s jurisdiction, ‘decision’
and ‘conduct’ to limit the range of applications which
brought before the final decision was made.
5.3.14 The holding that decisions had to be final and operative led the Court
to hold that decisions made in the process of arriving
at a final decision were
not normally reviewable, at least as decisions:
That will generally, but not always, entail a decision which is final or
operative and determinative, at least in a practical sense,
of the issue of fact
falling for consideration. A conclusion reached as a step along the way in a
course of reasoning leading to
an ultimate decision would not ordinarily amount
to a reviewable decision, unless the statute provided for the making of a
or ruling on that point so that the decision, though an intermediate
decision, might accurately be described as a decision under
5.3.15 These arguments left open the possibility
that decisions made in the process of arriving at a final decision could be
as conduct relating to the making of a decision. In
Court drew a distinction between challenges to the substantive decision and
challenges to the procedures used in arriving at
that decision. Challenges to
substantive decisions were to be brought under s 5 dealing with decisions while
challenges to the procedures
used in arriving at a decision, including decisions
with respect to procedures, were to be brought under s 6 dealing with conduct
relating to a decision:
If ‘decision’ were to embrace procedural determinations, then
there would be little scope for review of ‘conduct’,
a concept which
appears to be essentially procedural in character. To take an example, the
refusal by a decision maker of an application
for an adjournment in the course
of an administrative hearing would not constitute a reviewable decision, being a
procedural matter
not resolving a substantive issue and lacking the quality of
finality. Then it is the ‘conduct’ of the hearing in refusing
adjournment that is the subject of review. To treat the refusal of the
adjournment in this way is more consistent with the concept
‘conduct’ than with the notion of ‘decision under an
enactment’.
5.3.16 As s 6 permitting review of conduct is limited to authorising the
review of the procedures used in arriving at a decision,
it normally does not
allow the review of substantive decisions and findings of fact which are part of
the chain of reasoning leading
to the making of the final decision. These
decisions and findings of fact are therefore unreviewable at the time they were
made either
as a decision or as conduct relating to the making of a
, Mason CJ, with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed, held that the
findings of fact that Bond was not a fit and proper person to hold
broadcasting licence and that Bond controlled Bond Corporation, which were a
part of the chain of reasoning leading to the final
and operative conclusion
that Bond Corp was not a fit and proper person to hold a broadcasting licence,
were not reviewable decisions
or conduct under the
Toohey and Gaudron
JJ agreed with this
conclusion.
5.3.17 The fact that substantive decisions and findings of fact which are
part of the chain of reasoning leading to the making of
the final decision are
not reviewable in themselves as decisions or conduct does not completely prevent
their review under the
. Instead, it delays
their review until the final decision has been
They may be, and often
are, reviewed in order to show that they are based on legal errors and that
those errors infect the final
appears to draw a clear distinction between substantive
and procedural issues, substantive issues being reviewable under s 5 of the
as decisions if they are operative and required by the
legislation and procedural issues being reviewable under s 6 of the Act as
conduct. The distinction is not as clear as first appears because many decisions
and actions arising in the course of a process leading
to a final outcome have
substantive and procedural elements and because the grounds of review are the
same whether a matter is reviewed
under ss 5 or 6. As a result, in many cases it
does not matter much whether an issue is characterised as substantive or
because the result is the
5.3.19 The real importance of the distinction between substantive and
procedural issues is that it excludes some matters from review,
substantive decisions which are not final and operative or required by the
legislation but are steps in the reasoning or
process leading to the final
outcome. They are not reviewable under s 5 because they are not final and
operative or required by the
legislation and they are not reviewable under s 6
because they are not procedural and hence are not conduct. Hence the key issue
is not whether an issue is substantive or procedural because it may well be both
but whether it is not procedural and not a final,
operative substantive
decision, because if that is the case, it is unreviewable.
5.3.20 Given that the key issue is not whether a matter is substantive or
procedural, it is not surprising that situations with substantive
and procedural
elements, especially decisions with respect to the scope of an enquiry and the
procedures to be followed, which can
have substantive consequences for the
rights of the parties, have been characterised as substantive in some cases and
examples. In
Clark v Wood
, Finkelstein J held that a ruling under
Bankruptcy Act 1966
was reviewable as a
substantive decision under s 5 of the
Bankruptcy Act
permits the examination of a bankrupt in court or before a
magistrate or the registrar.
Section 81(10)
authorises the court, magistrate or
registrar to put questions or allow questions to be put to the person being
examined. The applicant
sought review of a ruling under
that certain
questions were allowable.
5.3.21 Decisions with respect to the questions which may be put in
proceedings have strong procedural overtones and relate to the
way in which
proceedings are conducted. Therefore, they could easily be classified as conduct
for the purposes of the
, so that they would be reviewable under
s 6. Despite these considerations, Finkelstein J held that they were substantive
and reviewable
under s 5 as decisions because of their potentially oppressive
nature and because of the potential impact which they had on the rights
For the reason that mischief or hardship might result from a misuse of the
power to compel and conduct an examination the courts have
been at pains to
point out that care should be exercised before ordering an examination and that
vigilance must be observed by those
overseeing an examination to ensure that no
injustice occurs ... Not only must injustice be guarded against, but
‘irrelevant
or fishing questions or (those that) have an indirect purpose
not connected with the bankruptcy must not be allowed’: see
Ex parte Cougle
(1965) 7 FLR 436
at 437 and the cases cited at 438. ...
It must be remembered that if an examinee fails to answer a question that is
put and required to be answered an offence is committed
and the examinee is
liable to a penalty of $1000 or imprisonment for six months or both: see s
81(11) and 264C. In addition, the
fact that an answer may be incriminating is
not an excuse not to answer the question unless the person before whom the
examination
takes place otherwise directs: see s 81(11AA). So, it is obvious
that if an examination is not strictly controlled real harm may
be suffered by
an examinee and by other persons as well. Private, sensitive or confidential
information might be disclosed when it
should not have been. Incriminating
answers may be given when the questions that led to them should not have been
asked. Some unfair
advantage might be obtained for other litigation.
The possibility that an examination may be oppressive or unfair suggests to
me that the quality of a ruling to allow a question to
be put is something more
than a procedural matter ‘at least in a practical sense’ to borrow
from the language of Mason
. A ruling may not resolve any
dispute of fact, but that is not a strict requirement of a
‘decision’. A ruling does of
course resolve an issue that is raised
namely whether a particular question should be allowed. Having regard to these
considerations
and the potentially serious consequences that may result from a
ruling under s 81(10) to allow a question to be put, it seems to
me that such a
ruling is a ‘decision’ that is capable of review under the
other hand, Kiefel J held that a decision not to grant an adjournment in a
disciplinary hearing to enable the applicant to
gain legal representation was a
procedural decision reviewable under s 6 rather than a substantive decision
reviewable under s 5.
She conceded that the decision had substantive elements
and was based on findings adverse to the applicant in that the Disciplinary
committee refused the adjournment because they did not believe the
applicant’s evidence that he did not have sufficient notice
of the hearing
date to arrange representation. Despite these considerations, she held that the
decision was reviewable under s 6
as conduct rather than under s 5 as a
substantive decision:
It was not suggested by the second respondents that the matters raised could
not be grounds for review under the
and it was accepted by their
submissions that the Committee was under an obligation to ensure fairness in the
procedures it adopted.
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v. Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321 it would not however be correct to approach the matter as one
reviewing the decision not to grant the adjournment
It is not a
’ of which s3(1) and s5(1)
since it is neither final nor determinative of a substantive matter. Although
one is tempted to conclude that in a sense
it has some operative effect and
carries with it findings adverse to Mr McGibbon, it is to be seen as merely
procedural and intermediate
and as such is to be viewed as conduct engaged in as
a step towards and for the purpose of the later
5.3.23 Similar problems have arisen under the
. The Tasmanian
courts have tended to hold that decisions with respect to procedural issues are
not reviewable in themselves as decisions
under s 17 of the
) or as conduct under s 18 (s 6 of the
However, the courts have held that the act of continuing the proceeding on the
basis of the procedural decision is reviewable
In coming to this
conclusion, they have followed the statements of Mason CJ in
effect that procedural decisions themselves were not conduct for the purposes of
(s 18 of the
), but preceded reviewable
conduct, the continuing of the proceeding on the basis of the decision in
State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal and
applicant challenged a decision of the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal to admit
fresh evidence in a review of the decision of the
Commissioner. The applicant
had applied to the Tribunal to review a decision of the Commissioner to dismiss
his complaint of victimisation.
The Tribunal had decided that it was entitled in
the course of the review to admit fresh documentary evidence. The applicant
to challenge the ruling and/or the Tribunal’s conducting of the
review on the basis of that ruling under the
5.3.25 Porter J conceded that it was arguable that the decision to admit
further evidence was a reviewable decision under s 17 in
that it determined an
issue of substance, the scope of the review, and was final and operative in a
practical sense.
However, he
came to the conclusion that the Tribunal’s actions were more properly to
be reviewed as conduct under s 18: ‘the
conduct which is properly the
subject of the scrutiny is that of continuing the review on the basis of the
ruling which has been
5.3.26 Similarly, in
Port of Devonport Corporation Pty Ltd v
was of the opinion that a decision of an Industrial Commissioner that he had
dismissal was not in itself a
reviewable decision under s 17 of the
because it lacked finality.
However, he held that the holding of a hearing on the merits of the case on the
basis of the decision
in question was reviewable conduct for the purposes of s
5.3.27 Some of the language in these and similar cases suggests that the
action being challenged must be classified as a substantive
decision under s 5
or as conduct under s 6. For reasons set out above, that is not the case.
did not establish that administrative action had to be classified as
either a decision or conduct as a step in determining whether
it was reviewable.
After Bond, it remains possible that administrative action with mixed
substantive and procedural elements could
be reviewed either as conduct or as a
decision. What
established is that administrative decisions which
only have substantive effects are reviewable as decisions under s 5 or not at
all, while administrative actions which only have procedural effects are
reviewable under s 6 or not at all. Hence substantive decisions
which cannot be
reviewed under s 5 are not reviewable under s 6 and procedural actions which are
not reviewable under s 6 cannot
be reviewed under s 5. The effect was to exclude
review of substantive decisions which are not operative or required by the
but are merely steps in the chain of reasoning leading to a final
The current position – s 13 of the JRA
following the
Judicial Review Act
(Qld) s 14, adopted a provision giving the Court the power to dismiss any
application for review which it considers in all the circumstances
premature or disruptive of the administrative process.
5.3.29 Section 13 of the
imposes a duty in some cases on the Court
to dismiss an application for review of a matter which arises during the course
of a proceeding
where the applicant is entitled to seek review of any decision
made at the end of those proceedings. Section 3 defines reviewable
matter as a
decision, conduct including conduct relating to the making of a decision and
failure to make a decision or perform a
legal duty. When s 13 is read in the
light of this definition, it requires the Court to dismiss some applications for
review of decisions,
conduct relating to the making of a decision and failure to
make a decision or perform a legal duty arising in the course of a proceeding.
The duty arises where the Court considers that it is desirable to dismiss the
application in order to ensure the orderly conduct
of the proceedings because
the balance of convenience so requires and the Court is satisfied having regard
to the interests of justice
that it should dismiss the application. In
considering the balance of convenience, the Court is required to consider but is
not limited
to considering the interests of the applicant, those of another
person or party, the public interest and the consequences of any
delay in the
proceeding while the application is considered.
5.3.30 Section 13 requires the Court to consider a broad range of relevant
matters. After considering those matters, it must dismiss
the application if it
decides that it is in the interests of justice so to do. Section 14 permits the
Court to exercise the power
under s 13 at any time after the application for
review has been lodged but requires that the power be exercised at the earliest
possible time. It permits the Court to act of its own motion or on the
application of one of the parties. The Court’s decision
to dismiss an
application is only appealable with the leave of the Court.
5.3.31 The Court has held that it should use s 13 to dismiss most
applications which are premature in the sense that they will interrupt
investigation or process. It is of the view that the delays inherent in allowing
such applications are so disadvantageous
that they should be dismissed unless
allowing the application produces a clearly discernible benefit:
However, should additional evidence provide a basis for the applicant to
invoke the Court’s jurisdiction under the
, it is highly
unlikely that the applicant would be allowed to avail himself of that
premature insofar as it will
interrupt a pending investigation. As to such an application, I repeat what I
Port of Devonport Corporation Pty Ltd v Abey
(supra) at pars 48
‘... It is only in exceptional circumstances that it is appropriate to
grant relief under the
Judicial Review Act 2000
in respect of a decision
given in the course of ongoing proceedings. The delays consequent upon the
fragmentation of proceedings
are so disadvantageous that they should be avoided
unless the grant of relief by way of judicial review can clearly be seen to
a discernable benefit. Observations to this effect have been made in
relation to committal proceedings in
Lamb v Moss
[1983] FCA 254
Yates v Wilson
[1989] HCA 68
(1989) 168 CLR 338
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
; (1990) 170
CLR 321 at 338 - 339. In my view these observations are generally applicable in
relation to ongoing proceedings that
are open to judicial
5.3.32 Despite the strength of these comments, the Court has allowed some
applications brought within the course of proceedings. In
some cases, it is
clearly in the public interest as well as in the interests of all parties,
including the administrator, to know
of the scope of the administrator’s
powers at the beginning of a proceeding rather than to have a long and expensive
set aside because of a legal error about the scope of the powers in
State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination
on point. That case involved an application to review a decision of the
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal. The Tribunal decided,
in a review of a decision of
the Commissioner, to admit evidence which was not available to the Commissioner.
Although the challenge
was brought in the course of the proceedings, it was
brought by the State of Tasmania in order to gain a ruling as to the scope of
the Tribunal’s powers. The Tribunal adjourned the hearing to await the
ruling before proceeding.
Although the application was in the course of proceedings and caused a delay,
the Court did not consider dismissing it. Clearly it
was in the interests of
justice and in the public interest to allow it to proceed.
5.3.33 Although no doubt based on
Judicial Review Act 1991
(Qld), which it closely resembles,
is broader in some respects than its
Queensland counterpart and narrower in other ways. It is broader in that it
empowers the Court
to dismiss premature or disruptive applications for review of
conduct related to the making of a decision as well as empowering the
dismiss premature and disruptive applications for review of decisions and
failure to make decisions. Section 14 of the Queensland
Act, on the other hand,
only empowers the Court to dismiss premature and disruptive applications for
review of decisions and failure
to make decisions, not for review of conduct.
However, in one important respect s 13 is narrower in that, unlike s 14, it does
apply to the prerogative remedies.
5.3.34 This Final Report argues below that s 13 should extend to the
prerogative remedies as there is no reason why it should be possible
premature or disruptive actions under them but not under the
However, there is
no good reason for excluding applications for review of conduct relating to the
making of a decision from the scope
of s 13 as the Queensland Act does. They can
be as premature and disruptive as premature applications to review decisions
attempts to review directions given at directions hearings
Therefore, s 13 should
continue to require the Court to dismiss premature applications to review
The impact of Bond on s 13 of the JRA
5.3.35 The Supreme Court has applied the narrow
interpretation of decision to the
This section
considers the implications of that interpretation for s 13, suggesting that s 13
assumes a broader interpretation of
decision and that the
interpretation deprives the section of much of its effect.
5.3.36 Section 13, in authorising the Court to dismiss premature actions,
addresses the issue which led in part to the decision in
narrow interpretation of the word decision and to draw a distinction between
review of decisions under s 5 and of conduct
under s 6 of the
(ss 17 and 18 of the
), so as to prevent review of fact finding and
other decisions leading to a final decision. Yet the decision in
limits the scope of s 13. If the decision in
Lamb v Moss
‘decision’ should be interpreted broadly had remained good law, s 13
would have been available to dismiss challenges
to decisions, to conduct related
to the making of a decision and to failure to make a decision where the
decisions, the conduct and
the failure to make a decision occurred in the
process of making a final decision.
greatly limits the scope of s 13. Section 13 requires the
Court to dismiss some applications for review of reviewable matters arising
the course of a proceeding. As noted above, s 3 defines reviewable matter as a
decision, conduct including conduct relating to
the making of a decision and
failure to make a decision or perform a legal duty. When s 13 is read in the
light of this definition,
it requires the court to dismiss some applications for
review of decisions, conduct relating to the making of a decision and failure
make a decision or perform a legal duty arising in the course of a proceeding.
The decision in
effectively excludes many decisions made in the
course of a proceeding, some but not all conduct relating to the making of a
and failure to make decisions from the scope of s 13. As a result, s 13
is left with little work to do as the only reviewable matters
arising in the
course of a proceeding to which it could apply are the occasional operative
decision made in the course of a proceeding,
some conduct relating to decisions,
especially where that involves procedural issues, and failures to perform a
legal duty which
are not failures to make a decision.
held that decision for the purposes of the
, and by implication the
, means operative decision required by
the legislation in question. Hence, it rules out review of decisions made in the
a proceeding unless they are in some sense final and operative or are
required by the legislation in
As decisions made
in the course of a proceeding leading to a final and operative decision are
rarely themselves final and operative
or required by the legislation, most fall
outside the
interpretation of decision. As, according to
, they are not decisions for the purposes of the Act, they fall
outside the scope of reviewable matter and s 13 does not apply to
them. As they
are not reviewable, no application for review may be brought with respect to
them. As no application for review may
be brought, no power to dismiss such an
application where it is premature is needed.
5.3.39 Applying
, s 13 rarely applies to failures to make a
decision in the course of a proceeding for similar reasons. Section 7 of the
(s 19 of the
) permits review of failures to make
decisions and failures to perform legal duties. There is little doubt that the
meaning of decision
in s 19 is the same as in s 17 which permits review of
decisions. As
held that decision for the purposes of s 17 means
final and operative decision, it is reasonable to assume that decision has a
meaning in s 19, so that that section only permits the review of failure
to make a final and operative decision. As decisions made
in the course of a
proceeding are rarely final and operative, failure to make such a decision is
not a failure which is reviewable
and hence is not a
reviewable matter for the purposes of s 13.
5.3.40 Applying
, the relationship between conduct relating to the
making of a decision and s 13 is more complex. If decisions made in the
of a proceeding are rarely final and operative and hence are rarely
decisions for the purposes of the
, conduct for the purposes of making
those decisions is prima facie not conduct for the purposes of making a decision
for the purposes
. Hence such conduct is not a reviewable
matter and does not fall within the scope of the power which s 13 confers.
However, if the
conduct occurs within the course of a proceeding which leads to
an operative, reviewable decision, and if the decision to which it
relates is an
essential step in the reasoning or process which leads to the reviewable
decision, it may be conduct for the purpose
of making a reviewable decision and
reviewable on that basis. Hence it could be a reviewable matter for the purposes
of s 13. Where
the conduct which occurs in the course of a proceeding only
relates to a decision which is not an essential step in the reasoning
which leads to the final decision, it is unlikely to be conduct for the purposes
and is unlikely to be a reviewable matter for the purposes of
5.3.41 Besides,
drew a distinction between substance and
procedure, holding that procedural decisions are conduct rather than decisions
for the purposes
. If that reasoning is applied to the
, review of such decisions is review of conduct under s 18 rather than
review of a decision under s 17. Reviewable conduct may and
indeed is likely to
arise in the course of a proceeding. As procedural decisions are conduct, they
can be reviewed whether or not
they are in any sense final and operative as long
as the procedure relates to a final and operative
5.3.42 To sum up, adopting the interpretation of decision which was upheld in
deprives s 13 of much of its effect.
interpretation of decision takes from the Court the power to consider many types
of application to review matters arising
in the course of a proceeding, greatly
reducing the importance of the power which s 13 grants to dismiss such
applications. There
will be relatively few cases, mostly dealing with procedural
issues, to which the power it confers to dismiss a premature action
will apply.
That is inconsistent with the drafting of s 13. The section assumes the
correctness of a broader interpretation of decision
in which decision extends to
decisions made in the course of a proceeding as well as the final, operative
decision which results
from the proceeding.
5.3.43 The fact that s 13 is based on a broader interpretation of decision
than the one which
adopted suggests that the drafters of the
rejected the narrow interpretation of decision adopted in
. However, as noted above, the Supreme Court has applied that narrow
interpretation to the
5.3.44 More importantly, if
accepted, there may be little point in retaining s 13 in its current form. As
shown above, if decision is interpreted as final
and operative decision, the
review in the course of a process is for the most part
limited to review of conduct, that is of procedural issues. Therefore, the
has little need for a power to dismiss applications for review of decisions and
failure to make decisions on the grounds that
they are premature. This raises
the issue of whether s 13 should be amended to reflect the interpretation of
decision adopted in
or whether the definition of decision should be
amended to make it clear that the narrow interpretation of decision adopted in
does not apply in Tasmania.
Handling premature applications for review
– the Bond rule or the s 13 discretion
5.3.45 Whether we should amend s 13 to reflect the
interpretation
of decision or whether we should amend the definition of decision to reject the
interpretation and retain s 13 in its present form depends on which
is the better approach to dealing with premature applications
for review. The
approach is a rule-based approach in that it adopts the rule that
reviewable decisions be final and operative or required by the
legislation so as
to rule out challenges to decisions made in the process of arriving at a final
and operative decision, especially
decisions on questions of fact. By limiting
reviewable decisions to decisions which are operative in that they alter a
legal position, the
interpretation seeks to rule out
the possibility of multiple challenges to a process leading to an operative
decision. In this way,
it seeks to rule out premature challenges and challenges
designed to frustrate and slow down government decision-making.
5.3.46 Section 13, rather than adopting a general rule, requires the judges
to consider each application for review during the process
on its merits. In
determining whether an application must be dismissed, the Court must take into
account some very broad considerations
such as the orderly conduct of the
administrative process in question, the balance of convenience and the interests
of justice. These
matters require the exercise of judgment, so that reasonable
judges will often disagree about the result.
5.3.47 There are a number of good reasons for preferring s 13 to
as a means of preventing premature applications for review. Firstly, experience
in applying
suggests that it has not solved
the problem of premature actions or simplified the law. The Federal Court has
often been reluctant
to interpret Bond as a rule-based approach in which:
• substantive decisions which are final and operative or required by
the statute are reviewable and those which are not final
and operative or
required by the legislation are unreviewable; and
• procedures are reviewable if they relate to the making of a final and
operative decision.
5.3.48 Instead, the Court has tended to weigh general considerations such as
the impact or lack of impact of a decision on the applicant
and the likely
impact of review on the administrative process in determining whether decisions
or procedures are reviewable.
Bond and determining which substantive
decisions are reviewable
5.3.49 According to
, not all substantive decisions are
reviewable.
held that reviewable decisions are decisions for which
provision is made by or under legislation. Usually such decisions are final
operative in the sense that they involve a final determination of the issue of
fact to be determined:
That answer is that a reviewable ‘decision’ is one for which
provision is made by or under a statute. That will generally,
but not always,
entail a decision which is final or operative and determinative, at least in a
practical sense, of the issue of fact
falling for consideration. A conclusion
reached as a step along the way in a course of reasoning leading to an ultimate
would not ordinarily amount to a reviewable decision, unless the
statute provided for the making of a finding or ruling on that point
so that the
decision, though an intermediate decision, might accurately be described as a
decision under an
5.3.50 The passage appears to adopt a simple definition of a reviewable
decision in that a decision is reviewable if it is authorised
or required by
statute, or to use the words of Mason CJ, quoted above, is ‘one for which
provision is made by or under a statute’.
Such decisions are determinative
in that they determine an issue which a statutory provision gives an official
the power to determine,
sometimes as a step in a process to a final decision.
They are operative in the sense that they have some legal consequences, although
they do not necessarily have any legal consequences for the aggrieved person
challenging them.
5.3.51 Complex legal processes may contain many such provisions and hence, on
this interpretation, may give a litigant a number of
opportunities to bring
challenges to what is essentially the one administrative process. Taken
literally, the passage does not appear
to rule out such multiple challenges. It
points out that most decisions for which provision is made under a statute will
and operative or determinative of the issue falling for consideration.
But if the statute provides for the making of a finding or
ruling on a point
which is merely a step leading to the ultimate decision, that finding is a
decision under an enactment and reviewable.
The decision that Bond Corp, the
licensees in the
case, were no longer fit and proper persons to hold
a broadcasting licence was a decision which the statute required as a step in
the process to a final decision. Because the statute required it, it was
reviewable.
5.3.52 To the extent that
sought to limit the possibility of
challenges during the process rather than at its end, permitting review of all
decisions which
the legislation requires as steps in the process of making the
final decision may operate inconsistently with the spirit even if
inconsistent with the letter of the decision.
5.3.53 Courts applying
have not always
applied the simple understanding of reviewable decision set out above where it
leaves litigants free to bring multiple
actions challenging the different steps
in a complex statutory procedure.
Edelsten v Health Insurance Commission
is a good example. That case involved challenges to the Health Insurance
Commission’s review of Dr Edelsten’s medical
practice for
over-servicing. The legislation, the
Health Insurance Act 1973
out a complicated procedure for investigating allegations of over-servicing. The
applicant challenged two decisions which
were made as part of that process. The
first was a decision to refer the matter to the Minister or the Minister’s
under reg 3(2)(b) of the
Health Insurance Commission
Regulations
. The power to refer to the Minister or the Minister’s
delegate arose under reg 3(2)(b) if an investigation showed that there
sufficient evidence to warrant referral of the case to a disciplinary committee
established under the
Health Insurance Act
. The second was a decision of
the delegate, who after receiving the referral, decided that the matter should
be referred to a disciplinary
committee. He had an implied power to refer
matters to a committee under
Health Insurance Act 1973
which required a committee to consider matters which the Minister (or the
Minister’s delegate) referred to it.
5.3.54 Both the decisions which the applicant sought to have reviewed were
made under statutory powers, the one express and the other
implied. Both
decisions were legally operative in that they were legally required steps in the
process of determining whether a medical
practitioner was over-servicing. They
were also steps ‘along the way in a course of reasoning leading to an
ultimate decision’.
that fact does not rule out review where, according to Mason CJ, ‘the
statute provided for the making of a finding or ruling
on that point so that the
decision, though an intermediate decision, might accurately be described as a
decision under an
enactment’.
it had simply applied the passage from Mason CJ’s judgment quoted above,
the Full Court of the Federal Court could
have come to the conclusion that both
decisions were final and operative in the relevant sense and reviewable. Steps
along the way
in the making of these decisions were the decision to compare a
computer analysis of the applicant’s use of certain procedures
of other doctors to determine whether the applicant may have over serviced and
similar decisions about what constituted
evidence of over servicing. Decisions
such as these would not have been reviewable under Mason CJ’s
5.3.55 However, the Full Court of the Federal Court decided that neither
decision was reviewable because neither had any legal effect
on the applicant
Edelsten, implying that a decision was final and operative only if it had a
legal effect on the applicant’s
rights or legitimate expectations:
No rights of Dr Edelsten are affected by Dr Nearhos’s decision (the
decision to refer the matter to the Minister or the Minister’s
under regulation 3(2)(b) of the Health Insurance Commission Regulations), nor
does any ‘legitimate expectation’
arise from it. During the course
of the investigations being made by Dr Nearhos, Dr Edelsten spent much time and
energy in supplying
information to Dr Nearhos and other officers of the
Commission. This action by Dr Edelsten can be understood, but that action does
not ‘constitute rights of Dr Edelsten’ in any relevant sense. Dr
Edelsten was not required by law to take that action
or to give any information
or explanation. The legal ‘rights’ of Dr Edelsten were not affected
by what the officers did.
Dr Edelsten could have refused to co-operate and in so
doing would not have committed any offence. For similar reasons, neither did
subsequent decision of Dr Dash to refer, as delegate of the Minister, the matter
to the Committee pursuant to s. 82 affect any
rights of Dr Edelsten or give rise
to any legitimate expectation. Indeed, even when the Minister or his delegate
refers a matter
to the Committee pursuant to s. 82, the Committee, though bound
by s. 94 to consider the matter, may decide no more than that Dr
Edelsten may
have rendered excessive services (s. 94(c)). But the Committee is not empowered
to decide at that preliminary stage
whether Dr Edelsten has or has not rendered
excessive services, simply whether he may have rendered excessive services. It
when the Committee reaches an affirmative view on that question that it
is required to conduct a hearing into the matter (s. 94(j)
and (k)). The
machinery of the
Health Insurance Act
then comes into operation,
requiring the Committee to give notice of the hearing to Dr Edelsten and
particulars of the matter to
which the hearing relates
; empowering it to
issue summonses to Dr Edelsten and others for the production of documents and
the giving of evidence at the hearing;
and giving Dr Edelsten the right to legal
representation at the hearing which must be conducted in
5.3.56 The Federal Court justified this interpretation of
pointing to its underlying rationale rather than to any particular words in the
The rationale underlying Bond is that Parliament could not have intended the
Judicial Review Act
to be a vehicle for judicial review of every decision
of a decision-maker under a Commonwealth enactment. Some decisions will have
real impact upon a person’s rights, privileges or obligations; some will
have no such impact, whilst others are mere stepping
stones which may lead
ultimately to the making of a decision which does affect the person’s
5.3.57 This interpretation reads the judgments in
in the light of the facts of the case, as well as its assumed
rationale, in that the decisions found to be final and operative in
were decisions which altered Bond Corporation’s legal position, while
those that were unreviewable did not. The finding
that Bond Corporation was not
a fit and proper person to hold a broadcasting licence enlivened the power of
the Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal to cancel its licence or to impose
conditions on it. Hence it was reviewable. However, the decision that Bond was
fit and proper person to hold a broadcasting licence had no effect on
anyone’s legal position. It was only a step on the way
to making the
decision that Bond Corporation was not a fit and proper person to hold such a
licence. As a result, it was not reviewable.
5.3.58 The Federal Court has not consistently taken into account the impact
of the decision on the legal position of the parties,
sometimes accepting that
it is sufficient that the decision, although not finally determining the rights
of the parties, is empowered
by the relevant statute and hence falls within the
conclusion that ‘the statute provided for the making of a
finding or ruling on [the] point so that the decision, though an
intermediate
decision, might be described as a decision under an
enactment’.
Gold Mines Ltd v Dep President B M Forrest of the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal & Ors
is a case in point. In that case, the applicant sought review of a decision
of the AAT staying a decision of the ASC with respect
to the purchasing of
shares in a takeover battle until it had reviewed that decision on the merits.
The Federal Court held that it
had jurisdiction to review the staying order
although that order did not finally determine the issue between the parties but
the decision of the ASC until the final decision was made.
5.3.59 Unlike
, the court in
did not openly take
into account the impact of the decision on the parties, simply applying the
words of Mason CJ’s judgment
which suggest that intermediate decisions are
reviewable if the statute in question provides for them. However, stay orders
a substantial impact on the legal position of the parties. A refusal to
grant a stay order in a case such as
, in which the challenged
decision of the ASC was a decision to permit Otter to buy more shares in a
company the subject of a takeover
bid, may effectively decide the case because
Otter may have acted on the permit before the challenge to the permit was
decided. In
those circumstances, it is not surprising that the Court decided
that the stay order was reviewable.
5.3.60 Similarly, the Queensland Supreme Court in
Vega Vega v Hoyle &
held that two enquiries under the
Hospital and Health Boards Act 2011
(Qld) into the practice of Dr Vega Vega as a specialist urologist at the
Rockhampton Hospital were reviewable decisions under the
Judicial Review Act
(Qld). Applying
, the two reports were reviewable because
they were determinative of the factual issues involved and were necessary
preconditions
to the making of a direction under
Hospital and
Health Boards Act 2011
(Qld) with respect to the delivery of medical
services at the hospital in question. Although there was no obligation to issue
a direction
on the basis of the reports, no direction could be made without
taking them into account. As they were required under the legislation
than mere administrative steps along the way to the making of a reviewable
decision, they were
reviewable.
5.3.61 As in
, the Court arrived at this decision without
considering the impact of the reports on the rights of the applicant. However,
clear from other parts of the judgment that the Court considered that the
making of the reports did have an impact on the rights
of the applicant,
especially his right to
5.3.62 In other cases, the fact that a decision had a substantial impact on
the rights of the applicant was held to be sufficient
reason to hold that the
decision was reviewable, even though the decision was made in the context of an
on-going procedure. In
held that a decision made in the examination of a bankrupt that the bankrupt had
to answer a particular question was a reviewable
decision because of the
potential such decisions had to infringe the bankrupt’s rights. Allowing
the question to be put was
a decision made under an enactment because the
Bankruptcy Act
(Cth) regulated the examination of a bankrupt
and compelled the bankrupt to answer questions. The Court held that the decision
substantive and hence reviewable because the questions might require the
disclosure of confidential information or require the bankrupt
to incriminate
himself or herself or have some other negative impact on the bankrupt’s
legal position.
Bond and the review of procedural decisions
held that s 6 of the
providing for the
review of conduct permitted the review of procedures rather than of substantive
decisions. However, it did not
impose any obvious limits on the review of
procedures to rule out the possibility of a number of reviews of different steps
same procedure. In particular it did not adopt a rule similar to that
adopted with respect to substantive decisions, limiting review
to a final review
after the procedure is completed except where the statute clearly contemplated
other possibilities for review.
5.3.64 An ambiguity in
with respect to the review of procedures,
especially procedural decisions, has opened up some scope for limiting
procedural reviews.
The key judgment is that of Mason CJ as he drew the now
generally accepted distinction between review of substantive decisions under
and the review of procedural questions as conduct under s 6. In his argument for
limiting s 5 to the review of substantive decisions
he argued that if procedural
decisions were reviewable as decisions under s 5, it would leave little to be
reviewed under s 6 as
This strongly
implies that procedural decisions are to be reviewed under s 6 as conduct and
that procedural decisions are likely
to form the bulk of the matters to be
reviewed under s 6. In support of this view, he gives an example of a procedural
decision reviewable
as conduct, the decision to grant an
adjournment.
5.3.65 However, later in his judgment, Mason CJ
strongly suggests that procedural decisions are not reviewable per se as conduct
s 6. He argues that s 6 allows for review of actions taken in the conduct
of proceedings and that it allows for the review of procedural
decisions only
incidentally, as something which precedes conduct. To support the argument, he
gives the continuation of proceedings
in a way which denies natural justice as
an example of actions with respect to procedures which are reviewable as conduct
The distinction between reviewable decisions and conduct engaged in for the
purpose of making such a decision is somewhat elusive.
However, once it is
accepted that ‘decision’ connotes a determination for which
provision is made by or under a statute,
one that generally is substantive,
final and operative, the place of ‘conduct’ in the statutory scheme
of things becomes
reasonably clear. In its setting in s.6 the word
‘conduct’ points to action taken, rather than a decision made, for
purpose of making a reviewable decision. In other words, the concept of
conduct looks to the way in which the proceedings have been
conducted, the
conduct of the proceedings, rather than decisions made along the way with a view
to the making of a final determination.
Thus, conduct is essentially procedural
and not substantive in character. Accordingly, s.3(5) refers to two examples of
conduct which
are clearly of that class, namely, ‘the taking of evidence
or the holding of an inquiry or investigation’. It would be
strange indeed
if ‘conduct’ were to extend generally to unreviewable decisions
which are in themselves no more than steps
in the deliberative or reasoning
Accordingly, there is a clear distinction between a ‘decision’
and ‘conduct’ engaged in for the purpose of
making a decision. A
challenge to conduct is an attack upon the proceedings engaged in before the
making of the decision. It is not
a challenge to decisions made as part of the
decision-making process except in the sense that if the decisions are procedural
character they will precede the conduct which is under challenge. In relation
to conduct, the complaint is that the process of decision-making
was flawed; in
relation to a decision, the complaint is that the actual decision was erroneous.
To give an example, the continuation
of proceedings in such a way as to involve
a denial of natural justice would amount to ‘conduct’. That is not
that the final determination of the proceedings would constitute a
decision reviewable for denial of natural
5.3.66 Some decisions in the Federal Court have relied on the passages in
suggesting that what is reviewable under s 6 as conduct consists of
actions rather than decisions to deny review to procedural decisions
. For example, the Court in
Commissioner of Taxation v Beddoe
quoting the above passage,
held that directions given by the AAT to
the Commissioner of Taxation were not reviewable as decisions under s 5 because
not substantive nor as conduct under s 6 because they were simply
steps in the decision-making
5.3.67 The decision was motivated by a concern that if review of directions
given at directions hearings were permitted, it would
fragment and delay the
decision-making process unreasonably:
It is in my opinion wholly undesirable that the process contemplated by the
should be fragmented by applications seeking to challenge
intermediate directions or determinations made along the way to reaching
ultimate determination of the issue before the Tribunal, in the same way that
this Court should be reluctant to fragment the criminal
process by entertaining
applications under the
in relation to committal proceedings and,
in particular, intermediate rulings or determinations made in the course of
committal proceedings
rather than the ultimate decision to
Geographical Indications Committee v O’Connor
the Full Court of the Federal Court followed the decision in
to hold that directions given in directions hearings are not reviewable either
as decision or conduct. It endorsed the comments made
undesirability of fragmenting administrative procedures by permitting challenges
to intermediate directions or decisions
made in the process of arriving at a
final decision.
The case was
one in which the decision-maker itself sought to be joined as a party to the
proceedings to ensure that the public interest
was represented. Hence, the
decision had no impact on private rights to be weighed against the
undesirability of fragmenting administrative
procedures which could follow from
review of the direction.
5.3.69 Where a procedural decision or direction leads to a flawed process,
the passage from
quoted above makes it clear that the flawed process
may be challenged as conduct. But that does not entail that the decision or
which leads to the flawed process may be challenged as conduct because
it is not conduct in itself but according to the quoted passage,
precedes that
conduct. This line of argument is designed to rule out premature challenges and
requires the courts to wait and see
whether a direction or procedural decision
in fact leads to a flawed process rather than intervene to review the direction
on the grounds that it has the potential to lead to such a process. In
Geographical Indications Committee v O’Connor
Court of the Federal Court followed this approach in holding that a direction
could not be challenged on the grounds that
it denied natural
5.3.70 In other cases, the Court has permitted review of procedural decisions
as conduct where those decisions have had a substantial
impact on the legal
position of the parties. For example, in
Court held that a decision not to grant an adjournment in a disciplinary hearing
was reviewable as conduct under s 6 of the
, even though it was a
decision. In arriving at this decision, Kiefel J was influenced by the
seriousness of the proceedings, which
could have led to a decision to sack the
applicant and by the serious consequences for him of not having legal
representation.
5.3.71 For reasons of length, the Final Report has only considered a small
sample of cases. The sample is sufficient to show that
the Federal Court, in
, has often applied the
interpretation of
concepts such as decision and conduct in the light of broad concerns such as
whether denying review would have
a serious impact on the rights of the
applicant and whether allowing it would unreasonably fragment the administrative
process. However,
it has not adopted this approach consistently. In other cases,
the Court has interpreted
as laying down more clear-cut rules,
allowing review of substantive decisions which are final and operative or are
required by the
legislation, regardless of the impact on administration or on
the rights of the applicant.
5.3.72 The lack of consistency in approach suggests that
work well as a device for filtering out premature and disruptive challenges.
Interpreted as a rule, it permits an applicant
to challenge every step in a
process where that step is required by the legislation regardless of the impact
of each step on the
applicant. It also may permit challenges to procedural steps
and decisions as conduct, regardless of the stage in the procedure at
are brought. If
were interpreted consistently in this way, it would
not be an effective remedy for premature and disruptive applications and would
need to be supplemented by another procedure for ruling out premature and
disruptive applications which the
rules permitted, such as s 13. If
another procedure were needed, there would be little point in retaining
rather than relying on that procedure alone.
5.3.73 On the other hand, if broad considerations such as the impact on the
rights of the applicant and the possible disruption and
delay of administrative
processes are taken into account in a case-by-case assessment of whether a
substantive decision was final
and operative or merely a step along the way to
such a decision and whether a procedural decision is reviewable or not, there is
little point in retaining the
limits on the meaning of decision and
conduct. It would lead to greater clarity and consistency if the courts were
given a power
to dismiss premature and disruptive applications for review and
were directed to take these and other relevant considerations into
deciding whether an application was premature or disruptive. Section 13 was
intended to be such a power. Hence the best
solution to the problem of
preventing premature and disruptive applications is to reverse the decision in
and to retain s 13 in its current form.
5.3.74 Two other considerations support this conclusion. Firstly, the
requirement that only final and operative decisions are reviewable
does not rule
out premature challenges or prevent litigants using the law to slow down and
frustrate administrative procedures. Because
do not replace but supplement the prerogative remedies, those
remedies remain available to challenge decisions made in the course
administrative process although they are not final and operative. Hence one
may be to increase the number of challenges based on the
prerogative remedies rather than the
defeats one of the main aims of those Acts, which was to reduce reliance on the
prerogative remedies and to provide a simpler
and more effective remedy.
5.3.75 Secondly, in some cases it is advantageous to be able to challenge
decisions which are made in the course of an administrative
process whether or
not those decisions are final and operative. If it is clear that any legal error
in the making of a decision which
is not final and operative will taint the
final decision, it may be quicker and easier to permit a challenge to that
decision when
it was made rather than force the parties to wait until the final
decision has been made. Forcing the parties to wait until the final
decision has
been made may result in the overturning of a long and complex administrative
process which then has to be repeated.
does not provide a means of
distinguishing this type of case from the case in which applications for review
are being used to delay
and frustrate the administration.
Legislation to reverse the decision in
5.3.76 Because
is inconsistent with s
and because it is difficult to apply, it is advisable to
legislate to reverse it. The best way to legislate to reverse the decision
may be to amend the definition of decision in the
a provision such as the following:
Decision under an enactment includes a decision made in the course of a
proceeding under an enactment whether or not the decision
is substantive or
procedural, final and operative or required by the
5.3.77 The suggested amendment is deliberately broad enough to include all
decisions which may arise in the course of a review. Section
13 may then be used
to filter out any applications seeking review of a decision which are premature
and disruptive. The TLRI’s
view is that adopting a definition of decision
which is broad enough to include all decisions which may be made in the course
an administrative process is most likely to simplify and clarify the law.
Experience derived from
suggests that any attempt to exclude a class
of decision from review is likely to complicate the law without working
effectively
as a filter. Hence, the best way forward is to legislate to adopt a
definition of decision which is sufficiently broad to include
all decisions made
in the course of an administrative proceeding and to give the courts a broad
discretion to rule out any applications
which are premature or disruptive.
5.3.78 Aronson has suggested a similar change to the
He suggests that if such a change were adopted, it should be coupled with
amendments to the right to
so as to ensure that
applicants do not have a right to reasons with respect to every decision made in
the course of an administrative
process. This suggestion needs to be considered
because of the possibility that giving a right to reasons for all decisions made
in the course of an administrative process may impose too great a burden on the
administration.
Extending s 13 to the prerogative
5.3.79 Adopting a provision such as s 13 which
gives the Court a broad power to dismiss premature and disruptive applications
have the unintended consequence of encouraging litigants to use the
prerogative remedies rather than the
to challenge decisions made in
the course of a government process. There are two reasons for not encouraging
this result.
5.3.80 Firstly, there is no justification for it being easier to bring
premature and disruptive actions under the prerogative remedies
than under the
. Premature and disruptive applications should not be permitted
whether under the
or the prerogative remedies if it is possible to
prevent them. Secondly, as one of the aims of the
is to provide
litigants with a simple alternative to the prerogative remedies, creating
incentives to use the prerogative remedies
rather than the
avoided. That can be done by extending s 13 or a similar provision to the
prerogative remedies.
5.3.81 If, as suggested in Part 3, the prerogative remedies are incorporated
, s 13 will extend to them as a matter of course. It may be
advisable to extend the operation of s 13 to the incorporated prerogative
remedies and to extend the definition of reviewable matter under s 3 to include
any matter reviewable under a prerogative remedy
to cover matters other than
those related to decisions which are reviewable under those remedies. No other
changes would be needed.
5.3.82 If the prerogative remedies are not
incorporated into the
, this Final Report has argued that they should
be embodied in legislation re-establishing them on a firm legal
A provision giving
the Court a power similar to that in s 13 to dismiss premature and disruptive
applications should be inserted
in that legislation to prevent the remedies
being used to bring premature actions and to disrupt government processes.
Bond and uniformity
was a decision with respect to the scope of the
. The Commonwealth legislature has accepted the interpretation of the Act
and has made no attempt to reverse it.
5.3.84 Other jurisdictions which have adopted legislation similar to the
have accepted the decision in
. Section 14 of the
Judicial Review Act 1991
provides the Court with a power to
dismiss premature and disruptive applications similar to that which
confers on the Tasmanian Court. This Final Report argues that
assumes a broader interpretation of decision than that adopted in
Queensland section is similar in every relevant respect, the arguments presented
above lead to the conclusion that it too
is based on a broader interpretation of
decision. However, the Supreme Court of Queensland has applied
the Queensland Act.
Importantly, the plurality judgment of the High Court in
to that Act.
5.3.85 The ACT
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1989
does not contain a provision similar to
Judicial Review Act 1991
(Qld). In this respect it is more similar to
than to the
or the Queensland Act. Hence it is
not surprising that the ACT Supreme Court has followed
interpretation of
5.3.86 If Tasmania adopted the amendment suggested above to extend decision
to cover decisions in the course of a proceeding under
an enactment whether or
not the decision was final and operative or required by the enactment, the
meaning of the term decision in
would differ substantially from
the meaning given to that term in similar Commonwealth, Queensland and ACT
legislation. There are
advantages in a small jurisdiction such as Tasmania to
adopting the interpretation which has been accepted in other larger
Relatively few cases arise in Tasmania, so it assists Tasmanian
courts if they are able to consider cases interpreting similar legislation
other jurisdictions. The courts may face a more difficult task if Tasmania
deliberately rejects the interpretation of a term
adopted elsewhere.
5.3.87 Despite the advantages of a uniform approach to the interpretation of
terms in similar legislation in different jurisdictions,
there are good reasons
for rejecting the interpretation of decision adopted in
been followed in other jurisdictions. As argued above, the courts have not been
able to apply
with any degree of consistency and adopting a broad
interpretation of decision and relying on s 13 to dismiss premature and
applications is likely to lead to greater simplicity and consistency.
These advantages outweigh any disadvantages resulting from
going it alone.
(a) Is there a danger that the
will be used to bring premature
or disruptive applications for review? If so, what is the best method of
guarding against the danger
— limiting the type of challenges which can be
brought so as to rule out challenges which are premature and disruptive or
the courts a discretion to rule out premature and disruptive challenges?
Or do we need both methods?
(b) Should all decisions of an administrative character made under an
enactment count as decisions for the purposes of the
? Or should they
have some additional characteristics such as being ‘final and
operative’ so that decisions made early
in an administrative process are
not reviewable, making premature and disruptive challenges more difficult?
(c) If courts should have a discretion to rule out premature and disruptive
challenges, should the concept of decision under an enactment
be amended to
include a decision made in the course of a proceeding under an enactment whether
or not the decision is substantive
or procedural, final and operative or
required by the enactment?
5.3.88 Equal Opportunity Tasmania (‘EOT’) provided a submission
that addressed Question 4. It submitted that, while the
capacity of individuals
to test the legality of administrative decision-making is an important mechanism
is preventing overreach,
it is important that boundaries of review are clearly
established. EOT expressed a view that judicial review should not be used to
frustrate the procedures of the Anti-Discrimination Commissioner as established
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
5.3.89 EOT presented a number of reasons as to why this should be the case.
First, it was submitted that given the extensive review
processes outlined in
Anti-Discrimination Act
the need for judicial review is relatively
low. Second, some of the types of the decisions that might be made under the
Anti-Discrimination Act
are not of the type that should be reviewable,
namely the decision to accept a complaint and open an investigation. EOT
that such a decision does not bring finality to a decision nor does it
equate to a legally binding determination that unlawful discrimination
5.3.90 Additionally, EOT submitted that Schedule 2 of the
effect should be strengthened and clarified, so as to ensure that the
Anti-Discrimination Act
is not subject to the
5.3.91 TasWater provided a submission to the effect that
should be amended to reverse the effect of the decision in
, as suggested in the Issues Paper.
5.3.92 An anonymous submission on this issue stated that, given the power of
the court to stay or dismiss proceedings on the basis
that those proceedings
would be an abuse of process under
, there appeared to be
no real likelihood that such disruptive proceedings would be allowed. The
submission further stated that given
the significant costs involved in mounting
judicial review proceedings, it is likely that most potential applicants would
be deterred
from seeking a remedy under the
. Only the most litigious
of applicants would not wait until the substantive decision-making process was
5.3.93 The Institute’s view is that in the main the Supreme Court
possesses the necessary tools to manage disruptive or bad
faith litigants, and
that the potential for disruptive litigation should not be seen as a barrier to
reforming the
are sufficient to achieve this
5.3.94 Accordingly, the amended definition of ‘decision’ in
should seek to reverse the effect of the decision in
, which has been
inconsistently applied in practice and is arguably ineffective as a rule against
disruptive litigation. This also
represents a significant streamlining of the
5.3.95 While this would have the effect of expanding the scope of the
, it is the Institute’s view that the expanded definition would
not serve to make the court’s jurisdiction overly broad.
Rather, it would
allow judicial review to be used in circumstances where the public expects it to
be available: when their legal
position is changed.
Recommendation 3
In addition to the expansion of the definition recommended in Recommendation
Judicial Review Act 2000
should be amended to expand the
definition of ‘
decision under an enactment
’ to include
a decision made in the course of a proceeding under an enactment whether or not
the decision is substantive or
procedural, final and operative or required by
the enactment.
5.3.96 If the expanded definition of
‘decision’ in Recommendation 3 is adopted, then it will have the
effect of opening
decisions that are not final and operative to review. However,
as mentioned, it will also have the effect of reversing the decision
, eliminating a rule that has, in other jurisdictions, been difficult
to apply. That being the case it will not be necessary to amend
Further, if Recommendation 1 is adopted, then
will apply to the prerogative
remedies as a matter of course.
Decisions under an Enactment
Introduction
Sections 17
limit its scope to review of
decisions, conduct relating to the making of decisions, and failure to make a
specifies that decisions to which the
applies must be administrative and made under an enactment. Limiting
the scope of the
in these ways means that the scope of review under
it is substantially narrower than review at common law. That reflected the
of the first version of the Act, the Commonwealth
was to leave review of decisions other than administrative decisions made under
an enactment, to review under
Constitution
. It is arguable that
it is not appropriate to limit the scope of the
in these ways in
Tasmania today.
6.1.2 This Part commences by examining the definition of an enactment in the
, which is defined as an Act or statutory
It is arguable that
that definition is narrow and excludes some classes of legislation, including
local government by-laws, planning
schemes and other types of statutory plan,
from the scope of review. Possible changes designed to broaden the definition
are considered.
6.1.3 This Part then examines the approach which the courts have adopted to
determining whether a decision is made under an enactment.
The requirement that
a decision to which the
applies must be made under an enactment has
been interpreted as limiting review by reference to the legal source of the
make the decision. In this it differs from other approaches to limiting
the scope of judicial review, such as that of
Constitution
limits judicial review by reference to the person who made the decision, an
officer of the Commonwealth, or the approach adopted
R v Panel on
Take-overs and Mergers; Ex parte Datafin Plc
which defines the scope of judicial review by reference to the nature of the
decision, whether it is public or private in nature.
6.1.4 This Part then looks at the problems to which interpreting decisions
under an enactment as limiting review by reference to the
legal source of the
power to make the decision has given rise and considers possible amendments to
to overcome these problems.
6.1.5 Finally, whether the scope of judicial review under the
should be extended beyond review under an enactment to review of decisions made
under other sources of power such as the prerogative
and contract is
considered.
5: What is an enactment?
Should the definition of enactment in
the JRA be amended to include instruments as well as statutory rules and to make
it clear that local government rules and by-laws
are enactments although they
are not statutory rules?
defines an enactment as ‘an Act or
statutory rule, and includes a part of an Act or statutory rule’. In some
may be a narrow definition as there may be significant classes of
legislation, such as local government by-laws, the State Planning
Provisions and
Local Provision Schedules adopted under the
Land Use Planning and Approvals
and Marine Farming Development Plans made under
Marine Farming Planning Act 1995
which fall outside the
definition. In other ways it is broad in that it extends the definition of
enactment to prerogative legislation
applying in the State, such as Letters
6.2.2 The term ‘statutory rule’ is defined in the
statutory rule within the meaning of the
Rules Publication Act 1953
Rules Publication Act 1953
s 2 defines statutory rule as:
(a) a regulation, rule, or by-law made under the authority of an Act by the
Governor or by a rule-making authority;
(b) a proclamation or notice, or an
order-in-council, order, or other instrument that fixes the date of commencement
of an Act or
enactment or that –
(i) repeals or amends; or
(ii) extends, restricts, varies,
modifies, or affects the operation of –
the provisions, scope, or application of an Act or enactment; and
(c) an instrument of a legislative character
made in the exercise of the prerogative rights of the Crown and having force in
but does not include a regulation, rule, or by-law, or any other instrument
of a legislative character, that is made by a local authority
or by a person or
body of persons having jurisdiction limited to a district, locality, or part of
6.2.3 The definition expressly excludes local government regulations and
by-laws from the definition of an enactment. As a result,
decisions of local
authorities made under their by-laws are not reviewable under the
There does not appear to be any good reason for this, especially as other
decisions of local government made under legislation such
Government Act
(Tas) are reviewable. Hence the definition of
enactment needs to be amended to extend review to decisions of local authorities
their by-laws.
6.2.4 It is not clear whether planning provisions and marine farming
development plans fall within this definition. It depends upon
whether they can
be classed as a regulation, rule or by-law made under the authority of an Act.
They are made under the authority
of an Act, State Planning Provisions and Local
Planning Schedules being made under the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act
and Marine Farming Development Plans being made under the
Farming Planning Act 1995
. If they are rules, regulations or by-laws, then
the authorities which issue them, the
the State Planning
and the Minister
acting on the recommendation of the Marine Farming Planning Review
respectively, are rule
making authorities for the purposes of the definition because the
Publication Act
defines a rule making authority as a person
(other than the Governor) or a body of persons, whether incorporated or
unincorporated,
authorised by or under an Act to make statutory
6.2.5 Whether or not decisions under plans and
planning provisions of the types mentioned are reviewable depends upon whether
plans and planning provisions are rules, regulations or by-laws. Two
Fuller v Resource Management and Planning Appeal
Resource Planning and Development
review of decisions made under planning schemes issued under the
Planning Approvals Act 1993.
In both cases the issue was not raised, and it
was assumed that the planning schemes were enactments for the purposes of the
. If the issue had been raised, there is a reasonable possibility that
the Court would have held that planning schemes were not regulations
ruling out review.
6.2.6 It would be sensible to settle the issue by amending the
make it clear that legislative instruments which are not obviously rules,
regulations or by-laws are enactments for the purposes
way of doing that would be to define enactment as including legislative
instruments other than rules, regulations and by-laws.
could be used as a model. It defines
an enactment as including ‘an instrument (including rules, regulations or
by-laws) made
under such an Act or under such an Ordinance, other than any such
instrument that is not an enactment because of section
6.2.7 The courts have interpreted the term instrument broadly.
to qualify as an instrument for the purposes of the
, a document
must be made under an enactment, authorise decisions of an administrative
character and have the capacity to affect legal
rights and obligations. Without
qualification, this test is broad enough to give contracts made under authority
conferred by statute
the status of an instrument and hence of an enactment for
the purposes of the
To avoid this
result, the Court qualified the test by adding that a document only qualified as
an instrument if the authority which
issued it had the power to make changes to
it without the consent of the parties which it
6.2.8 The term instrument, as it has been defined, is broad enough to include
both local government by-laws and planning provisions
and schemes such as those
issued under the
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Marine Farming Planning Act 1995
6.2.9 However, the best solution may be to substitute the term instrument for
statutory rule in the
definition of enactment, bringing the
in line with the
. If that were done, it would exclude
prerogative legislation from the definition of enactment, so that decisions made
legislation would no longer be reviewable. Although prerogative
legislation is not common in Tasmania and the provision is untested,
it would be
wrong to remove it from the
. There is little doubt that prerogative
legislation was included in the definition of statutory rule incorporated from
Rules Publication Act
because in 1953, when that Act was
passed, the Australia Act had not been adopted, so that the United Kingdom
retained the power
to legislate under the prerogative for the State. That power
no longer exists
UK prerogative legislation remains applicable to Tasmania.
6.2.10 Because little UK prerogative legislation still applies in Tasmania
and because the power to enact legislation under the prerogative
of the Queen in
the right of Tasmania is rarely used, the power to review decisions under
prerogative legislation is currently not
of great importance. Because Tasmania
is no longer a colony, new prerogative legislation cannot alter the rights of
However, prerogative legislation still has potential as a means of regulating
schemes for the provision of benefits and services,
especially where there is no
intention to create a right to the benefit or
At some future time,
prerogative legislation may be used more frequently because governments are
relying more on the prerogative
than they have in the past. It would be
unfortunate if this happened after the power to review decisions under that type
of legislation
were removed from the
6.2.11 A better solution would be to add to the existing definition so that
statutory rules and instruments were both included in
the definition of
enactments to ensure that the definition covers planning provisions and schemes
as well as prerogative legislation.
It would also be sensible to include a
specific provision to the effect that local government and marine board rules
and by-laws
are enactments for the purposes of the
even though they
are not statutory rules. These changes would deal with the problems while not
changing the good features of the
current definition.
was invited with respect to the following question
Should the definition of enactment in s 3 of the
be amended to
include instruments as well as statutory rules to ensure that the definition
covers planning provisions and schemes?
Should a specific provision be added to
the definition to make it clear that local government rules and by-laws are
enactments although
they are not statutory rules?
6.2.12 The Institute received an extensive anonymous submission in response
to Question 5, directly addressing the examples in the
Issues Paper: local
government by-laws made under the
Local Government Act 1993
, the State
Planning Provisions and Local Provision Schedules adopted under the
Planning and Approvals Act
and Marine Farming Development Plans made under the
Marine Farming
Planning Act 1995
(Tas). As described above, the definition of enactment
given by the
excludes these from review.
6.2.13 The submission agreed that there is no obvious reason for by-laws to
be excluded from the definition of ‘statutory rules’
Rules Publication Act
, and that decisions under such by-laws should be
subject to judicial review. It was suggested that this could solved by amending
Rules Publication Act
rather than by amending the definition of
enactment in the
6.2.14 In respect of planning schemes under
, the submission
disputed the characterisation of
Fuller v Resource Management and Planning
Appeal Tribunal
Cameron v Resource Planning and Development
Issues Paper. These cases allowed review of decisions made under planning
schemes. As noted above at [
the question of whether planning schemes are enactments for the purposes of the
was not raised and if it had been raised, then there was a reasonable
possibility that the Court would have held that planning schemes
regulations or rules, ruling out review.
6.2.15 In response, the submission noted that planning schemes do not
authorise particular decisions outside of the framework set
This being the case, the submission contended that there is no need to address
the question of whether planning schemes are enactments
for the purposes of the
, as all relevant decisions are made under
. Instead, the
limited number of judicial review proceedings in relation to panning matters
reflects the availability of alternative
review mechanisms, such as the
Tasmanian Planning Commission.
6.2.16 In respect of Marine Farming Development Plans (‘MFDPs’),
the submission noted that while they appear similar to
planning schemes, there
are important differences. Particularly many of the MFDPs that have been made
provide authorisation to administrative
decision-makers to make decisions of
enormous significance entirely on their discretion.
6.2.17 This raises the issue of whether decisions made in accordance with an
MFDP can be validly considered to have been decisions
made under an enactment.
As there are no other means of appeal available, if decisions of this type are
not considered to be made
under an enactment then they cannot be tested.
6.2.18 Despite this, the anonymous submission did not support the suggestion
made in the Issues Paper that the definition of enactment
amended to capture MFDPs. It was argued that an MFDP does not comfortably sit
within the category of enactment, as they are not
tabled in Parliament, the
Governor General has no role in relation to them, most are drafted by individual
proponents of marine farms
and most only apply to the conduct of a single marine
farmer rather than the public at large. Additionally, MFDPs are ultimately
by the Minister on the recommendation of the Marine Farming Planning Review
Panel. Hypothetically, there are stages in the making
of an MFDP that could be
subject to judicial review, and which would be closed if the definition of
enactment was expanded to cover
6.2.19 Rather, the submission recommended that a better solution would be to
Marine Farming Planning Act
, such that it sets clear parameters
on the types of decisions that can be provided for under MFDPs. By explicitly
setting out what
decisions can be made in the
Marine Farming Planning Act
itself, it will allow those decisions to be challenged through judicial
6.2.20 The submission made similar suggestions in respect of other
legislation, including
National Parks and Reserves
Management Act 2002
National Parks and Reserved Land Regulations
. The submission’s view was that changes to the definition of
enactment would not best address issues with acts of this type,
amendments of the individual pieces of legislation, with a mind to ensuring that
there is a rigorous and transparent assessment
of all developments and
commercial uses of Tasmania’s reserved estates.
6.2.21 It is the Institute’s view that the
approach laid out by the anonymous submission would be advantageous. However, in
addressing deficiencies in the
amendments of this type cannot capture
future legislation that might be made in respect of planning and development.
Given this,
the Institute’s preference is a solution that can capture
newly developed instruments.
Recommendation
The definition of enactment in
Judicial Review Act 2000
should be amended to read:
means an Act, statutory rule or instrument, and
includes a part of an Act, statutory rule or instrument;
6.2.22 The Institute also recommends that the government consider revisiting
existing planning legislation and consider amendments
to more rigorously set out
the scope of decisions that can be made under that legislation.
Decisions under
an enactment – the current law
The source of the power to make the
6.3.1 Almost since the inception of the
‘decision made under an enactment’ has been interpreted as requiring
the Court to determine the legal source
of the power to make the decision. If an
enactment is the source of the power, the decision is reviewable under the
. If an enactment is not the source of the power, the decision is
not reviewable although it may have other types of connection to
6.3.2 Other approaches to determining whether a decision was made under an
enactment which did not focus exclusively on the source
of power to make the
decision were suggested but abandoned. In an early decision under the
Burns v Australian National University
Ellicott J suggested a test based on the core functions which the statute
imposed on the decision-maker. If the decision related to
the core functions
which the enactment imposed on the decision-maker, the decision was made under
the enactment, even if it was also
made in the exercise of contractual
Consistent with this approach, I am of the opinion that if a statutory
authority makes a decision by which a person is aggrieved,
which is made under
broad statutory powers but which lies at the very heart of those functions for
which the body was established
by statute, the courts should be slow to find
that such a decision, if administrative in character, is not made ‘under
an enactment’
simply because the occasion for the exercise of the power
arises out of a contractual situation. The clear object of the Act is to
rights on aggrieved citizens as a result of the exercise of powers conferred by
an enactment on Ministers, public servants,
statutory authorities and others. In
many cases the power exercised will be precisely stated in the legislation. In
other cases the
power to do a particular thing will be found in a broadly stated
power. The Act should not be confined to cases where the particular
precisely stated. In each case the question to be asked is one of substance,
whether, in effect, the decision is made ‘under
an enactment’ or
6.3.3 The case dealt with the dismissal of a professor. As decisions with
respect to the employment of deans and professors related
to teaching and
research, core functions of the university, Ellicott J held that the decision
was reviewable.
6.3.4 The source of power to make the decision was not irrelevant to this
test. Ellicott J pointed out that the decision in question
was made under broad
statutory powers. However, it was not the only relevant consideration. The fact
that the decision lay at the
heart of the functions which the statute
established the university to perform was also relevant to determining that the
was made under an enactment.
6.3.5 In overruling that decision, the Full Court
of the Federal Court rejected the core functions test on the grounds that it was
impossible to distinguish between the core functions of the university and other
functions which it performed. All were necessary
so that contracts of employment
with respect to those functions were equally necessary:
We cannot accept that to determine whether a decision is made ‘under an
enactment’ it is legitimate to distinguish between
decisions about matters
lying at the very heart of the existence of the appellant or its Council and
other matters. The powers vested
in the Council by s. 23 are in substance to do
whatever is necessary to control and manage the activities of the appellant. It
difficult to conceive of wider or more general powers. It is true that deans
and professors are mentioned as the first objects of
the power of appointment
conferred by that section; but we attach no importance to that circumstance. We
see no reason for distinguishing
between decisions of the Council of the
appellant relating to professors and decisions relating to its other servants. A
cannot function without its teaching staff — whether they be
deans, professors, readers, lecturers or tutors. Nor can it function
without its
other officers or servants — whether registrars, librarians, groundsmen or
security officers.
Where is the line to be drawn to determine those who perform essential
functions and those who do not? If deans and professors perform
functions, do readers, lecturers and tutors perform them also? What of the
appellant’s librarians or registrars?
Many other examples spring readily
to mind; but we need not mention them. In our opinion the particular position
held by a member
of the appellant’s staff is not itself determinative of
the question whether a decision of the Council as the governing body
appellant was made under the University Act. Our conclusion may be different if
the University Act or Statutes made by the
Council thereunder gave special
statutory status, privilege or protection to people who held high positions or
office in the appellant;
but they do not do
6.3.6 As it rejected the view that the core functions which the legislation
vested in the decision-maker could be distinguished from
its other functions,
the Full Court rejected the core functions test for a test which looked to the
source of the power. As the source
of the power relied on to dismiss Burns was
his contract of employment, the decision was made under that contract, not under
enactment. Hence the decision was not reviewable:
The primary Judge said that the word ‘administrative’ carries
with it the notion of ‘managing, executing or carrying
into effect’.
Thus if any officer or servant of the appellant could show a ground for a review
of a decision by the appellant
or its Council dismissing him or otherwise
affecting him adversely in his employment he may be entitled to apply for an
review under the
Judicial Review Act
Mindful of the
far-reaching consequences of this conclusion his Honour drew the line between
decisions about matters fundamental to
the appellant’s existence and other
decisions. But if that line of demarcation is impermissible, as we think it is,
that a vast array of decisions relating to the employment of the
appellant’s officers and servants, and any other decisions
of a managerial
or administrative nature, may be susceptible of review under the
simply because the Council’s charter
empowers it,
in effect, to do whatever is necessary to run the affairs of the appellant.
This serves to illustrate to our mind the correctness of the conclusion on
the facts of this case that the Council’s decision
to dismiss the
respondent was made under the contract of engagement of 1966 and not under the
powers conferred by s. 23 of the University
6.3.7 Since
, the Court has used a source-based test rather than
a test based on core functions or statutory purposes to determine whether a
is under an enactment. In
Glasson v Parkes Rural Distributions Pty
the High Court
applied the source of the power to make the decision
test to hold that a decision that Parkes had been overpaid under a scheme to
subsidise fuel prices in country areas was not a decision under an enactment for
the purposes of the
. In doing so, the High Court made it clear
that the source of the power was to be determined by identifying the legal power
which the decision was made, not by considering whether the decision was
made in pursuance of Commonwealth legislation or a Commonwealth
scheme. Since
, that legalistic approach has been the dominant approach to
determining whether a decision was made under an enactment.
6.3.8 Under the subsidy scheme considered in
, the Commonwealth
granted the States money under
Constitution
to be used to subsidise
fuel prices in accordance with guidelines which the Commonwealth laid down. The
State enacted legislation
to implement the scheme. Under that legislation, the
State appointed officers to determine the amount of the subsidy to be paid to
rural fuel suppliers and to determine if there had been any over-payments.
Glasson, an officer appointed under the State Act, decided
that Parkes had been
over-paid and issued Parkes with a certificate demanding repayment. Parkes
applied for review of Glasson’s
decision under the
Full Court of the Federal Court held that although the decision was made by a
State officer under State legislation, it was
a decision under a Commonwealth
enactment for the purposes of the
because it was made in
pursuance of a Commonwealth scheme set out in a Commonwealth enactment. The fact
that it could also be said
to have been made under a State law was not
On the facts of the present case, the decision of the respondent was made
under the Commonwealth Act and the Scheme and thus was made
under an enactment
Judicial Review Act
. In making the decision the respondent
acted in pursuance of the Scheme which had been formulated by the Minister
pursuant to the
Commonwealth Act. It is true that the respondent was authorised
by an appointment under the State Act, but that is beside the point.
respondent was acting in pursuance of the Scheme being an instrument under the
Judicial Review Act
. The power conferred by the State Act was a necessary
power in order to implement the Commonwealth Act. To say that the decision
also made under the
Petroleum Products Subsidy Act 1965
(NSW) would not
be to deny these
propositions.
6.3.9 In arriving at the conclusion that the decision was made under an
enactment for the purposes of the
, the Full Court of the Federal
Court held that matters other than the source of the legal power to make the
decision were relevant.
They took into account that the scheme in question was a
Commonwealth scheme which had been formulated by a Commonwealth Minister
Commonwealth legislation.
6.3.10 The High Court reversed the decision of the Full Court of the Federal
Court. In doing so, it focussed solely on the legal source
of the power to make
the decision. As the source of that power was a State law, the decision was not
made under a Commonwealth enactment
and hence was not reviewable under the
The Full Court held that the decision embodied in the certificate was made
under the Commonwealth Act and the scheme, notwithstanding
that it was also made
under the State Act. With all respect, we cannot agree. The appellant derived
his authority to give the certificate
in question from the State Act and from no
other source. He was, as the scheme envisaged, appointed under the State Act to
authorised officer, and the power which he exercised was conferred on him
by s.8(3) of that Act. The certificate derived its legal
efficacy to impose a
legal liability on the distributor entirely from the State Act, and in
particular from s.10. No action taken
under the Commonwealth Act or under the
scheme could either strengthen, or detract from, the force of the certificate
under s.8(3).
The State Act of course proceeds on the assumption that there was
in force a scheme by reference to which the amounts payable should
ascertained and an authorised officer, in giving a certificate, would be bound
to consult the scheme and to ascertain the amounts
payable in accordance with
the scheme. However, although the scheme would give the authorised officer
authoritative guidance, it
did not give him power or authority to make the
decision to issue the certificate and it was not the legal source of the rights
liabilities which the certificate created and imposed. Finally, the
certificate issued by the appellant purports to have been issued
under s.8(3) of
the State Act and closely follows the words of that section, which although
similar to are not the same as those
of cl.E2(5) of the scheme. The issue of the
certificate might have a practical effect on the rights and liabilities of the
Commonwealth
and the State inter se as measured by the scheme: it might lead to
a repayment by the distributor to the State, and thereby affect
the adjustment
of accounts between the Commonwealth and the State pursuant to ss.3 and 11 of
the Commonwealth Act and cl.E7 of the
scheme, but that does not mean that it was
issued under the scheme. When neither the Commonwealth Act nor the scheme is the
of the power to appoint the decision-maker, or the source of his power to
make the decision, or the source of the decision’s
legal effect, it cannot
be said that the decision was made under that enactment. For these reasons, we
find it impossible to say
that the certificate was issued under the authority,
or in pursuance, of the Commonwealth Act or the scheme, or that it represents
embodies a decision made under the Commonwealth Act or the scheme. It was issued
entirely under the State Act. It was not a decision
enactment’ within the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
, and it follows that the objection to the competency of the application
was rightly upheld by McGregor
, the High Court gave its imprimatur to the legal
source of the power to make the decision test for determining whether a decision
was made under an enactment. Since
, this test has been the
accepted test and the courts have worked out its implications.
6.3.12 The adoption of the legal source of the power to make the decision
test as the test for determining whether a decision was
made under an enactment
focussed attention on the problem of multiple sources of power to make the
decision. The most common form
of the problem involves a situation in which a
statute confers a general power to contract on a government agency and using
power, the agency enters into contracts and exercises contractual powers.
Are the decisions the agency makes in the exercise of powers
conferred on it
under contract made under the enactment or under the contract or under both?
Often the answer is not clear because
decision-makers rarely if ever specify the
source of power on which they relied, statute or contract. As a result, courts
deduce the answer from indirect evidence.
6.3.13 Both the judgment of Ellicott J and of the Full Court in
sought to solve the problem of multiple sources of power to make the decision.
Ellicott J’s core functions test allowed for
the possibility that a
decision could be made under an enactment even if the decision was also made
under a contract. In principle,
the source of power to make the decision test
which the majority in the Full Court adopted is also consistent with that
possibility;
there is no reason why there should not be two sources of power to
make a decision, a statutory source and a contractual source.
However, the Full
used the source of power test to rule out that possibility
because it was seen as opening up a huge range of contractual and employment
decisions to review under the
6.3.14 The High Court’s decision in
was consistent with
the approach which the Full Court of the Federal Court adopted in
, the High Court adopted a legalistic approach which led to the
conclusion that there could only be one legal source of the legal
power to make
a decision, in that case the State Act. In doing so it rejected the broader
approach of the Full Court of the Federal
Court, which held that there could be
more than one source of that power. In reaching this conclusion, the High Court
courts to apply the legal source of the power to make the decision
approach so as to rule out review where the enactment was not
the ultimate
source of the power to make the decision.
6.3.15 As a result, the courts have continued to use the source of power
theory to rule out the possibility that a decision may be
reviewable under the
where the decision was made under a contract.
However, the issue is not clear cut because the Full Court conceded in
that the decision may have been reviewable if, as could have been
the case, the terms governing dismissal had been set out in an
enactment, such
as university rules. Since
, the courts have struggled to develop
criteria for determining when a decision is made under an enactment rather than
under a contract
or other source of power.
6.3.16 The current law with respect to when a decision is ‘under an
enactment’ was laid down by the High Court in
was decided under the
Judicial Review Act 1990
(Qld) but it is accepted
that it applies to the
and it has been applied to the
6.3.17 In that case, the majority laid down a two-pronged test for
determining whether a decision was made under an enactment. Firstly,
decision had to be one which was required or authorised by the enactment and
secondly it had to change rights and obligations:
The determination of whether a decision is ‘made ... under an
enactment’ involves two criteria: first, the decision must
be expressly or
impliedly required or authorised by the enactment; and, secondly, the decision
must itself confer, alter or otherwise
affect legal rights or obligations, and
in that sense the decision must derive from the enactment. A decision will only
... under an enactment’ if both these criteria are met. It
should be emphasised that this construction of the statutory definition
require the relevant decision to affect or
rights or obligations, and it will be sufficient
that the enactment requires or authorises decisions from which new rights or
obligations
arise. Similarly, it is not necessary that the relevantly affected
legal rights owe their existence to the enactment in question.
Affection of
rights or obligations derived from the general law or statute will
6.3.18 Although
has been followed by the Tasmanian Supreme Court,
it is arguable that it does not apply to the
because of differences
between the
. The second limb of the
test requires that for a decision to be under an enactment, it must
confer, alter or otherwise affect legal rights and obligations.
That test may be
inconsistent with the scope of the
, which differs from the
in that, on one interpretation, it specifically allows review of
decisions which are legally incapable of altering or affecting legal
obligations. The definition of enactment in the
extends to a class of
legislation, legislation under the prerogative, which is no longer legally
capable of altering legal rights
and duties, permitting review of decisions made
under legislation of that
As this class of
legislation cannot authorise decisions which alter rights and duties, the
specifically allows review of a class of decisions which do not alter
rights and duties. The second limb of the
test, which requires that
to qualify as a decision made under an enactment, the decision must confer or
alter rights and obligations
is inconsistent with this aspect of the
and cannot apply to it.
6.3.19 It may be objected that decisions made under UK prerogative
legislation enacted while Tasmania was legally a British colony
rights and duties. Such decisions are decisions made under an enactment and are
reviewable under the second limb of the
test. Hence extending review
to review of decisions made under prerogative legislation does not necessarily
extend review to decisions
which cannot alter rights and duties. It simply
extends review to decisions under prerogative legislation which can and do
rights and duties, not to those decisions which cannot affect rights and
6.3.20 Because it is not clear whether
applies to the
it is necessary to consider whether it should do so. The
reinforces the decision in
that to be reviewable, a decision has to
be final and operative or required by the legislation in
The second limb of
the test, the requirement that ‘the decision must itself confer, alter or
otherwise affect legal rights
or obligations’ repeats, in different words,
requirement that decisions be final and operative or required by
the statute. Both emphasise that the decision normally must alter
position by conferring powers or changing rights and duties, although
ameliorated this requirement by stating that the decision must, at
least in a practical sense, be final and
However, the
test narrows the
test by effectively ruling out review
in cases where the decision is final and operative in a practical rather than
legal sense,
because these are cases in which rights and duties are not affected
or altered. That is unjustifiable. The importance of allowing
review where the
decision is final and operative in a practical sense is discussed
6.3.21 Although the majority decided that it was not a case of multiple
sources of power to make a decision,
sought to settle the problem of
multiple sources of power to make a decision. This problem arose in a string of
cases in which the
Federal Court was asked to review decisions made by a
statutory authority under a contract or some other general law relationship.
common feature in these cases was that the source of the authority’s power
to enter the contract or other legal relationship
was its enabling statute, but
the specific power to make the decision under challenge was set out in the
contract or other relationship,
not in the authority’s enabling
legislation.
6.3.22 Much in
was designed to resolve this problem. The majority
explicitly adopted the view that where power to make the decision under
and the rights and obligations in issue were set out in the contract
or other legal relationship rather than in the enabling statute,
the decision
was made under the contract or other relationship, not under the
The majority
overruled the decision in
Australian Capital Territory Health Authority v
Berkeley Cleaning Group Pty
and the cases which
relied upon it to the extent that they decided that decisions made under a
contract which was authorised by an
enactment were made under the enactment for
the purposes of the
6.3.23 Having decided that where there are multiple sources of power for a
decision, a decision was not under an enactment if it were
made in the exercise
of powers conferred by a contract or other legal relationship rather than by the
enactment, it may seem that
the Court had no reason to lay down a general test
for determining when a decision was under an enactment. However, it did so for
two reasons. Firstly, a number of tests for determining whether a decision was
under an enactment had been proposed by the Federal
Court and had been
considered by the Queensland courts in
itself. The majority took the
view that some of these tests were based on an error, that of immediacy or
proximity, and sought to
correct the error by developing a test which explained
why decisions made under a contractual power were not made under an enactment
without relying on notions of immediacy or proximity.
6.3.24 The second reason was that adopting the principle that a decision was
not under an enactment if it were made in the exercise
of powers conferred by a
contract or some other legal relationship was of no assistance in
itself because in that case the Court held that the decision under challenge was
not made under contract or other legal relationship
between Tang and the
university because there was no contract between them. Instead, the relationship
was a voluntary one which could
be terminated by either party at any
6.3.25 In adopting their two-pronged test, the
majority rejected a couple of earlier approaches to the problem in which notions
proximity played a role. The first adopted in the Federal Court, was an
approach which considered whether the enactment was the immediate
or proximate
source of the power to make the decision. It had been adopted in cases such as
Post Office Agents Association Ltd v Australian Postal
Richardson Corporation Pty Ltd v Federal Airports
Corporation
Ltd v Australian Stock Exchange
Commissioner of
6.3.26 The second, adopted in the Queensland Court of Appeal in
itself, was based on the premise that if the decision could be made by any
person in the community and the enactment in question
merely facilitated that
decision, it was not a decision under an enactment: ‘is it something that
anyone in the community could
do, which is simply facilitated by the statute, or
is it something which a person can only do with specific statutory
authority?’
6.3.27 Both the tests which were rejected attempted to deal with the problem
of multiple sources of legal power to make a decision.
The first did so by means
of a spatial analogy, arguing that for a decision to be under an enactment, the
enactment had to be the
final or proximate source of the power to make a
decision. The approach suggests a chain of powers leading to a decision. If the
enactment is the last or proximate link in the chain leading to the decision,
the decision is made under the enactment. If another
source of legal power such
as a contract is the last or proximate link in the chain leading to the
decision, the decision is made
under the contract, not the enactment. The
majority rejected this solution on the grounds that proximity tests are
problematic and
that using one in this situation deflected attention from the
interpretation of the Queensland
Judicial Review Act
light of its subject, scope and
6.3.28 The second proposed solution to the problem of multiple sources which
the majority rejected attempted to deal with the problem
by considering the
nature of the power rather than its source. If the power was one which any legal
person could exercise, simply
by virtue of being a legal person, then making a
decision in reliance on that power was not a decision under an enactment for the
purposes of the Queensland Act, even if the decision-maker gained the power to
make the decision from an enactment. So, for example,
if an enactment conferred
the power to enter into contracts on a statutory authority, decisions made in
the exercise of that power
were not decisions under an enactment because that
power, the power to contract, is shared with a few exceptions such as minors,
with every person in the community.
6.3.29 The Court rejected the test for two reasons. Firstly, the test
required the Court to determine which of multiple sources of
power was the
source of the power to make the decision. Only after that power had been
identified could one ask whether it was a
power shared with every member of the
community. The Court argued that seeking to identify the true source of power to
make the decision
suffered from the defects of the proximity approach,
presumably detracting attention from the meaning of the words interpreted in
light of the subject, scope and purpose of the Act. To that extent it did not
solve the problem of multiple
Secondly, the
majority argued that the cases relied on to support the test, including its own
earlier decision of
6.3.30 The rejection of proximity tests led to a
broad interpretation of the first limb of the court’s two-pronged test,
requirement that the decision must be expressly or impliedly required or
authorised by the enactment. It is broad enough to permit
review where there are
two sources of power for the decision in question, such as a statutory power to
contract and a contract in
the exercise of that power because the making of the
contract and hence the decision under the contract are both authorised by the
6.3.31 The majority formulated the second limb of the test in a couple of
ways. They stated in one formulation that the second limb
required that
‘the decision in question derive from the enactment the capacity to affect
legal rights and obligations’,
so that ‘legal rights and obligations
[are] affected not under the general law but by virtue of the
and in another
that ‘the decision must itself confer, alter or otherwise affect legal
rights or obligations, and in that sense
the decision must derive from the
enactment’.
of these formulations rules out the possibility of review where there are
multiple sources of power. If a decision is made
under a contract, and a statute
confers the power to contract, the decision, to the extent that it affects
rights and obligations,
does so under the general law rather than under the
6.3.32 Hence, when applied to the problem of multiple sources, the two limb
test leads to the conclusion that a bare statutory power
to contract does not
entail that contracts made in the exercise of the power are made under an
a statutory grant of a bare capacity to contract does not suffice to endow
subsequent contracts with the character of having been
made under that
enactment. A legislative grant of capacity to contract to a statutory body will
not, without more, be sufficient
to empower that body unilaterally to affect the
rights or liabilities of any other party. The power to affect the other
rights and obligations will be derived not from the enactment but
from such agreement as has been made between the parties. A decision
into a contract would have no legal effect without the consent of the other
party; the agreement between the parties is
the origin of the rights and
liabilities as between the
6.3.33 The two-limb test does not depend upon notions of proximity. However,
it has the disadvantage that it limits the scope of review
to cases in which
rights and obligations are affected, excluding review where a person has an
interest rather than a right at stake.
required or authorised by an enactment which does not affect rights and duties
but does affect interests
6.3.34 As noted above, the High Court in
, adopted a two-pronged
test for determining whether a decision was made under an enactment. The second
limb of the test was that
the decision must itself confer, alter or otherwise
affect legal rights or obligations, and in that sense the decision must derive
from the enactment. This test entails that if the decision does not affect any
legal rights or obligations, but does affect a party’s
interests, review
is not available. Hence Tang herself was not entitled to
judicial review because the decision to exclude her from her degree did
affect her rights, as she had no contract with the university and no other
enforceable legal right to pursue the
Although Tang had an
expectation that she would not be excluded from her degree without the proper
procedures being followed, that
expectation alone did not entitle her to
judicial review.
Decisions made
under the general law but given effect to by statute
NEAT Domestic Trading Pty Limited v AWB
is the leading example of a case of this type. In this case, the AWB, a
corporation incorporated under the Corporations Law (Vic)
had the power under
Wheat Marketing Act 1989
(Cth) to refuse to permit the export
of bulk wheat. If the AWB refused to permit the export of wheat, the Wheat
Export Authority,
a government agency charged with approving all Australian
wheat exports, had no power to permit the export of the wheat in question.
6.3.36 When the AWB refused to permit NEAT to export durum wheat, NEAT sought
review of the decision under the
. The majority refused the
application for review on a number of grounds, including the ground, important
for present purposes, that
there was no decision under an enactment as required
. They came to this conclusion because the decision in
question was made under the Corporations Law and that was not a decision under
an enactment:
The Authority may not give consent without AWBI’s prior approval in
writing. That approval was a condition which must be satisfied
Authority might give its consent. It was, in that sense, a condition precedent
which had to be met before the Authority
could lawfully exercise the power which
the 1989 Act conferred on it to give its consent to the proposed export[31].
Unlike the Authority, AWBI needed no
statutory power to give it capacity to provide an approval in writing. As a
company, AWBI had
power to create such a document. No doubt the production of
such a document was given statutory significance by s 57(3B) but that
sub-section did not, by implication, confer statutory authority on AWBI to make
the decision to give its approval or to express that
decision in writing. Power,
both to make the decision, and to express it in writing, derived from
AWBI’s incorporation and
the applicable companies legislation[32]. Unlike
a statutory corporation, or an office holder such as a Minister[33], it was
necessary nor appropriate to read s 57(3B) as impliedly conferring those
6.3.37 This reasoning suggests that
review may not be available in
cases where private law or the common law grants the power to make a decision
but a statute confers
regulatory or administrative effects on that decision
which otherwise it would not have.
Private law
legislation and decisions under an enactment
6.3.38 There was one problem which the High Court in
tackle. As noted above, the Court held that the AWB’s decision to veto an
export licence was not reviewable because
it was not made under the
Marketing Act
but under the Corporations Law. The majority did not explain
why that fact ruled out review, because the Corporations Law is an enactment
hence the decision was made under an enactment. Some decisions made under the
Corporations Law are excluded from
but they do not
include decisions of the type considered in
. If the judges in
had addressed the issue, they no doubt would have concluded that as
the Corporations Law in question was the Victorian version of
that Act, the
decision was made under Victorian law, rather than a Commonwealth enactment.
, review of a decision made under State legislation was
not available under the
6.3.39 Such an approach ducks a more important issue. Although the
on their face apply to all administrative decisions
made under an enactment, it is arguable that there is a class of legislation
which is not an enactment for the purposes of those Acts. This class of
legislation is dealing with private law matters and is designed
to regulate the
relationships between citizens, rather than government. It usually binds
government when government enters into the
class of transaction or relationship
being regulated, but that is not its major purpose.
6.3.40 The issue of whether an administrative decision made under this type
of enactment arose under the
in the case of
King v Director of
King sought review of the Director of Housing’s decision not to renew
her lease and to serve her with a notice to vacate. The
Director of Housing
argued that the decision not to renew her lease and to serve on her a notice to
vacate were not made under an
enactment but under the general law. The case was
decided on the assumption that the
Director of Housing power to let out public housing but that the terms and
conditions of the lease, including the ways in
which leases were terminated,
were determined by the general law, including the
Residential Tenancy Act
Whilst the authority for the Director to act in the way he did comes from the
HA, the force or effect of the decisions does not. The
decisions derived their
force from the contractual relationship between the parties, as that
relationship is governed by the RTA.
... The decisions operate because of the
general law.
6.3.41 Although the judgment states that the decisions were made under the
general law, that law includes an enactment, the
Residential Tenancy Act
As the above passage makes clear, that Act governed the relationship between
the parties. All the steps which the Director took were
determined by that Act,
rather than by the terms of the lease. Under the Act, when a fixed term lease
expires, the landlord has three
options. She or he can do nothing. In that case,
the Act imposes a lease for no fixed term on the parties and determines the
on which such a lease may be
terminated.
She may renew the
or may serve a notice
to vacate on the tenant.
Director chose the third option and served a notice to vacate.
6.3.42 Given that the decision to issue a notice
to vacate was made under an enactment, the
Residential Tenancy Act
it is not clear why it was not reviewable under the
. There was no
suggestion that it was not administrative. The Director of Housing or his or her
delegate made it in the exercise of
their authority to administer public housing
in Tasmania.
6.3.43 The Full Court held that the decision to serve a notice to vacate was
final and operative in the sense required by
That holding was
clearly correct. Serving the notice to vacate was final and operative in that it
prevented a tenancy for no fixed
term from coming into effect and was a
precondition to a magistrate’s having the power to make an order for
vacant possession
under s 45 of the Act.
6.3.44 Although the issue was not discussed, the decision to issue a notice
to vacate, considered as a decision under the
Residential Tenancy Act
met the requirements of the
test for determining whether a decision
was made under an enactment.
That test has two limbs: ‘first, the decision must be expressly or
impliedly required or authorised by the enactment; and,
secondly, the decision
must itself confer, alter or otherwise affect legal rights or obligations, and
in that sense the decision
must derive from the
enactment.’
6.3.45 The decision meets the first limb of that
test because the
Residential Tenancy Act
authorised a person in the
position of a landlord, such as the Director, to issue a notice to vacate when a
tenancy expired. Secondly,
the decision, exercising a power which the
Residential Tenancy Act
conferred, altered or affected legal rights in
that it prevented a tenancy of no fixed term from coming into effect by
operation of
that Act, and was a precondition to a magistrate having the power
to issue a notice to give vacant possession under s 45 of the Act.
6.3.46 Although the decision, considered as a
decision under the
Residential Tenancy Act
qualified as a
decision under an enactment under the
Full Court decided that it was not reviewable because:
A decision not to extend or renew the lease beyond that expiry date has force
because of the ordinary relationship between parties
in that position. The
service of the notice to vacate is to be treated in the same way. The decision
derives its force from the relationship
as governed by the RTA. As the primary
judge said, the decision to serve the notice to vacate was a decision that any
landlord could
make, rather than a decision deriving from the HA. That the RTA
governed the circumstances in which the Director had to deal with
the expiry of
the lease, and the issue of a notice to vacate, is irrelevant. The decisions
operate because of the general
6.3.47 The reasons assume that decisions made under the general law
exercising powers which are not governmental but which any person
may possess,
are not reviewable under the
, even if they meet the
tests for decisions under an enactment. That assumption is based on
the further assumption that there is a class of general law statutes
not enactments for the purposes of the
, although there is nothing in
the wording of the
which indicates that that is the case.
Is the source of power approach the
appropriate approach for determining whether a decision is made under an
6.4.1 As explained above, the Full Court of the Federal Court and the High
Court in two early cases,
that a decision is made under an enactment for the purposes of the
if the enactment is the source of the power to make a
In doing so, the
courts rejected broader approaches, an approach in which a decision was made
under an enactment if the decision
related to the core functions for which the
enactment provided and an approach in which a decision was made under an
enactment if
it was made in pursuance of the enactment.
6.4.2 The High Court and the Full Court of the Federal Court rejected these
two tests because they did not give clear answers and
required difficult line
drawing. The Full Court of the Federal Court made this particularly clear in
, arguing that because the appointment of groundsmen and security
guards was as important to the proper functioning of a university
appointment of deans and professors, it was not possible to say that one related
to the core functions of the university as
set out in its enabling Act and the
other did not.
6.4.3 The source of the power to make the decision as a test for whether a
decision was made under an enactment anticipates
. By focusing on the
statute as the legal source of power to make the decision, it implies that the
decision must be required by the
statute. Decisions made in the process of
arriving at a final decision are usually not required by the statute in
question. They
are merely steps in the chain of reasoning leading to the final
decision which the statute requires. Hence, they may not be reviewable
6.4.4 If this is the case, it is arguable that the
source of power test, like the
interpretation of decision, is
inconsistent with s 13 of the
, which gives the Supreme Court a broad
power to dismiss applications for review which are premature or disruptive. For
reasons set
s 13 assumes an interpretation of decision which is broader than a decision
which is final and operative and required by the statute
and extends to
decisions made in the course of a proceeding leading a final decision. For the
same reasons, the source of power test,
to the extent that it excludes decisions
not required by the enactment from review, is inconsistent with s 13. The
amendment to the
Act designed to overrule
which reads:
Decision under an enactment includes a decision made in the course of a
proceeding under an enactment whether or not the decision
is substantive or
procedural, final and operative or required by the enactment,
overrules the source of power to make the decision test to the extent
necessary to resolve the inconsistency.
6.4.5 As noted above, the High Court and the Full Court of the Federal Court
adopted the source of power test because it provided
clearer answers. Although
it does provide clearer answers, the source of power approach is potentially
restrictive. Although not
specifically referring to the source of power
approach, in
Ellicott J warned that adopting restrictive
interpretations of terms such as decision made under an enactment might defeat
the purposes
. He was especially concerned that narrow
interpretations would rule out review of decisions made under broad grants of
power to perform
functions such as establish a university and restrict the Act
to review of powers to make a particular decision or do a specified
The clear object of the Act is to confer rights on aggrieved citizens as a
result of the exercise of powers conferred by an enactment
on Ministers, public
servants, statutory authorities and others. In many cases the power exercised
will be precisely stated in the
legislation. In other cases the power to do a
particular thing will be found in a broadly stated power. The Act should not be
to cases where the particular power is precisely stated. In each case
the question to be asked is one of substance, whether, in effect,
the decision
is made ‘under an enactment’ or
6.4.6 Ellicott J’s fears have been realised. The source of power to
make the decision approach has led to a situation in which
the Act can rarely be
used to challenge decisions made in the exercise of broad grants of power such
as the power considered in
, which was essentially the power to
establish and run a university. To bring decisions made in the exercise of such
powers within
the scope of the
arguable that a broader test is needed for determining whether a decision was
made under an enactment, such as Ellicott’s
core functions test or the
test of whether a decision was made pursuant to an enactment which the Full
Court of the Federal Court
6.4.7 The reason for this is that broad grants of power such as the power to
establish and run a university give the recipient of
the power authority to
enter a wide range of legal relationships for the specified purpose, in this
case the running of a university.
But it may not specify the decisions which the
recipients of the power may make or the actions which they may perform, except
the broadest terms. The broad grant of power will often be used to create
other legal instruments which define powers and procedures
more specifically and
authorise particular decisions and actions.
6.4.8 Those legal instruments may take the form of subordinate legislation.
An agency which is given broad powers to run an institution
or to perform a wide
range of functions is usually given power to make subordinate legislation for
that purpose. That legislation
is normally an enactment for the purposes of the
. If it confers the power to make a particular
decision, that decision will be made under an enactment for the purposes of the
of the power to make a decision test and will therefore be reviewable.
For example, in
, the Full Court of the Federal Court recognised
that if the university had used its rule making power to enact rules governing
terms on which staff were to be employed and if those terms had been
incorporated into Burns’s contract, they would have been
the source of the
power to make the decision to sack Burns. If that had been the case, the
decision to sack Burns would have been
a decision made under an enactment and he
would have been able to challenge
6.4.9 However, an agency given a broad grant of power to run an institution
or implement a programme may not be bound to enact subordinate
legislation to
govern its exercise of its powers. It may choose to exercise its powers by
delegating powers to its officers or committees,
by adopting policy documents
setting out how it will exercise its powers and by entering into contracts and
other legal relationships.
Griffith University had chosen to exercise its powers
in this way in
In these situations, the contract or other legal relationship, not the broad
grant of power is likely to be the immediate source
of the rights and duties of
the parties and of any power to make a decision affecting those rights and
duties. This raises the issue
of whether a decision is made under an enactment
when there are two sources of power involved in the making of the decision, the
grant of power and a contract or other legal relationship entered into in the
exercise of that power.
was invited with respect to the following question
Is the source of power approach the appropriate approach for determining
whether a decision is made under an enactment?
6.4.10 Community Legal Centres Tasmania (‘CLC Tas’) made a
submission on this question. CLC Tas expressed concern that
the decision in
has significantly affected the ability of individuals to hold
government decision-makers, and those exercising public functions,
accountable
for their actions.
6.4.11 CLC Tas strongly recommended that rather than focusing on the source
of power, the legal test should instead focus on whether
the powers or functions
being exercised can be seen as having a public function, referring to the
decision in
. In their view, if the public function test was
adopted in Tasmania it would allow for review of both decisions made pursuant to
legislation and decisions where it was considered that there was a public duty
or power being exercised.
6.4.12 In relation to the issue of public housing, CLC Tas noted that
residents of Tasmania’s 13,450 social housing properties
are exempt from
seeking judicial review even in circumstances where they have been served a
‘no grounds’
An eviction of this
6.4.13 The CLC Tas submission noted that guidance on the likely breadth of a
public function test could be found in Victoria’s
Charter of Human
Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Section 4 of the
sets out a definition of public authority as
including entities whose ‘functions are or include functions of a public
and then goes on to provide a non-exhaustive list of factors that
may establish whether a function is of a public nature. This has
the effect of
ensuring that the reach of the
extends to private or
not-for-profit bodies, such as Victoria’s community housing providers.
6.4.14 In the Institute’s view, the source
of power approach has led to a situation in which the
can rarely be
used to challenge decisions made in the exercise of broad grants of power, as in
the case of
. This issue should be addressed directly by amending
such that a new test is implemented. A test of this type could be
modelled on s 4 of the
, which provides for a detailed assessment
of whether a body is performing a public function. In the Institute’s
view, where
an entity exercises regulatory powers or executes functions on
behalf of the State or public authority, decisions of that entity
reviewable by the courts.
Recommendation
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be amended to include an
additional ground for review based on whether a body is exercising powers or
functions of a
public nature. Powers or functions of a public nature should be
defined in accordance with Victoria’s
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
6.4.15 Compared to retaining the source of power
approach, this reform represents an opportunity to both simplify the process and
increase the effectiveness of judicial review. More fundamentally, citizens
should not lose recourse to judicial review because a
public power has been
effectively devolved to a non-public body; they should not lose access to review
on what amounts to technicalities.
6.4.16 While this again broadens the scope of judicial review, as with
Recommendation 2, explicit exceptions are still incorporated
into the JRA.
Where there is more than one source of the
legal power to make a decision, and one source of power is an enactment, in what
circumstances
should the decision be considered as made under an enactment for
the purposes of the JRA?
6.5.1 Where legislation gives a government officer or agency a broad grant of
power to establish and manage an institution or implement
a programme, and the
officer or agency enters into contracts and other legal relationships under the
authority of its broad grant
of power, decisions made with respect to the
contracts will be considered as made under an enactment if the courts recognise
the broad grant of power to the officer or the agency is a source of the
legal power to make the decision. As pointed out above,
the courts have usually
not been willing to do that. In
the High Court held that in
cases of this type, the contract, not the enactment, was the source of power to
make the decision, so
that it was not a decision under an
In doing so, it
Australian Capital Territory Health Authority v Berkeley Cleaning
Group Pty Ltd
which permitted review of a tendering process leading to the making of a
6.5.2 It is not clear that the common law is more liberal in allowing review
in these situations. The common law, at least in England,
permits review where
government or a body connected to government uses contract as a regulatory or
administrative device. In England,
the courts have permitted review where the
powers being exercised, whether contractual or not, can be seen as public, but
permitted review where the powers are private and there is no
connection between the body exercising them and
government.
The Australian
courts have yet to adopt the English position, but have not ruled it
6.5.3 The cases in which a government body is vested with a statutory power
to contract have an obvious connection with government.
Hence there is a case
for allowing review under the English doctrine. However, in many of the cases,
the contracts are more akin
to ordinary commercial contracts than to regulatory
devices. In these cases, it is not clear that they ought to be subject to
6.5.4 It may be necessary to distinguish government contracts which are
essentially commercial from those which are essentially regulatory.
strong arguments for not allowing judicial review of contracts which are
essentially commercial. Private parties dealing
with government on a commercial
or semi-commercial basis need what may be called security of transaction; that
is, they need to know
that their contracts with government and government bodies
are not open to challenge by third parties on administrative law grounds.
Because the
allows standing to persons whose interests are adversely
affected by a decision,
across the board rule that contracts entered into under a statutory power to
contract are decisions under an enactment and reviewable
for the purposes of the
would allow such third party challenges.
6.5.5 It would be difficult to limit the scope of such challenges. Once
decisions under and with respect to contracts entered into
under a statutory
power to contract are held to be decisions under an enactment for the purposes
, all grounds of review available under the
available to the challenger.
Australian Capital Territory Health Authority v Berkeley Cleaning
Group Pty Ltd
applicant challenged a tender process on the grounds of relevant and irrelevant
considerations, unreasonableness and no evidence
among other grounds. The Court
did not hold any of them to be inappropriate or unavailable in this type of
6.5.7 Opening up government agency contracts to challenges on these grounds
would create a situation similar to that which existed
under the old company law
doctrine of ultra vires. Under that doctrine, contracts entered into by private
companies were invalid
if they fell outside the objects for which the company
was founded as stated in its objects clause. These contracts could be set
at the suit of shareholders. Similarly, if the contractual decisions of
government bodies were subject to review under the
, it would be
possible for interested parties to seek to have them set aside on the grounds
that they were entered into for improper
purposes, that is purposes which were
inconsistent with the subject scope and purpose of the body’s enabling Act
power to contract.
6.5.8 The company law doctrine of ultra vires was found to be so inconvenient
because of its impact on the security of company contracts
and transactions that
it was repealed. A general right to challenge the exercise of a statutory power
to contract under the
is likely to lead to similar inconvenience and
for that reason should not be adopted.
6.5.9 However, government powers to contract and the contracts themselves are
regulated in a number of ways to protect the public
interest. This regulation
can take the form of legislation or of ‘soft law’ such as treasury
and other policies, codes
and guidelines which do not impose legal rights and
obligations but which are enforced within the executive and administration.
the regulation takes the form of legislation, decisions with respect to
contracts which are subject to the regulation are almost
certainly decisions
under an enactment and reviewable under the
6.5.10 Where the regulation is in the form of ‘soft law’, the
is not available unless the Court adopts a broad view of decision
under an enactment and holds that the contract is reviewable because
exercise of a statutory power to contract. That is not likely given the position
which the High Court adopted in
6.5.11 ‘Soft law’ regulation of government contracts does not
create any legal rights but may create expectations that
government will comply
with soft law policies and guidelines, and if it does not, will give a hearing
to affected parties and explain
its decision. Where the government fails to do
that, contract law often does not provide any remedy. If soft law policies and
are incorporated into the contract, failure to comply with them may
be breach of contract. If they are not incorporated, there will
6.5.12 Because government contracts vary in the extent to which they are
properly regarded as private rather than public agreements,
different types of
government contracts are regulated in different ways. Hence, it would be unwise
to adopt a uniform approach to
judicial review of decisions made with respect to
government contracts. Instead, it may be preferable to adopt different
to different classes of contract, depending on the extent to which
they have a public aspect and are regulated in the public interest.
be done by extending the scope of decision to include decisions made with
respect to or under specified types of contract.
Issue 7(1) – Tenders and procurement contracts
6.5.13 Procurement contracts involving large sums of money tend to be put out
to tender. Tendering processes tend to be laid down
either in legislation or in
soft law policies and guidelines. The question of judicial review of tendering
processes raises difficult
issues. Tendering processes are designed to ensure
that every person has an opportunity to bid to supply government with goods and
services and that the bids are evaluated in a fair and even-handed way. The
processes aim not only to ensure that the bidders are
treated fairly but also to
protect the public interest in ensuring that public moneys are spent wisely and
not wasted.
6.5.14 Where tendering processes are laid down in legislation, judicial
review under the
may be available for
Where the processes
are laid down in policies and guidelines enforced by Treasury or another
government department, judicial review
is less likely to be available. As there
is no enactment, there is no possibility of judicial review under the
. Whether review is available under the prerogative remedies depends
upon whether there is a public or regulatory element
For example, if a
local council sought to implement a planning policy through contract, that would
be a sufficient public element
to warrant judicial review.
6.5.15 Whether judicial review of tendering should be available depends upon
a number of considerations. Disgruntled and disappointed
tenderers are likely to
use judicial review in an attempt to overturn a decision to award a tender to
competitors.
In such cases
the dispute is as much one between two private companies as it is between the
company and the decision-maker who decided
the tender. That is not in itself
sufficient reason to rule out permitting an unsuccessful tenderer from
challenging the decision.
There are many situations in which government
decisions are challenged as a way of furthering a dispute with a private party.
is especially true in environmental and development law, where challenges
to government decisions permitting a development are a
common way of pursuing a
dispute with the developer.
6.5.16 Once a decision has been made and a contract entered into, allowing
disappointed tenderers to challenge the decision or the
process can interfere
with the security of transactions and discourage would be tenderers from taking
the risk. Intervention by the
courts in the tendering process before a contract
has been entered into may create similar
Governments may
adopt tendering policies and guidelines rather than legislation in order to
minimise such disruptive challenges.
It is arguable that governments should be
free to do this and that judicial review should not be available to challenge
of the policies and guidelines.
6.5.17 However, such an approach may leave the tenderer whose tender was not
properly considered without any adequate remedy. Internal
review is unlikely to
lead to the decision being reversed where to do so would overturn a contract as
that could lead to the government
being liable in damages. As a result, the best
that can be hoped for in internal review is an improvement in the process for
future. Inadequate processes and failure to follow policies and guidelines
may discourage businesses from tendering for government
contracts as effectively
as the threat of judicial review leading to the overturning of a contract.
6.5.18 ARC Report 32 considered a number of problems in allowing judicial
review of procurement and tendering
Firstly, it noted that, because the government’s power to contract is at
large, it is not easy to identify appropriate criteria
for review of the
It is arguable that
the principles of natural justice should not limit the discretion which a
contracting party has under normal
contract principles to choose between a
number of tenders or offers.
It also noted doubts about the applicability of relevant and irrelevant
considerations to the power to contract rather than to statutory
Secondly, it noted
concerns that to subject the government to administrative law oversight of its
contractual powers would place
it in a worse position than private law
contractors, being subject to both the law of contract and administrative
Because of these
concerns, it concluded that Commonwealth tendering and contracting should not be
subject to review under the
except in cases where it is subject
to statute.
6.5.19 ARC Report 50 was sceptical of allowing judicial review of tendering
and procurement processes. It considered that private
law remedies were adequate
and that there was no good reason for permitting public law remedies with
respect to tenders.
it concluded that as some of these issues may be amenable to review under
Judiciary Act
there is no good reason for excluding them
from review under an amended
6.5.20 The best solution, rather than attempting to deal with tendering in
, may be to enact separate legislation on the lines of the
Commonwealth
Government Procurement (Judicial Review) Bill
proposes to give tenderers a right to seek an injunction and a right to
compensation where Commonwealth Procurement
are not properly
complied with. As it is designed to complement rather than replace other avenues
of review, it does not rule out
judicial review in procurement cases.
6.5.21 The Bill contains two provisions designed
to minimise the impact of judicial review on the procurement process. The first
cl 6, which permits the Court to award compensation rather than an injunction
in certain cases where it is satisfied that granting
an injunction would lead to
a significant delay to the procurement concerned. The second is cl 23, which
provides that a contravention
of the Procurement Rules does not invalidate any
resulting contract.
6.5.22 One aim of the Bill is to ensure that Australia complies with
international obligations such as the procurement provisions
in the Trans
Pacific Partnership Agreement and the World Trade Organisation’s Agreement
on Government Procurement, both of
which require a transparent dispute review
If Tasmania adopted
legislation modelled on the Commonwealth Bill, it too would be compliant.
6.5.23 If it were decided not to enact legislation similar to the
Commonwealth Government Procurement Judicial Review Bill,
possible to extend the
to cases in which tender processes were not
complied with. However, such an extension should be subject to the proviso that
is not to invalidate the process where to do so would invalidate a
resulting contract, unless the case involved corruption or other
wrongdoing.
Issue 7(2) – Contracts of employment
6.5.24 Contracts of employment have also given rise to difficulties. Some of
the leading cases under the
with respect to the source of power
to make a decision, enactment or contract, such as
Australian National University v
contract of employment cases. In Tasmania, contracts of employment with the
government typically involve elements of statute,
such as the
State Service
awards under the
Industrial Relations Act
6.5.25 Where the decision involves breach of the provisions of an enactment,
such as breach of the grounds of dismissal provisions
State Service
, the decision is under an enactment and
available. Where the decision is made under an award made under the
Industrial Relations Act
the decision is also made under an
enactment. Schedule I of the
excludes decisions of the Industrial
Commission made under the
Industrial Relations Act
but that does not
exclude a decision which the government or its agencies make as an employer from
6.5.26 The difficulty arises when a decision with respect to employment is
made under the contract of employment rather than under
an enactment or an
award. Following
the decision is not reviewable because it is not made under an enactment even if
an enactment conferred the power to contract on
the agency.
6.5.27 Where the decision is made under a contract of employment rather than
an enactment or an award, there may be ‘soft law’
such as policies
and guidelines governing the situation. As noted above, these create
expectations rather than rights unless they
are incorporated into the contract.
If they are incorporated into the contract, failure to comply with them may be
breach of contract,
leaving the aggrieved employee with a contractual remedy. If
they are not incorporated into the contract, there is no remedy for
comply with them.
6.5.28 Whether there should be a remedy depends upon whether employees should
be entitled to a hearing or an explanation if an employer
decides not to comply
with codes or policies in their case. Such codes and policies are often designed
to ensure fair treatment and
to prevent bullying and victimisation. Some form of
judicial review may help to give a remedy to an employee who is aggrieved by
failure to follow the codes and policies. It also gives the trouble maker
further opportunity to cause trouble.
6.5.29 Allowing judicial review in these cases prevents the government or its
agencies from choosing to adopt informal codes and guidelines
and informal
dispute resolution procedures in its relations with its employees and to exclude
the courts from the process except
where there has been a breach of contract. It
is arguable that it is wrong to prevent the government or its agencies from
such a choice. Involving the courts introduces delay and expense and may
not be in the public interest.
6.5.30 On the other hand, if a decision not to apply a policy or guideline in
a particular case was made under an enactment, the person
affected would be
entitled to a hearing and if denied it, would be entitled to judicial
It is arguable that a
person should not be in a worse position because the decision not to apply the
policy was made under a contract
rather than under an enactment. That raises
issues about the general desirability of extending judicial review to situations
the power the government is exercising is not a power under an enactment
but is a common law power or a power conferred by a contract
or other legal
relationship. This issue is discussed below.
Issue 7(3) – Contracts and other arrangements entered into in the
implementation of a policy, or to deliver a service or benefit
6.5.31 It is an administrative law commonplace
that governments are relying more on contracts and other arrangements rather
than legislation
for the implementation of policy and the delivery of services
and benefits. These contracts and other arrangements tend to be regulatory
rather than commercial in nature. Where, as is typically the case, they involve
the spending of government money, they are supported
by an appropriation. The
appropriation usually lacks any detail about how the money is to be spent.
Instead, the content of the contract
or other arrangement is set out in policies
and guidelines which do not have the force of law.
6.5.32 Often, where the contract or arrangement is for the provision of a
service or benefit, the ultimate recipient of the service
or benefit is not a
party to the contract or arrangement. Instead, the contract or arrangement is
between the government and an outside
service provider and sets out the terms on
which the provider is to provide the service or benefit. Although the service
may enter into an agreement with the recipient of the benefit under
which the recipient agrees to comply with a set of conditions
in return for the
benefit, these agreements are rarely contracts.
6.5.33 As a result, the recipients of the service or benefit are in a very
weak legal position. They have no contractual remedy available
if the service
provider treats them unfairly or wrongly denies them the service or benefit. It
is doubtful that they have any right
to judicial review. In the United Kingdom,
judicial review has been extended to cases in which benefits are paid through an
of prerogative power rather than under an
It is not clear
that, even in the UK, it extends to giving the recipient of a government funded
service or benefit a right to judicial
review against the service provider. In
Australia, although there are statements in the cases that whether judicial
review should
be available depends more on the nature of the power being
exercised rather than its
review has not been
extended to recipients of a benefit or service provided by an outside service
6.5.34 Whether or not review is available at common law, it is clearly not
available under the
because there is no decision under an enactment,
whatever test is adopted. It is arguable that review ought to be extended to
cases because recipients of such services and benefits are unlikely to have
any other legal remedy. To deny them any remedy leaves
them at the mercy of the
service provider and may be inconsistent with the rule of law. A good example is
the recent Tasmanian decision
Smillie v Legal Aid Commission of
In that case, a
recipient of legal aid charged with murder and attempted murder requested that
his grant of aid allow him to be represented
by a private legal practitioner
rather than a Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania lawyer. The Commission refused on
the basis that the
applicant already had a lawyer who had spent a considerable
amount of time on the case. If a new lawyer were appointed, her efforts
wasted, wasting some of the limited resources of the Commission. On review to
the Supreme Court of Tasmania, Wood J found
that the decision to refuse the
request for a transfer of aid was not ‘of an administrative character ...
made under an enactment’.
In other words, because there was no statutory
provision in the
Legal Aid Commission Act 1990
(Tas) expressly addressing
the transfer of legal aid to other legal practitioners, or imposing any
obligations with respect to transfer
on the Commission or giving the complainant
any right to a transfer or to apply for a transfer, the decision to refuse the
could not be said to have been made under an enactment. Therefore, it
was not reviewable.
6.5.35 The ARC in Report 32,
Review of the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
: The Ambit of the Act
recommended that decisions under Commonwealth schemes and programmes funded by
an appropriation should be reviewable under
recommended review of these decisions under the
reasons. Firstly, if a Commonwealth officer rather than person providing an
outsourced service made the decision, it was
already reviewable under
Constitution
Judiciary Act
Secondly, many schemes
financed by an appropriation were similar to schemes set up under statute. Given
the similarities, the fact
that they were not set up under statute should not be
the decisive factor in determining whether decisions made in their
implementation
were subject to judicial
Thirdly, the fact
that such schemes and programmes were funded by a parliamentary appropriation
gave them ‘the same public
interest character as they would have if they
were the subject of other legislation enacted in the public
6.5.36 In the view of Report 32, these factors were sufficient to distinguish
such schemes and programmes from other government decisions
not made under
legislation and justified extending
review to them. Accordingly,
Report 32 recommended that the definition of decision be extended to include
decision of an administrative character made, or proposed to be made, by an
officer of the Commonwealth under a non-statutory scheme
or program the funds
for which are authorised by an appropriation made by the Parliament for the
purpose of that scheme or
6.5.37 The Commonwealth has not adopted the recommendation, but it provided
the inspiration for
Judicial Review Act 1991
That section defines decision as including:
(b) a decision of an administrative character made, or proposed to be made,
by, or by an officer or employee of, the State or a State
authority or local
government authority under a non-statutory scheme or program involving funds
that are provided or obtained (in
whole or part)—
(i) out of amounts appropriated by Parliament; or
(ii) from a tax, charge, fee or levy authorised by or under an enactment.
6.5.38 The provision covers situations in which the state itself or a state
agency provides the benefit or service from government
funds under a
non-statutory scheme. However, it does not extend to the situation in which the
state grants money to an outside service
provider which provides the service or
benefit on the state’s behalf. If the provision were adopted, it could be
extended to
cover decisions made by an outside service provider under a scheme
or programme involving government funds.
6.5.39 The Queensland provision has been seen as
largely ineffective because it only extends to schemes and programmes and has
been used successfully very
But this may be
because practitioners have not understood its potential as much as because of
doubts about the interpretation of
key terms such as
Although a one-off
decision may be a scheme,
number of cases have failed because the applicant was not able to show that the
decision was made to implement a scheme or
The simplest way
of avoiding these problems may be to delete the words ‘under a
non-statutory scheme or program’ so that
the provision applies to all
administrative decisions involving the expenditure of government moneys.
6.5.40 However, ARC Report 50,
Federal Judicial Review in Australia
the last ARC Report to deal with these issues, did not
suggest the adoption of any provision along the lines of
Judicial Review Act 1991
(Qld). Nor did it consider any ways in which
that or a similar section could be amended to deal with the problems in its
interpretation. Instead, it did not recommend any change to the
other than to incorporate a jurisdiction equivalent to
Constitution
Judiciary Act
leaving the common law to evolve with respect to judicial review of schemes and
programmes funded by means of an
appropriation.
6.5.41 The Report was sceptical about the desirability of extending
review to grants funded from appropriations. It pointed out that many
grants were made to provide relief in emergencies and that
they tended to be
administered so as to ensure that assistance was given to all who suffered from
the emergency as quickly as
It also doubted
that judicial review could provide an effective remedy for a person who was
wrongly denied a grant in these circumstances,
stating that,
remedies are likely to be ineffectual. The latter point is particularly
significant, because the available grant money is likely to
legitimately distributed to other persons when a judicial review remedy issues
and thus a finding that a particular decision
not to give a grant to a person
was invalid is unlikely to lead to the money being granted to that person.
Making a judicial review
application of a grant decision is therefore unlikely
to have much practical
6.5.42 These comments are most relevant to one-off grants and do not appear
to be so applicable to continuing schemes financed through
grants to outside
service providers. In these situations, the money is less likely to be exhausted
when a remedy is granted so that
it is more likely that the remedy will be
6.5.43 The Issues Paper suggested that the legal
position of beneficiaries of these schemes is weak because they are unlikely to
any private law remedy against the service provider and public law remedies
may be unavailable. Therefore, there is good reason to
provide a remedy in these
cases by adopting an expanded version of s 4 of the Queensland
Review Act 1991
Where there is more than one source of the legal power to make a decision,
and one source of power is an enactment, in what circumstances
decision be considered as made under an enactment for the purposes of the
Should there be judicial review of decisions made with respect to:
• Tenders and procurement contracts
• Contracts of employment
• Contracts and other arrangements entered into in the implementation
of a policy, or to deliver a service or benefit.
6.5.44 The Institute did not receive any submissions on Question 7. However,
it did receive submissions on the related Question 8.
As these two questions are
interrelated and address the same issue, the Institute has chosen to deal with
both questions at once.
6.5.45 Anglicare Tasmania provided a response to Question 8. They were of the
opinion that judicial review of decisions should be
available for decisions of a
public or governmental character. This includes contracts for procurement,
employment or arrangements
entered into for a public purpose, which Anglicare
recommended be open to review. They also submitted that decisions pertaining to
entry into contracts and termination, any decisions in the performance of the
contract, or decisions made which affect the interests
of the parties to the
contract and decisions made which affect the interest of third parties aggrieved
by the decision should also
be open to review.
6.5.46 CLC Tas also provided a submission in response to Question 8, noting
that significant outsourcing of governmental work to private
and not-for-profit
organisations means that private bodies are involved in decision-making which
entails the exercise of public power,
but which may be authorised by sources
other than statute, particularly by contract. They noted that this could result
in significant
changes to an individual’s rights, but without and recourse
to judicial review.
6.5.47 The Institute’s view in respect of both these questions is that
currently there is a lack of clarity as to the interaction
between contract law
and judicial review, and that there is a gap in the judicial review regime as it
relates to government contracts.
The Institute considers that if that lack of
clarity is properly resolved, then the current gap will be closed as a
6.5.48 With this in mind, the Institute considers that
Queensland’s
Judicial Review Act 2001
offers useful guidance for
reform. Section 4(b) sets out that a decision to which the act applies as
(b) a decision
of an administrative character
made, or proposed to be made, by, or by an officer or employee of, the State or
a State authority or
local government authority under a non-statutory scheme or
program involving funds that are provided or obtained (in whole or
(i) out of amounts appropriated by Parliament; or
(ii) from a tax, charge, fee or levy authorised by or under an enactment.
6.5.49 Introducing the same of similar wording
will have the effect of capturing many circumstances where
there is more than source of power for a decision, as those circumstances
to arise where government is engaging a third-party organisation by
Recommendation
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be amended to
incorporate an expanded definition of decision that includes a decision of an
administrative character
made, or proposed to be made, by, or by an officer or
employee of, the State or a State authority or local government authority under
a non-statutory scheme or program involving funds that are provided or obtained
(in whole or part)—
(i) out of amounts appropriated by Parliament; or
(ii) from a tax, charge, fee or levy authorised by or under an
6.5.50 While there may be some concerns about the
effects of this expanded provision, its operation in Queensland shows that its
would not be unusual. Further, although there are means by which
unsuccessful applicants seeking employment with the State can challenge
decisions, the additional certainty provided by the
beneficial.
Should a decision made in pursuance of an
enactment which affects interests but does not affect anyone’s rights or
obligations
be a decision under an enactment?
6.6.1 As noted above,
held that to be a decision under an
enactment, the decision must itself confer, alter or otherwise affect legal
rights or obligations,
and in that sense the decision must derive from the
enactment. As Kirby J pointed out in
, that test for decision under
an enactment prevented review in cases where the decision did not affect rights
and obligations but
Tang’s rights and obligations were not affected, only her interests, she
was not entitled to review under the
Judicial Review Act 1991
presumably, a person in a similar position would not be entitled to sue under
6.6.2 There are numerous objections to limiting review to cases in which the
decision confers, alters or otherwise affects legal rights
or obligations; it
can lead to injustice as happened in
. It also introduces the type of
complexity that the
was designed to remove. In order to qualify
for review, litigants must show that the decision affected their legal position,
or not that affect is minor compared to the effect on their practical
situation. In
itself, it is arguable that Tang’s legal rights
were affected by the decision. Before the decision, she had a licence to enter
university property, to use university laboratory equipment to conduct
experiments and for other research related purposes. The decision
to exclude her
ended that licence so that if she had attempted to continue her research, she
could have been excluded as a trespasser.
These effects on her legal position,
although substantial in themselves, were minor compared with the practical
consequences of the
decision for her. By excluding her for plagiarism, the
university labelled her a cheat, making it most unlikely that she would ever
have the opportunity to pursue her chosen career or do research at any other
university. But after the decision in
, any right to review depends
upon whether the decision affects legal rights and obligations, no matter how
insignificant, not on
the decision’s practical effects, no matter how
significant.
6.6.3 Besides, this aspect of the decision is
inconsistent with the general trend of administrative law, which is to give
protection to interests which are not legally enforceable rights and
obligations. This is especially true of the law with respect
to natural justice.
As early as
Kioa v West
the High Court extended the right to natural justice to cases in which the
complainant did not possess any legal rights but had an
interest in the
decision. Both these cases and most of the later natural justice cases are ones
in which the complainant has applied
to be granted a permit or a licence such as
a visa but has no right to that permit or licence. A decision not to grant the
or licence would be reviewable under the
test because it is a
decision not to confer a right. But in
itself, Brennan J recognised
that natural justice applied to cases more like
, in which the
decision is not one to confer a right but is with respect to a benefit which an
official has the power to grant or
There are interests beyond legal rights that the legislature is presumed to
intend to protect by the principles of natural justice.
It is hardly to be
thought that a modern legislature when it creates regimes for the regulation of
social interests — licensing
and permit systems, means of securing
opportunities for acquiring legal rights,
schemes for the provision of
privileges and benefits at the discretion of Ministers or public officials
— intends that the interests of individuals which do not amount to legal
rights but which are affected by the myriad and complex
powers conferred on the
bureaucracy should be accorded less protection than legal rights (emphasis
narrowed the scope of the
to such an extent that at least in natural
justice cases and perhaps in other areas, it is narrower than the common law. At
law natural justice is available in cases where interests, rather than
rights are at issue, but under the Acts review is not available
in such cases.
Given that the
and to a lesser extent the
intended to be remedial, expanding the scope of review and clarifying the law,
that result is inconsistent with their purpose.
6.6.5 Besides, the
test, to the extent that it rules out review
where interests but no rights and duties are affected, is inconsistent with s 13
. That section vests the Court with a power to dismiss
applications to review decisions made in the course of a procedure on the
that they are premature or disruptive of good administration. It assumes
that the Court has power to review decisions made in the
course of a procedure
whether or not they are final and operative or required by the enactment. As
pointed out above,
inconsistent with the source of power to make the decision test for determining
whether a decision is under an enactment.
6.6.6 It is even more inconsistent with the
test because most
decisions made in the course of a proceeding which are not required by the
enactment do not affect the rights and
duties of affected persons but do affect
their interests. For example, the decisions challenged in
Edelsten v Health
Insurance Commission
discussed above affected interests not
Yet s 13 assumes that
such decisions are reviewable. The amendment suggested to overrule the decision
, to the effect that:
Decision under an enactment includes a decision made in the course of a
proceeding under an enactment whether or not the decision
is substantive or
procedural, final and operative or required by the
is probably sufficient to reverse the decision in
to the extent
necessary. To ensure that that is the case, it may be wise to amend the
suggested amendment to read ‘whether
or not the decision is substantive or
procedural, final and operative, required by the enactment or changes rights and
6.6.7 Kirby J argued in
that the requirement that to be a
decision under an enactment, the decision must alter or affect rights and duties
was inconsistent
with s 3(4) of the
, which gives standing to
persons whose interests are affected by the decision being challenged:
To provide such a wide definition of ‘person aggrieved’ and then,
by a judicial gloss, to narrow severely the parliamentary
purpose in so
providing (by obliging demonstrations of the ‘affecting of legal rights
and obligations’ as a precondition
to relief) is unacceptable as a simple
matter of statutory construction. The text is not then internally harmonious and
as it should be assumed the Parliament intended. Judges must not
impose interpretations on parliamentary law that contradict express
of such law or deny, or frustrate, its
application.
6.6.8 The inconsistency between the
test and the
test for standing is not as clear as Kirby J argued. There is nothing in the
test which requires that the rights and duties affected be those of
the applicant. They may be those of a third party. Hence, when
combined with the
test, a person whose interests are affected by the
decision has standing to challenge it no matter whose rights and duties the
affects, as long as it affects the rights and duties of someone.
Challenges of this type are not uncommon. Land use, environmental
development decisions are often challenged by persons other than those whose
rights and duties are affected by the decision.
In these cases, the person whose
rights and duties are affected is often the developer. The challengers, who are
often objectors
to the decision, challenge the decision on the basis that it
affects their interests rather than their rights. So the
left s 3(4) of the
with a reasonably broad operation.
6.6.9 The real problem with the rights and duties test is that it rules out
review in cases which ought to be reviewed because the
decision challenged has a
serious impact on the applicant and the application for review is not premature
or designed to disrupt
administrative processes. To this extent,
compares unfavourably with
, the Court sought to deal
with a real problem, that of premature and disruptive challenges to decisions
made in the process of arriving
at a final decision. It did not seek to rule out
review of those decisions entirely, but to prevent review of them until the
decision had been made.
was also concerned with substance, not form in that it
permitted review of decisions which were in a practical sense, final and
The decision
challenged in
requirements for a reviewable
decision in that it was final and operative in a practical sense; it ended once
and for all Tang’s
chance to gain her doctorate at Griffiths University
and almost certainly ruled out any chance she may have had to complete a
at another university.
ended the possibility of review where the decision was
final and operative in a practical rather than a legal sense by holding that
be under an enactment, a decision had to alter rights and obligations. To this
extent, it reverses the holding in
that decisions which are final
and operative in a practical sense are reviewable.
focused on the
meaning of the term decision in the
on the meaning of the phrase made under an enactment. As a matter of
interpretation, the phrase made under an enactment must
impose some restrictions
on the decisions which may be reviewed under the Act. Otherwise, it would add
nothing. However, it is odd
that the restrictions which it imposes effectively
change the definition of decision so as to prevent review of a class of
reviewable decisions, those which are final and operative in a
practical sense.
6.6.12 Whereas
was concerned with the practical operation of the
was more concerned with the technicalities of
devising a workable test for determining whether a decision was made under an
or under some other source of power. As noted
it rejected proximity
tests for determining whether the source of the power to make the decision under
review was an enactment or
something else, such as a contract.
6.6.13 It is not clear that proximity tests are as problematic in this
context as the majority in
assumed. The majority saw them as
problematic because they had caused problems when used in the law of torts to
determine legal responsibility
for tortious acts and omissions and because they
distracted attention from the real issue, the meaning of the words read in light
of the subject, scope and purpose of the
6.6.14 Notions of proximity in the law of torts are associated with ideas
arbitrary to
separate one cause out in a chain of causation leading to an event, label it as
the proximate and immediate cause of
the event and attribute responsibility on
the basis of that labelling because all events in the chain of causation are
equally necessary
for the event to occur.
6.6.15 The issues are different when a source of power is identified as the
proximate immediate source of power to make a decision.
No chain of causation is
involved. The situation much more closely resembles that which arises when we
trace subordinate legislation
and ultimately in the
Constitution
. Lawyers are familiar with tracing a chain of
validity back to determine the validity of a law or decision and forward to
the immediate source of power to make the decision. This process is
not arbitrary but is based on fundamental principles of legality
constitutionality.
6.6.16 The majority in
gave two other reasons for their decision,
neither compelling. Firstly, they held that their task was to interpret the
under an enactment in the light of the subject, scope and purpose of
, suggesting that the interpretation they adopted was
justified on that basis. However, they did not consider the subject, scope and
especially the purpose of the
. There is a strong argument that
the interpretation which they adopted frustrates that purpose. The
was designed to be remedial and to give individuals remedies against
government action which adversely affected them. Preventing
its use in cases in
which the legislation affects interests rather than rights and duties tends to
frustrate its purpose by limiting
the range of cases in which it provides
remedies for no good reason. As argued below, it has led to a situation in which
review under
is narrower than at common
There are no good policy
reasons for limiting the scope of review in this way. Although it is not
inconsistent with the words made
under an enactment, there are other plausible
interpretations of those words which do not limit the scope of review to the
same extent.
An obvious one is that a decision is made under an enactment if it
is made in pursuance of the Act or to implement it.
6.6.17 In conclusion,
adopted a very narrow interpretation of
made under an enactment to solve problems which were seen as arising from the
use of notions
of proximity to determine whether a decision was made under an
enactment. As argued above, those problems may be non-existent. The
test has nothing else to recommend it and is too narrow. Hence there are good
reasons for legislating to reverse the decision and
no good reasons for not
doing so. It could be reversed by a
provision stating
that decision made under an enactment includes a decision, which affects a
person’s interests, whether or
not it affects their legal rights and
duties or the legal rights and duties of any other person.
6.6.18 Extending the scope of decision made under an enactment to include
decisions which affect interests as well as rights aligns
the test for made
under an enactment with the test for standing. Any person with an interest in a
decision has standing to sue; that
person has, if the proposed test is adopted,
a prima facie right to an order of review. That is a sensible outcome because
the alternative
may create a situation in which a person
may be entitled to standing although, even if they prove all their allegations,
not entitled to review. A test for standing should not allow access to
persons who cannot make out a prima facie case.
6.6.19 It may be objected that allowing an action whenever a person’s
interests are affected extends the reach of the
too far because
people may have a wide range of interests in a wide range of government
decisions. However, all
remedies are discretionary, so that the Court
may refuse a remedy if the effect on the applicant’s interests is
was invited with respect to the following question
Should a decision made in pursuance of an enactment which affects interests
but does not affect anyone’s rights or obligations
be a decision under an
6.6.20 The Institute received a submission from Anglicare on Question 9. In
their view, a decision which does not affect anyone’s
obligations does not need to be covered by the
. However, they also
submitted that the
should allow for ‘right or
obligations’ to be interpreted broadly. An example given was a decision
of fixtures in public housing. While it may not directly
affect a resident’s legislated or common law rights, it might affect
interests in general or specific ways.
6.6.21 Anglicare suggested the ‘person aggrieved’ test as the
criteria for whether a decision should be covered by the
person has been aggrieved in any manner by a decision, that decision should be
covered by the
. Anglicare further emphasised that judicial review
should be available in all circumstances where a decision made affects a
6.6.22 In the Institute’s view, this issue requires resolving
. In requiring that a decision must itself confer, alter or otherwise
affect legal rights or obligations of an individual,
scope of judicial review in such a way that, as seen in
, can lead to
injustice. As Kirby J (in dissent) pointed out, while the majority held that
Tang had not had her legal rights altered
by the decision it is still the case
that she faced very significant consequences.
6.6.23 Following the decision in
, a person’s right to
review cannot account for a decision’s practical effects, no matter how
significant. This approach
is at odds with general trends in administrative law,
which are aimed at providing greater protection to interests which are not
legally enforceable rights and obligations.
6.6.24 The practical effect of
is to narrow the scope of judicial
review allowed under the
, an effect that is at odds with the purpose
. In particular, the decision in
is inconsistent
with s 13 of the
, as described above. Further, while
been applied by the Tasmanian Supreme Court,
it conflicts with s 7 of the
. Section 7 of the
sets out a definition of ‘person
aggrieved’, which includes any person whose interests have been adversely
affected by
a decision. In turn, s 17 of the
allows a person
aggrieved to make an application for review.
, however, requires that for a person to seek review they
must show a change in their
legal right and obligations
, a much narrower
test than that of s 7 of the
. The practical effect of the decision in
is to restrict judicial review in a way that fundamentally conflicts
with the intentions, and even the express provisions of the
6.6.26 Accordingly, it is the Institute’s view that this conflict
should be resolved and that the application of the decision
should be reversed through an amendment to s 7 of the
to clarify its
6.6.27 Though there may be an objection to further
broadening the
, as individuals may have a broad range of interests
that may apply to the wide range of government decisions, as
are discretionary, it will be open to the Court to reject an application on the
basis that the interest in question is minimal.
Accordingly, the Institute
recommends amending s 7 of the
as set out in Recommendation 7.
Recommendation
Judicial Review Act 2000
should be amended to reverse
the application to the
of the decision in
Griffith University v
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
so that a person whose interests are adversely
affected need not show that a decision changed their legal rights or
obligations.
Should a decision made under the general law
but given effect to by statute be reviewable?
6.7.1 As noted above, in
Court held that AWB’s decision to veto the export of wheat was made in the
exercise of its general powers under the
Corporations Law rather than under the
Wheat Marketing Act 1989
(Cth). However, the
Wheat Marketing Act
attached additional legal consequences to that decision. Under that Act the
Wheat Export Authority could not permit the export of
wheat unless the AWB
approved it. If the
Wheat Marketing Act
had not attached these legal
consequences
to AWB’s decision, the decision would have been
6.7.2 Although the decision derived its legal effect from the
Marketing Act
the High Court held that it was not made under that
Act but under the general law. Hence it was not a decision made under an
review was not
6.7.3 The decision entails that where legislation attaches additional legal
consequences to a decision made under the general law,
the decision is not
reviewable under the
. This is the case even in
situations where there would be no point in making the decision but for the
legal consequences which the
legislation attaches to it.
6.7.4 The decision is legalistic and ignores the reality of the situation. No
doubt a company incorporated under the Corporations
Law has power to pass a
resolution approving or disapproving of a government action such as permitting
the export of wheat. But the
Corporations Law gives no legal effect to the
decision to pass such a resolution. Without more, it is no more than the
of an opinion. As the majority conceded, the decision derived its
legal effect from
Wheat Marketing Act
. Given that without
, there would have been no point in AWB’s making the decision
which it did, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the
power to make the
decision derived from the
Wheat Marketing Act
, not from the Corporations
Law. Indeed, the majority conceded that if the AWB had been a statutory
authority or the power of veto
had been vested in the Minister, it would have
been appropriate to read
as impliedly conferring the veto power on
them. The majority did not explain why the position of a corporation
incorporated under
the Corporations Law differed from that of the Minister, who,
as a natural person had the power to make a decision as broad as that
6.7.5 Kirby J in dissent made very similar points. He held that AWB’s
veto of the export of the wheat in question was a decision
under an enactment,
arguing that it was the
Wheat Marketing Act
which required and gave
effect to AWB’s decisions with respect to the export of wheat:
The notion that a private corporation, as such, could, by its decision,
control the consent-making processes of the Authority (and
thereby effectively
control the occasions and terms on which other traders would be allowed to
participate in its market) is unthinkable
without the support of valid
legislation. The only way that AWBI’s ‘decision’ could take on
a legal character affecting
the conduct of the Authority, and the economic
rights of NEAT (and its growers) and of other Australian growers who wished to
wheat to the world market, is by force of the Act. And then only if the
Act gives such authority in clear and unmistakable terms.
It follows that it is the Act that provides for, requires, and gives legal
force to, AWBI’s ‘decisions’ relevant
applications. It is the role performed for the purposes of the Act, and not the
corporate structure of AWBI, that
determines the character of the
‘decisions’ in question in this
6.7.6 The majority’s conclusion that the decision was not made under an
enactment but under the Corporations Law characterised
the decision as a private
law one rather than a public law one. By doing so, it prevented judicial review
of the decision. That made
AWB legally unaccountable for its decisions with
respect to the export of wheat, as no private law remedies were available. These
decisions were not subject to the
Trade Practices Act
and as the growers
were not necessarily shareholders in AWB and there were no contractual or other
private law relationship between
the parties, no corporate law or contractual
remedies were available:
In characterising the decisions to grant, or withhold, approval for bulk
export of wheat, the relationship between AWBI and the applicant
traders (and
growers) seeking such approval is therefore also relevant. Grain traders seeking
the Authority’s, and consequently
AWBI’s, agreement for the export
of wheat, are not in a contractual relationship with AWBI. Further, in a letter
to the Authority,
Mr David Mailler, the Chairman of the Durum Wheatgrowers
Association (NSW), also pointed out that those growers who had not exported
the past or who joined the industry later were not shareholders of AWB. Remedies
under the TPA were also foreclosed. As such,
the only way that the decisions of
AWBI, with their wide and significant impact, could be exposed to legal scrutiny
or accountability
was by way of administrative review. If such review were
unavailable, AWB and AWBI, at least in this respect, would come close to
possessing absolute legal
6.7.7 The majority’s characterisation of the decisions as private law
ones is difficult to justify as it had the result that
the decision could not be
challenged legally. The fact that the decisions were exempt from the
Practices Act
suggests that parliament intended that they be treated as
public law ones. Their characterisation as public law is supported by the
that they were essentially regulatory, affecting the interests of members of the
public who had no private law relationship
to AWB. The fact that the AWB was
constituted as a private law corporation rather than a government agency does
not prevent the characterisation
of the power to veto wheat exports as a public
law power as it is well recognised that private bodies can be vested with public
6.7.8 There is no good reason for denying review in these cases. The
is designed to be remedial and to remove many of the technicalities
and unnecessary restrictions which used to encumber the law of
judicial review.
It should not be interpreted in a way which creates additional technicalities
and unjustifiable restrictions.
6.7.9 Even if it is seen as desirable to restrict review under the
to decisions made under an enactment, the decisions made in these cases ought to
be seen as falling under an enactment because, although
they may be made under
the general law, an enactment gives them their legal effect. Often, without the
enactment’s giving them
that legal effect, they would be pointless and
would not be made.
6.7.10 A simple amendment to the
to extend the meaning of decision
under an enactment to situations in which the decision is made under the general
law, but an enactment
attaches additional legal consequences to it, would solve
the problem.
was invited with respect to the following question
Question 10
Should a decision made under the general law but given effect to by statute
be reviewable?
6.7.11 The Institute did not receive submissions in response to this
6.7.12 The Institute’s view is that review
should be available in cases such as these. Given the decision in
it is worthwhile considering a reform that serves to preserve a right to review
of decisions made under the general law. As discussed,
there does not appear to
be a compelling reason to deny review in such cases.
Recommendation
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be reformed to reverse the
decision in
NEAT Domestic Trading Pty Limited v
AWB Limited
[2003] HCA 35
(2003) 216 CLR 277
by including a provision that allows for a
review in cases where a decision is made under the general law but given effect
by statute.
Are there classes of legislation which
should not be considered as an enactment for the purposes of the
the Full Court of the Tasmanian Supreme Court held that the decision of the
Director of Housing not to renew a lease was not a decision
under an enactment
because it was not made under the
(Tas) but under the
general law of residential
Much of the
general law with respect to residential tenancies in Tasmania, including the law
with respect to when and how a landlord
may choose to terminate a lease, is
governed by the
Residential Tenancy Act 1997
decision not to renew the lease could have been characterised as a decision
under an enactment, the
Residential Tenancy Act
If the Court had
characterised the decision in that way, it would have been reviewable because it
met all the
requirements.
6.8.2 However, the Full Court did not characterise the decision in that way.
Instead, they held that the decision was made under the
general law because the
power to terminate a fixed term lease when the term expired was a power which
any landlord could exercise.
6.8.3 Although the Court did not confront this issue directly, the decision
raises the issue of whether private law statutes, that
is statutes which are
primarily designed to govern relations and transactions between private citizens
and corporations, but which
apply to governments and government agencies when
they enter into the relations and transactions in question, should be considered
as enactments for the purposes of the
. If they are enactments,
decisions made under Acts such as the
Sale of Goods Act
Residential Tenancy Act
the Corporations Law and consumer
legislation are decisions under an enactment for the purposes of the
6.8.4 It is arguable that the holding in
was wrong because the
decision was clearly made under an enactment, the
Residential Tenancy Act
There is nothing explicit in the
which rules out decisions made
under an Act like the
Residential Tenancy Act
, which confers the same
powers on all persons, whether government officers and agencies or private
individuals. Hence, the Court
should have held that the decision not to renew
the tenancy was reviewable under the
6.8.5 Holding that the decision in
was reviewable would not allow
challenges to all government decisions made under general legislation such as
decisions to buy small
amounts of office supplies under the
Sale of Goods
To be reviewable, a decision must be administrative as well as made
under an enactment. There is a line of cases, which holds that
decisions made by
government officials and agencies with respect to contracts and other similar
transactions which are essentially
private and have no public or regulatory
aspects, are not reviewable.
6.8.6 Although these cases were not decided under the
judicial review statutes, they provide guidance in the interpretation of the
term administrative in this context. Just
as contractual decisions in which
there are no public or regulatory elements are not reviewable, decisions made
under private law
statutes such as the
Sale of Goods Act
which have no
public element should not be regarded as administrative decisions and hence
would not be reviewable under the
6.8.7 However, decisions made under a private law statute which do have a
public regulatory aspect should be regarded as administrative
for the purposes
and hence as reviewable. It is not always easy to determine
whether a decision has sufficient public element to justify being classed
administrative and hence reviewable. In
, the decision arguably had a
public element in that it was made by a government officer, the Director of
Housing, in the administration
of government policy with respect to public
housing. However, it is also arguable that the decision was essentially private
no public elements. It was simply a decision which any landlord might
make that a tenant was not suitable and hence should not have
his or her lease
renewed. The Full Court tended to view the decision in this
6.8.8 It may be desirable to amend the
to provide guidance in cases such as
. That could be done by adding a
provision to the effect that a decision made under a private law enactment is a
decision under an
enactment if it is properly regarded as administrative or has
a public, regulatory aspect. Such a test does not provide a bright
distinction between reviewable and non-reviewable decisions. That is not a good
reason for rejecting it. It reflects the fact
that the distinction between
public and private is not clear-cut. However, it is a necessary distinction
which necessarily plays
an important role in defining the scope of judicial
6.8.9 Allowing decisions under private law
statutes to be reviewed as decisions under an enactment may be seen as
introducing an element
of arbitrariness into the law, denying judicial review in
cases where a decision was made at common law but making it available in
such as the sale of goods and residential tenancies, where the law has been
codified. That is not a good reason for denying
review in these cases. Instead
it is a reason for extending review to cases where the decision was not made
under an enactment but
under common law or other powers.
Question 11
Are there classes of legislation which should not be considered as an
enactment for the purposes of the
6.8.10 The Institute did not receive submissions in response to this
6.8.11 The Institute’s view is that amending
such that it provides guidance in cases such as
warranted. In circumstances where private law is used to enact a decision that
is of an administrative or public character then
review should be available to
the public. Practically speaking, if the decision is of a public character then
its legal origins should
be of less concern under the
Recommendation 9
Judicial Review Act 2000
(Tas) should be reformed to include a
provision that establishes that a decision made under a private law enactment
constitutes a
decision under an enactment for the purposes of the
Review Act 2000
(Tas) if that decision is properly regarded as
administrative or has a public, regulatory aspect.
6.8.12 With regards to
specifically,
treating the decision as completely private ignores the fact that the Director
of Housing is not in the same position
as a private landlord. It is the
Director’s responsibility to provide housing to those who are unlikely to
be able to obtain
housing in the private rental market. That responsibility,
which is owed to the community at large, colours decisions which the Director
may make with respect to tenants, giving them a public aspect.
Should the scope of the JRA be extended to
cover administrative and governmental decisions whether made under an enactment
6.9.1 The five issues discussed above may be seen as aspects of the one
bigger issue
— should the scope of the
be extended to
all administrative or governmental decisions, whether made under an enactment or
6.9.2 Governments have become increasingly reliant on sources of power other
than legislation, such as prerogative powers and powers
conferred by contracts
and other agreements, to implement programmes and to control the delivery of
services. Governments are also
tending to outsource service delivery to a
greater extent than they have in the past. It may be necessary to extend the
review under the
to decisions other than those made under an
enactment to reflect these changes in the way governments operate.
6.9.3 It is arguable that the rule of law requires that decisions made under
prerogative powers and under contract plus decisions
of service providers acting
on behalf of government be subject to judicial review. If they are not so
subject, there is no way of
ensuring that the government and its servants and
agents are not exceeding their legal powers. Besides, individuals who are
affected by these decisions should have some recourse to an
independent procedure for resolving their complaints.
6.9.4 The need to provide a remedy in these cases suggests that the scope of
should be extended to cover decisions made in the exercise of
non-statutory governmental powers. If the
were extended to cover the
five types of case dealt with above, it would extend judicial review to many
situations in which the power
on which the government was relying was not a
statutory power. In particular, it would cover those situations which involved
spending of appropriated money. However, it would not cover cases such as
which did not
involve the spending of money but the establishment of an industry regulatory
agency which had no statutory powers
but which was tied to government.
6.9.5 It is arguable that there is little point in extending the scope of the
because even if extended, the remedies it could provide are too
limited in scope to be effective. Judicial review of decisions made
prerogative powers or under contracts and other arrangements is limited in scope
compared with review of decisions made under
an enactment. Where a decision is
made under a legislative grant of power, the enactment imposes clearly defined
and legally enforceable
limits on that power. Many of the grounds of review in
, such as lack of statutory authorisation for the decision which
was made, improper purpose, relevant and irrelevant considerations
Wednesbury unreasonableness, are designed to enforce the limits on statutory
powers and are not available for reviewing decisions
made under non-statutory
Sections 18
(2)(e) of the
limit their scope to cases
which are an improper exercise of the power conferred by the enactment under
which the decision is proposed
to be made, so that in their current form they
would not be available for review of non-statutory powers. It would be pointless
extend review under the
to decisions under non-legislative powers
without amending
to extend the scope of these grounds of review to
cases which are an improper exercise of non-statutory powers as well as of
conferred by an enactment.
6.9.6 Removing the limitation which
impose on their scope may
not make these grounds of review generally available for review of decisions
made under non-statutory powers.
These grounds of review were developed for the
review of decisions made in the exercise of statutory powers because legislation
binding and enforceable legal limits on government power. Although
non-statutory powers are often exercised in accordance with written
policies and
guidelines, grounds of review such as relevant and irrelevant considerations,
improper purpose and unreasonableness
may not be available for ignoring the
guidelines and policies because guidelines and policies do not impose legal
limits on the scope
of the power. The ARC has expressed concern that applying
these grounds of review to policies and guidelines may convert non-binding
guidelines into binding legal
The courts have no
power to do that.
6.9.7 Despite the concern, there may be a role for grounds of review such as
relevant considerations in reviewing decisions made in
accordance with soft law
such as policies and guidelines, even in cases where the source of power to make
the decision is not legislative.
Policies and guidelines are relevant in making
decisions under statutory powers and
discretions,
as long as they
are consistent with the
legislation.
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs v Gray,
Drummond JJ gave the following analysis of the role of policy in decision making
under a statutory discretion:
The place of government policy in the Tribunal’s decision making will
depend upon the interests of good government and consistent
decision-making on
the one hand and the ideal of justice in the individual case on the other. But
its decision must be the result
of an independent assessment of all the
circumstances of the particular case and not the uncritical application of
Drake (supra) at 421. This is nothing more than a statement of
what is sometimes called the non-fettering principle which applies
generally to
statutory tribunals and decision-makers – see Bayne,
The Exercise of
Discretion According to Policy Guidelines
(1993) 67 ALJ 214.
24. The proposition that government policy cannot bind the Tribunal does not
imply that the policy can be ignored. It is reasonable
to associate with the
legislative intent that is taken to inform the construction of a wide statutory
power, an acceptance of the
likelihood that policies or guidelines will be
developed by the Executive at either or both Ministerial or departmental levels
govern its application. As Bowen CJ and Deane J observed in Drake (supra) at
‘... the consistent exercise of discretionary administrative power in
the absence of legislative guidelines will, in itself,
almost inevitably lead to
the formulation of some general policy or rules relating to the exercise of the
relevant power.’
6.9.8 The role of policies and guidelines developed to guide the exercise of
non-legislative powers is very similar. There is no reason
why a similar
approach to guidelines and policies could not be taken when they have been
developed to guide the exercise of non-statutory
powers. The relevant
considerations ground of review requires that where there is a duty to take a
consideration into account, it
must be considered but the decision-maker is free
to determine the weight to be given to it. Policies and guidelines developed to
guide the exercise of statutory discretions are relevant considerations which
cannot be ignored. Policies and guidelines developed
to guide the exercise of
non-statutory powers could be regarded as relevant considerations which must be
considered but which do
not bind the decision-maker.
6.9.9 Currently, the grounds for review of non-statutory powers are narrower
than those available to review statutory powers, making
it less attractive as a
form of review. However, it would not be valueless. In particular, it could be
used to ensure that persons
who are adversely affected by the exercise of a
non-legislative power are granted procedural fairness, including a right to be
before a decision is made. That is an important protection. And the above
discussion has demonstrated that there is room for expanding
the grounds
available for reviewing the exercise of non-legislative powers to include
relevant and irrelevant considerations without
any fundamental departure from
accepted principles. Once that is done the grounds of review may extend to
include related grounds
such as unreasonableness and no evidence.
6.9.10 Besides, the fact that the scope of the
is limited to
decisions under an enactment does not rule out the possibility of judicial
review of non-legislative powers. The
Constitution
requires that the Supreme
Court retain the jurisdiction conferred on it by the prerogative remedies,
whether they are incorporated
or retained as separate
Those remedies may
extend to the review of some non-statutory powers, especially some prerogative
6.9.11 The Federal Court has accepted that there is no general rule excluding
exercises of prerogative powers from
However, not all
exercises of prerogative powers are reviewable. Whether the exercise of a
particular prerogative power gives rise
to reviewable decisions depends upon the
nature of the power and the subject to which it
6.9.12 However, because the extent of review of sources of non-legislative
government power other than the prerogative is ill-defined
and may not cover all
situations in which review is justified, it may be advisable to define its scope
more clearly in the
. Besides, there are good reasons for extending
the procedural and other advantages of the
to the review of
non-legislative powers, even where those powers are reviewable under the
prerogative remedies.
6.9.13 Because of the difficulties in defining when judicial review of the
exercise of non-legislative powers is desirable and when
it is undesirable, the
ARC has not endorsed proposals to define in the
the scope of
review more closely than does the common law. In Report 32, the Council
recommended that the
be amended to allow review of decisions of
government officers made under schemes funded by an
appropriation.
The Council
limited its recommendations in this way to ensure that it did not extend review
beyond areas reviewable at common law,
especially areas such as government
tendering and contracting.
6.9.14 In its report on federal judicial review, the ARC
suggested a
compromise in which the scope of the
would be extended to
incorporate a jurisdiction equivalent to the jurisdiction of the High Court
Constitution
but there would
be no extension of the scope of review to particular classes of non-legislative
Its rationale was
to give litigants challenging the exercise of non-legislative government power
the procedural and other advantages
while leaving the
courts free to determine the scope of review of non-governmental powers
according to common law
principles.
6.9.15 This compromise is equivalent to a proposal to incorporate the
prerogative remedies into the
without extending the scope of review
under the other provisions of the
It would have the effect
of limiting review of non-statutory decisions to review for jurisdictional error
as the prerogative remedies
are largely limited to
That is not likely to
be a serious limitation on the scope of review because denial of procedural
fairness, one of the few grounds
of review currently available for
non-legislative decisions and the most commonly used, is a jurisdictional
6.9.16 Despite the concerns of the ARC, it may be desirable to extend
to include all or most administrative or
governmental decisions. There are a number of ways in which the
be amended to allow a general right to review regardless of the nature of the
power under which the decision was made. Firstly,
all decisions which have a
public or regulatory aspect could be brought within the scope of the
regardless of the source of legal power relied on to make the decision.
Secondly, it could be done by reference to government decision-makers,
all decisions of government officers, agents, agencies and service providers
within the scope of the Act, regardless of
the source of legal power relied on
to make the decision. Thirdly, all decisions subject to the requirements of
procedural fairness
could be brought within the scope of the
regardless of the source of legal power relied on to make the decision.
Issue 11(1) – Should the JRA be extended to permit review of all
decisions of an administrative or public nature?
6.9.17 This proposal would extend jurisdiction under the
which is similar to the jurisdiction of the English courts under the
doctrine. It has the advantage of simplicity, focussing on one
question, is the decision administrative or public. In doing so, it
attention on the key issue; is the decision administrative or public and hence
suitable for judicial review? Hence, it could
be used to exclude government
contractual decisions from review on the grounds that they are not usually
administrative or public
but are analogous to the private contractual decisions
of ordinary citizens.
6.9.18 Although this test may exclude most contracts from review, it may
allow review in cases such as
where contract
was used as a means of implementing a government programme and hence had a
greater public or administrative element
than a normal contract.
6.9.19 The major weakness in the proposal is that it has proven difficult to
distinguish public from private decision making in borderline
cases. Aronson,
Groves and Weeks give a list of the results in English cases applying the
doctrine, showing that it has not been
easy to distinguish exercises of public
from exercises of private power in borderline
This is not
surprising, given that there is a tendency for governments to confer regulatory
functions on private bodies subject to
some government oversight. The fact that
current practice tends to blur the distinction between public and private and
is reflected in the cases is not a good reason for rejecting the
Issue 11(2) – Should the JRA be amended to permit review of all
decisions of government officers, servants, agents, agencies
and service
6.9.20 A provision extending
review to all decisions of government
officers, servants, agents, agencies and service providers appears to have the
advantage that
it does not present the court with the difficult task of
distinguishing public from private power. Instead, it presents the Court
the easier task of determining whether the decision-maker is a government
officer, servant, agent, agency or service provider.
6.9.21 However, there are problems in adopting a provision extending review
to all decisions of government officers, servants, agents,
agencies and service
providers. It extends review without exception to decisions of the named classes
of decision-maker, unless they
are specifically exempted from review by
provisions such as those found in Schedule 1 and 2 of the Act. This grant of
be too broad in that it does not recognise that government officers
and agents may make decisions, such as those with respect to
many government
contracts, which have no public element other than that they are made by a
government officer or agent. Given the
understandable reluctance to subject all
government contracts to judicial review, it may be necessary to supplement the
other limitations to filter out those decisions of government officers
and agents which should not be subject to judicial review.
6.9.22 To prevent overreach into areas that should not be reviewable, the ARC
recommended that a provision authorising review of the
decisions of government
officers be limited to schemes and projects financed from
appropriations.
That proposal
was adopted in the
Judicial Review Act 1991
and has been
considered in some detail
As pointed out above,
it does not extend to every case where review may be desirable, including cases
of public/private regulation
subject to government oversight as in
6.9.23 To cover cases such as
, it is necessary to extend
review to situations which do not involve the spending of appropriated funds. If
that were done without
adopting some other limitation on the scope of review of
decisions of government officers and agents, it would lead to the unlimited
review of government contracts entered into by government officers and agents.
6.9.24 The most obvious limitation to impose would be to require that to be
reviewable, the decision must be public, administrative
or governmental in
character. If that limitation were adopted, the proposal becomes very similar to
the proposal that review be extended
to all decisions of an administrative,
public or governmental character. Once this limit is added, the requirement that
the decision
be made by a government officer, servant, agent or agency seems
superfluous and could easily be dropped, so that the two proposals
6.9.25 Secondly, the requirement that the decision be made by a government
officer, servant, agent, agency or service provider is
not as clear as it may
seem. It is broader, but similar in some ways to the requirement in s 75(v)
which gives the High Court original
prohibition or an injunction is sought against an officer of the Commonwealth.
The earliest
cases suggest two ways of identifying officers of the Commonwealth.
On one view, an officer of the Commonwealth was a person who
had been appointed
to a Commonwealth office. The other view was that an officer of the Commonwealth
was a person who performed a
Commonwealth government function, whether or not
they held an office under the Commonwealth.
6.9.26 The former of the two views prevailed, leading to some technical
limitations on who could be a Commonwealth officer. The majority
in the early
R v Murray and Cormie
held that it was not enough that a person
was performing a Commonwealth function. To be a Commonwealth officer, they had
to be appointed
to a Commonwealth office. Hence, a judge of a State court
exercising Commonwealth jurisdiction under
Constitution
an officer of the Commonwealth because they held a State not a Commonwealth
6.9.27 Similar problems may arise under any provision which confers
agencies or service providers. It would be open for a court to adopt an
interpretation of officer, servant, agent, agency,
or service provider analogous
to the interpretation of officer adopted in
R v Murray and Cormie.
interpretation would limit the phrase to persons who had been appointed as
government officers, servants, agencies, and service
providers, so that it would
not include persons performing functions on behalf of the government without
being appointed as officers,
servants, agents or service providers. That would
be an unnecessary restriction on the scope of review as the availability of
of the decision of a person performing a government function should not
depend upon whether they had been appointed as a government
officer, servant or
agent. Instead, it should depend upon whether the decision is a public or
private one.
6.9.28 In conclusion, it may not be desirable to adopt a provision extending
judicial review under the
to all decisions of a government officer,
servant, agent, agency or service provider because the requirement is not
sufficient in
itself to prevent review of decisions which probably should not be
reviewed, such as contractual decisions. If it is combined with
limitation, such as the requirement that to be reviewable, the decision must be
public, administrative or governmental in
nature, in order to rule out review of
normal contract decisions, it adds little to that requirement. It is also open
to a narrow
technical interpretation which would prevent review of some
decisions which ought to be reviewable for no good reason.
Issue 11(3) – Should the JRA be amended to permit review of all
decisions which are subject to the requirements of natural justice?
of Victoria’s
Administrative Law Act 1978
limits review to situations where the decision-maker is bound by one or more
of the rules of natural justice. It does so by limiting
review to the decisions
of tribunals which are defined as:
‘Tribunal’ means a person or body of persons ... who, in arriving
at a decision in question, is or are by law required,
whether by express
direction or not, to act in a judicial manner to the extent of observing one or
more of the rules of natural justice.
6.9.30 Matthew Groves has argued that this formula is a better way of
defining the scope of review than the
formula of administrative
decisions made under an
He argues that it
is much simpler than the
formula because the situations to which
the rules of natural justice apply are well understood and the arguments now
tend to be about
what it requires in particular cases. Those arguments are
irrelevant to the jurisdictional formula because it requires that the
decision-maker
only be required to exercise one of the rules of natural justice
which might be to provide notice or to act without
6.9.31 Groves also points out that the scope of natural justice has expanded
greatly since the
Administrative Law Act
was adopted in 1978. In 1978,
natural justice was only available to a person whose rights were affected by a
government decision or
action. Cases such as
FAI Insurances Ltd v
Kioa v West
have extended the reach of natural justice so that persons whose interests
or legitimate expectations are affected by a government
decision or action as
well as those who have rights at stake are entitled to natural justice. The
expansion of natural justice has
led to a great expansion of the right to review
Administrative Law Act
6.9.32 Defining the scope of review by reference to natural justice has the
potential to enable the courts to avoid the distinction
between public and
private, which has caused so much difficulty in the United Kingdom. Natural
justice has long extended to clubs,
professional associations and other related
private organisations which exercise disciplinary powers such as the power to
6.9.33 A broad reading of the natural justice formula could extend judicial
to such bodies, ruling out any need to distinguish public from
6.9.34 However, extending judicial review to that extent would create new
problems. If natural justice were adopted as the jurisdictional
formula in the
, it could expose clubs and professional bodies to the full gamut of
grounds for review. That would pose huge problems for clubs and
professional bodies, many of which do not have the resources or expertise
operate in accordance with administrative law standards. It would be
unreasonable to require them to.
6.9.35 The only way to protect clubs and professional associations from the
full gamut of grounds of review is to limit judicial review
to the public
sphere. The Victorian courts have done that under the
Administrative Law Act
With one or two exceptions they have limited judicial review under the Act
review of the decisions of public
6.9.36 Given that the public private distinction may be needed to prevent
judicial review’s extension to private bodies with
disciplinary and other
powers over their members, defining the scope of review by reference to natural
justice may have little advantage
over defining it by reference to the
distinction between public and private power. Reliance on the distinction
between public and
private power seems inevitable unless we are prepared to
permit judicial review under the
to extend to private clubs and
organisations which possess disciplinary powers over their members.
6.9.37 Hence the best option for extending the
beyond the five
situations outlined above is by extending judicial review to decisions and
conduct made in the exercise of public
power, regardless of its source. The
distinction between public and private power remains relevant even if some other
test such as natural justice or decisions of public officers,
servants, agents, agencies or service providers is adopted. Little
is gained by
supplementing the requirement that the decision be made in the exercise of
public power with additional requirements
such as the decision-maker must be
subject to the requirements of natural justice or must be a government officer
If the scope of the JRA is extended to all
decisions made in the exercise of public power, should that grant replace or be
in addition
to the existing grant of power and others suggested in the above
discussion?
6.10.1 If the scope of the
is extended to all decisions made in
the exercise of public power, it will be necessary to decide whether to add the
additional grant
of jurisdiction to that already in the Act and others proposed
to solve specific problems identified as arising from the requirement
decisions be made under an enactment or to replace the existing grant of
6.10.2 The second option has the virtue of apparent simplicity. However, it
may lead to its own problems. There is much to be gained
from keeping the
existing jurisdictional formula which is well understood and gives rise to no
problems in the majority of cases.
It may also be worthwhile to extend that
adding a final
general grant. To prevent that general grant from being read down
in the light of the other grants, there could be a general grant
of jurisdiction
over all exercises of public power, regardless of the source and of the person
who exercises the power. It could
then be made clear that that general grant
includes but is not limited to jurisdiction with respect to all the other more
(a) Should the scope of the
be extended to cover administrative
and governmental decisions whether made under an enactment or not?
(b) Should the
be extended to permit review of all decisions of
an administrative or public nature?
(c) Should the
be amended to permit review of all decisions of
government officers, servants, agents, agencies and service providers?
(d) Should the
be amended to permit review of all decisions
which are subject to the requirements of natural justice?
(e) Should judicial review under the
be extended to all
decisions and conduct made in the exercise of public power, regardless of its
Question 13
(a) If the scope of the
is extended to all decisions made in the
exercise of public power, should that grant replace or be in addition to the
existing grant
of power and others suggested in the above discussion?
(b) Should the general grant of jurisdiction over all exercises of public
power include but not be limited to jurisdiction with respect
to the other more
specific grants of jurisdiction which currently exist and which are proposed in
this Issues Paper?
6.10.3 The Institute received a number of submissions on Question 12 but did
not receive any submission on Question 13. Both questions
are being dealt with
together for simplicity’s sake.
6.10.4 The Director of Public Prosecutions (‘DPP’) submitted that
he did not believe the Issues Paper suggested, to his
understanding, any
amendments to the
that would have the effect of exposing his office
to judicial review. In his view, it would be undesirable for decisions made by
the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions to be judicially reviewable.
6.10.5 It was submitted by the DPP that it would impact on the integrity of
the courts and ultimately be impracticable. The need to
also assess the
possibility of judicial review would lengthen litigation, drawing out the
criminal justice process. As there are
already oversight and complaint
mechanisms, the DPP submitted that judicial review would be unnecessary, further
noting that the
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual
Abuse specifically rejected judicial review of the DPP’s functions.
6.10.6 TasWater submitted that the scope of the
should be extended
to cover administrative and governmental decisions whether made under an
enactment or not, and that the scope
should be extended to all decisions and
conduct made in the exercise of public power, regardless of source.
6.10.7 However, TasWater also submitted that judicial review should not be
extended to permit review of all decisions of government
officers, servants,
agents, agencies and service providers, believing that it would be too broad.
Their submission also suggested
that the Court should retain discretion to
refuse any remedy available under the
if there is a private remedy
6.10.8 An anonymous submission provided that they were supportive of the
being extended to permit the review of all decisions of an
administrative or public nature as per Question 12(b), but recognised
may be some difficulties around the precise definition of such decisions. The
anonymous submission remained confident
that case law would evolve to ensure
is given an appropriate ambit, as was the experience in the
United Kingdom following the decision in
6.10.9 The Institute’s view is that the
should be best
adapted to its intended purpose of simplifying the process of judicial review,
and in turn improving its accessibility
to members of the public. With this in
mind, the best approach is to rely on the distinction between public and private
power. This,
as opposed to the source of power approach, is best suited to
achieving that purpose.
6.10.10 However, this need not be paired with an elimination of the existing
is well understood and
poses few, if any, difficulties in practice.
6.10.11 As it stands, the previous recommendations in this Report will have
this effect. Given this, the Institute does not recommend
any further
Final remarks
6.11.1 The Institute acknowledges that while these reforms are intended to
to its intended purpose, they represent a considerable
change to compared to its current operation. Given that, the impetus to accept
these reforms is likely limited. The Institute wishes to stress that this should
be no obstacle to reform.
6.11.2 John Milton wrote that even the power of kings was only derivative of
what was transferred to them by the common people, and
that power always
remained with the people. This idea is even more forceful in a democracy, where
government is selected by the people.
Underpinning our system of laws and
governance is the notion that the power of that law and the authority of that
governance comes
from the consent of those governed.
6.11.3 Democracy is not, and should not, be a once every three-year event. It
must go beyond elections, and beyond lip service to
the needs and expectations
of the public. It must rest in an acknowledgement that the public has an
interest in the current actions
of the government, and that they should have the
tools to challenge. The best tool to achieve that is judicial review.
6.11.4 As originally conceived, the
Judicial Review Act
was to make
the process of judicial review more accessible and comprehensible to the public.
Returning to this original conception,
and empowering the public in the process,
will serve to strengthen Tasmania’s democracy.
Griffith University v
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
, 133 (Kirby J) (‘
Judicial Review Act
Judicial Review Act 1991
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1989
Administrative Law Act 1978
See for example,
Domestic Trading Pty Ltd v AWB Ltd
[2003] HCA 35
(2003) 216 CLR 277
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
King v Director
[2013] TASSC 9
Smillie v Legal
Aid Commission of Tasmania
[2014] TASSC 19.
Summarised in M Aronson,
‘Private Bodies, Public Power and Soft Law in the High Court’
[2007] FedLawRw 1
Federal Law Review
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions; Community Legal Centres Tasmania; Equal Opportunity
Tasmania; Anglicare Tasmania;
Tasmanian Water and Sewerage Corporation; and an
anonymous submission.
(2010) 239 CLR 531
(1990) 170 CLR 321
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99.
[2003] HCA 35
(2003) 216 CLR 277.
[2013] TASFC 9.
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99.
(1990) 170 CLR 321.
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 20 April 2000,
Sections 17 and
18(2)(a)–(e) of the
list various forms of jurisdictional error,
but (f) and (i) extend review to other errors of law whether or not they are
and whether or not they appear on the face of the record.
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 20 April 2000,
stated that the Act applied notwithstanding anything in any other legislation,
effectively repealing existing privative clauses.
See Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 20 April 2000, Part 2,
46–114 for the Minister’s explanation of these provisions.
contains no equivalent of s 43 of the Tasmanian Act, abolishing the prerogative
remedies. In that context, s 10, which states that
the rights the Act gives are
in addition to, not in derogation from any other rights to review which the
person may have, preserve
the common law remedies alongside those in the Act.
The Federal Court, which possesses no common law jurisdiction but only such
as statute confers on it, has been given jurisdiction with respect
to mandamus and prohibition:
Judiciary Act 1903
Review under
grown to such an extent compared with review under the
members of the Federal Court have questioned the continued value of the
. See, eg, Justice Alan Robertson, ‘The Administrative Law
Important?’
Australian Bar Review
CLR 321, the High Court decided that only ‘final and operative’
decisions were reviewable. Until that decision,
the Federal Court had
interpreted the term more broadly;
Lamb v Moss
[1983] FCA 254
(1983) 49 ALR 533.
implications of
are considered in detail in Parts 4 and 5.
‘Administrative’ powers and decisions are to be distinguished from
those which are legislative and judicial.
Problems had arisen in
determining whether a decision was made ‘under an enactment’
especially in cases where there
was an alternative source of the legal power to
make the decision, such as a contract. However, it did not become clear just how
problematic the requirement that the decision be ‘under an
enactment’ was until
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
, some five years after
was passed.
Section 43 does not extend
to habeas corpus and the Act did not change any provisions in the
Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
referring to habeas corpus, such as
(2010) 239 CLR 531, 581
is narrower in
scope, only abolishing the writs of mandamus, prohibition and certiorari.
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 4 July 2000,
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1980
Tasman Quest v Evans
[2003] TASSC 110
Tasman Quest
Ibid [8]. The equitable
remedies of injunction and declaration remained available. Whether they provided
a solution to the dilemma
the court faced is considered below.
The doubts are discussed at
if we decide to retain the prerogative remedies, is legislation
needed to put them on a firm legal footing?
(1997) 19 CLR 602.
[2015] TASSC 54
Tasmanian Industrial Commission Case
[2010] HCA 1
; (2010) 239
Ibid [100] (French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ) quoted in
R v Tasmanian
Industrial Commission
[2015] TASSC 54
[2015] TASSC 54
[2005] TASSC 8
, [25]. The
legislation under which the Tribunal operates and the decisions of the Tribunal
are not exempt from review under Schedules
1 and 2 of the Act.
[2016] TASSC 29
case concerned proceedings before a Board of Enquiry set up under the
Government Act
(Tas) which is not exempted from review under
Schedules 1 and 2 of the Act.
[2016] TASSC 12.
[2016] TASSC 59.
[2013] TASSC 10.
[2015] TASSC 6
[2012] TASSC 42.
[2005] TASSC 134
Evans J made this suggestion although the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
listed in Schedule 2.
[2015] TASSC 6
Section 4(1)
Judicial Review Act
limits review under the Act to decisions of an
administrative character.
[2013] TASSC 3.
[2014] TASSC 64.
[2015] TASSC 33.
Skilltech Consulting
Services Pty Ltd v Bold Vision Pty Ltd
[2013] TASSC 3
The effect of Schedule 1 is
discussed in detail in Part 2.1 above.
[2015] TASSC 54.
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 20 April 2000, Part 2, 40–108, Judicial
Review Bill Second Reading Speech, considered in detail in Part
2, especially
Before the passage of the
Australia Acts 1986
the Tasmanian Parliament could not alter the
scope of the jurisdiction which the
Australian Courts Act 1828
the Tasmanian Supreme Court because that Act was Imperial legislation
applying to the State by paramount force under s 2 of the
Colonial Laws
Validity Act 1865.
Section 2 of the
Australia Act
removed the
remaining limitations on State legislative power and s 3 of the Act repealed the
Colonial Laws Validity Act
thus leaving the State Parliament free
to alter or repeal the grant of jurisdiction to the Tasmanian Supreme Court in
Australian Courts Act 1828.
(2010) 239 CLR
Ibid [98]–[99].
Ibid [100].
[1995] HCA 58
184 CLR 163
Ibid 179 [58], referred to
(2010) 239 CLR 531, [68].
(2010) 239 CLR
531, [71], [73].
Ibid [100], quoted above at
Council of Civil Service
Unions v Minister for Civil Service
[1985] AC 374
R v Panel on
Take-overs and Mergers; Ex parte Datafin
[1986] EWCA Civ 8
[1987] QB 815.
Re Refugee Review
Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR 82
, It is not clear how far
certiorari extends beyond courts or whether all tribunals are subject to it:
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
(2010) 239 CLR
531, [98]–[100].
[2010] FCA 1019
(2010) 189 FCR 412.
Ibid [32]–[33].
Ibid [121].
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act 1977
FAI v Winneke
[1982] HCA 26
151 CLR 342.
Judicial Review Act
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
Judicial Review Act
Administrative Law Act
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) r 56.01. The apparent decline in the
Administrative Law Act
explained in M Groves, ‘Should the
Administrative Law Act 1978
Melbourne University Law Review
Administrative Review
Council (‘ARC’),
Federal Judicial Review in Australia
was intended to abolish the prerogative remedies completely, but as explained
above (see [
interpreted so as to do that.
provisions were copied from the
s 10(2). Similar provisions are
found in the
Judicial Review Act
CLR 531, [98]–[100].
(2010) 239 CLR 531.
Injunctions and
declarations may also be available but they are not used frequently in Tasmanian
administrative law.
[2003] TASSC 110
October 2003).
Australian Courts Act
Australia Act
Darling Casino v NSW
Casino Control Authority
(1997) 19 CLR 602.
CLR 531, [100] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Krefeld and Bell JJ).
Duncan v Independent
Commission against Corruption
[2015] HCA 32
, [35] (Gageler J)
[2015] TASSC 54
Sections 17
[2005] TASSC 8
[2005] TASSC 134
[15] (Evans J).
[2009] TASSC
[2016] TASSC 29
[129] (Blow CJ).
[2015] TASSC 6
[13] (Pearce J).
[2014] TASSC 64
[3], (Blow CJ).
[2013] TASSC 3
[3] (Blow J).
[2011] TASSC 27
n 8 (Porter J).
[2011] TASSC 27
, counsel for the Attorney-General argued that the
Supreme Court no longer has power to grant prerogative relief and that
Supreme Court Rules
is invalid.
Supreme Court Civil
Procedure Act 1932
This does not deny that
the Supreme Court, as a superior court of record, has an inherent power to
control its own procedure. Whether
that power extends to a power to regulate the
way in which its grant of supervisory jurisdiction under the
Courts Act 1828
is to be exercised is a moot point. It need not be discussed
here because when laying down
Supreme Court Rules
the Court did not claim to be exercising that power, but the rule making
power conferred on it by the
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act
Swanton v Resource
Management and Planning Appeal Tribunal
[2015] TASSC 6
R v Macdessi; ex parte Walton
[2014] TASSC 64
Skilltech Consulting Services Pty Ltd v Bold Vision Pty Ltd
[2013] TASSC 3
CLR 531, 581, [100].
[2015] TASSC
Mark Aronson, Matthew
Groves and Greg Weeks,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action and
Government Liability
(Law Book, 6
ed, 2017) 83–5.
Doan v Health
Insurance Commission
(2002) 124 FCR 125
[2002] FCA 1160
(18 September 2002)
[99]–[100] (Marshall J).
– the definition of ‘decision to which this Act applies’
extends to decisions whether made in the exercise
of a discretion or not.
Australian Postal
Corporation v Forgie
(2003) 130 FCR 279
[2003] FCAFC 223.
International Pty Ltd v AB Luckman
[1985] FCA 293
(7 August 1985) [11];
Re Whim Creek Consolidated NL v Colgan
(1991) 31 FCR 469
[1991] FCA 467
(7 October 1991) [20].
(1991) 31 FCR 469
[1991] FCA 467
(7 October 1991) [29].
Customs Act 1901
Re Whim Creek
Consolidated NL v Colgan
(1991) 31 FCR 469
[1991] FCA 467
(7 October 1991)
Section 203(2)
Customs Act 1901
at that time read: ‘An authorised person may seize
any forfeited goods or any goods that he believes on reasonable grounds are
forfeited goods.’ This section has since been repealed.
Aronson, Groves and
Buck v Comcare
(1996) 66FCR 359;
[1996] FCA 1485
Trajkovski v Telstra Corporation
[1998] FCA 169
Chowdhary v Bayne
[1999] FCA 41
(1999) 29 AAR 100
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Administrative Appeals Tribunal
[2003] FCA 102
(2003) 37 AAR 40
Australian Postal Corporation v
[2003] FCA 390.
(2003) 130 FCR 279
[2003] FCAFC 223.
(1990) 170 CLR 321;
[1990] HCA 33.
Ibid, [32] (Mason CJ,
Brennan and Deane JJ agreeing on this point), [25]–[9] (Toohey and Gaudron
(2003) 130 FCR 279
[2003] FCAFC 223.
Aronson, Groves and Weeks
[1990] HCA 33.
Review of the
Administrative Decisions
Judicial Review Act
26 (Commonwealth of Australia, 1986).
(1983) 49 ALR 533
[1983] FCA 254.
Lamb v Moss
[1983] FCA 254
(1983) 49 ALR 533
(1983) 49 ALR 533
[1983] FCA 254.
[1990] HCA 33
, [37] (Mason CJ, Brennan J agreeing);
Lamb v Moss
(1983) 49 ALR 533
[1983] FCA 254.
(1990) 170 CLR 321;
[1990] HCA 33.
Ibid [32] (Mason CJ,
Brennan J agreeing). See also [25] (Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
the High Court argued that the words of the
were clear in
requiring that ‘decision’ be limited to ‘final and operative
decision’ and that there were
no policy reasons which were sufficiently
strong to justify disregarding the clear meaning of the words: (1990) 170 CR
[1990] HCA 33
, [31]–[32] (Mason CJ); [25]–[29] (Toohey and
Gaudron JJ). Policy arguments with respect to the need for additional screening
devices to rule out premature actions may have played a smaller role in the
decision than is commonly assumed.
Ibid [32] (Mason CJ,
with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed). Toohey and Gaudron JJ reached a similar
conclusion, [25]–[29].
Ibid [34] (Mason CJ,
with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed).
Ibid [86] (Mason CJ,
with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed).
Ibid [39] (Mason CJ,
with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed).
Aronson, Groves and
This assumes that
procedural decisions are reviewable as conduct. Some statements in
cast doubt on this. They are considered below in
Bond and the review of
procedural decisions as conduct
(1997) 78 FCR 356
[1996] 41 ALD 219.
(1997) 78 FCR 356
[1996] 41 ALD 219.
State of Tasmania v
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal and Others
[2009] TASSC 48
Devonport Corporation Pty Ltd v Abey
[2005] TASSC 97
[32] (Crawford J).
(1990) 170 CLR 321,
[46]–[47], quoted below at [
[2009] TASSC 48.
[2005] TASSC 97.
Von Stalheim v
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner & Anor
[2005] TASSC 134
, [9]. See also
Port of Devonport Corporation Pty Ltd v Abey
[2005] TASSC 97
(Crawford J);
Houghton Pty Ltd v Resource Development and Planning Commission
[2005] TASSC 58.
[2009] TASSC 48
(2009) 19 Tas R 54.
Commissioner of
Taxation v Beddoe
(1996) 68 FCR 446
[1996] FCA 78
[1996] FCA 1661
148 ALR 383
Geographical Indications Committee v O’Connor
, [20], [28]. See also
Somnomed Ltd v Commissioner of Patents
[2006] FCA 765.
King v Director of
[2013] TASFC 9
State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
[2009] TASSC 48
(2009) 19 Tas R 54
, [21]–[24];
Tarkine National Coalition Inc v
Minister Administering the
Mineral Resources Development Act 1995
, [27]–[30];
G F Noye Pty Ltd v Resource Management and
Planning Appeal Tribunal
[2007] TASSC 109
(19 December 2007); V
Stalheim v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner & Anor
[2005] TASSC 134
Port of Devonport Corporation Pty Ltd v Abey
[2005] TASSC 97
Houghton Pty Ltd v Resource Development and Planning
[2005] TASSC 58
[1990] HCA 33
170 CLR 321, [32]–[33] (Mason CJ with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed),
[25]–[29] (Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
King v Director of
[2013] TASFC 9
State of Tasmania v Anti-Discrimination
[2009] TASSC 48
(2009) 19 Tas R 54
, [21]–[24];
Tarkine National Coalition
Inc v Minister Administering the
Mineral Resources Development Act 1995
[2016] TASSC 11
, [27]–[30];
G F Noye Pty Ltd v Resource Management and
Planning Appeal Tribunal
[2007] TASSC 109
(19 December 2007);
Stalheim v Anti-Discrimination Commissioner & Anor
[2005] TASSC 134
Port of Devonport Corporation Pty Ltd v Abey
[2005] TASSC 97
Houghton Pty Ltd v Resource Development and Planning
[2005] TASSC 58
(1990) 170 CLR 321, [32]
(Mason CJ with whom Brennan and Deane JJ agreed). See also [26]–[29]
(Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
(1990) 27 FCR 26.
CLR 321, [32] (Mason CJ).
Edelsten v Health
Insurance Commission
(1990) 27 FCR 26, [47].
CLR 321, [32] (Mason CJ).
[1997] FCA 85
February 1997).
[2015] QSC 111.
[116]–[119].
[120]–[128].
(1997) 78 FCR 356
CLR 321, [34] quoted above at [
(1996) 68 FCR 446
[1996] FCA 78
[1996] FCA 1661
(1997) 148 ALR 383.
[1996] FCA 1661
(1996) 68 FCR 446
Geographical
Indications Committee v O’Connor
[2000] FCA 1877
, [20], [28]. See also
Somnomed Ltd v Commissioner of Patents
[2006] FCA 765.
[2000] FCA 1877.
[1996] 41 ALD 219.
The amendment should be
to the definition of decision under an enactment, not simply to the definition
of decision, for reasons
explained at [
Mark Aronson, ‘Is
the ADJR Act Hampering the Development of Australian Administrative Law’
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
Schedule 2, which lists exceptions to the right.
s 29 and Schedule 3
which lists exceptions.
Judicial Review
, which is similar to
, extends to the prerogative
and the Prerogative Remedies.
See above [
Nona v Barnes
[2012] QCA 346
Wilson v Coordinator-General Department of State
Development
[2001] QCA 159
Palmer v Chief Executive, QLD Corrective
[2010] QCA 316
Resort Management Services Ltd v Noosa Shire
[1993] QCA 347.
(2005) 221 CLR 99
[2005] HCA 7 (Gummow
, Callinan and Heydon JJ).
Eastman v The
Honourable Justice Anthony James Besanko and Attorney-General for the Australian
Capital Territory
[2010] ACTCA 15
(17 August 2010) [200]–[205].
Rules Publication Act
Legislation Publication Act 1996
[1986] EWCA Civ 8
[1987] 1 QB 815
2 All ER 770.
The Minister after
receiving a report from the State Planning Commission, makes State Planning
Provisions,
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
The State Planning
Commission, with the approval of the Minister, makes Local Planning Schedules,
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
Marine Farming
Planning Act 1995
Rules Publication
(Tas) s 2(1).
[2009] TASSC 51.
[2006] TASSC 66.
(1984) 1 FCR 254.
Ibid 264–5.
Australia Act
Prerogative legislation
applying to a colony may affect rights, although to what extent is not clear;
R (on the application of Bancoult) v Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs
[2006] EWHC 1038
However, prerogative
legislation cannot alter rights and obligations in the country itself as
distinct from its colonies and dependencies:
Case of Proclamations
EWHC KB J22
(1611) 12 Co Rep 74
77 ER 1352.
R v Criminal
Injuries Compensation Board; ex parte Lain
[1967] 2 QB 864
, for a good
example of such a scheme.
[2009] TASSC 51.
[2006] TASSC 66.
[1982] FCA 59.
Australian National
University v Burns
[1982] FCA 191
(1982) 64 FLR 166.
[1984] HCA 49
155 CLR 234.
(1983) 77 FLR 195.
[1984] HCA 49
155 CLR 234.
[2005] HCA 7
With respect to the
Smillie v Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania
[2014] TASSC
Prerogative legislation
applying to a colony may affect rights. However, prerogative legislation cannot
alter rights and obligations
in the country itself as distinct from its colonies
and dependencies: see n
1990] HCA 33
; (1990) 170 CLR 321, [32].
(2005) 221 CLR 99
, [81]–[82].
(1985) 7 FCR 575.
(2005) 221 CLR 99
Ibid [57] and [91].
(1988) 84 ALR 563
(1992) 117 ALR 277,
[1996] FCA 1568
(1996) 65 FCR 269
Tang v Griffith
[2003] QCA 571
[1984] HCA 49
155 CLR 234.
(2005) 221 CLR 99
Ibid [12], [20] (Gleeson
CJ) and [91] (Gummow, Callinan and Heydon JJ).
[2003] HCA 35
(2003) 216 CLR 277.
1, cls (ha) and (hb).
[2012] TASSC 82
[2013] TASFC 9.
[2013] TASFC 9
Residential Tenancy
s 42(1)(d).
(Tas) s 16 vested authority to let and by implication to cancel or not renew
leases of public housing in Tasmania; see also s 6A(3A)(d)
which gave the
Director and his or her delegates power to ‘do all such acts and things as
may be ... appropriate for exercising
the powers given to the
[2013] TASFC
The Court at first
instance and the Full Court both held that the decision to issue a notice to
vacate was not a decision made under
because it did
not meet the
[2012] TASSC 82
[2013] TASFC 9.
That is not relevant for present purposes.
[2005] HCA 7
[2013] TASFC 9
[1982] FCA 191
[1982] FCA 191
(1982) 64 FLR 166.
[1984] HCA 49
[1984] HCA 49
(1984) 155 CLR 234.
See Part 5.3 above:
The source of the power to make the decision
[1982] FCA 191
64 FLR 166.
The relevant passage is quoted above [
[1982] FCA 59.
[1982] FCA 191
[1982] FCA 191
(1982) 64 FLR 166.
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99.
The Institute notes the
unsuccessful appeal in
Director of Housing v Parsons
[2019] TASFC 3
where a decision by Housing Tasmania in relation to a decision to not renew a
lease was successfully challenged as a matter of judicial
(1985) 7 FCR 575.
R v Panel on
Take-overs and Mergers; Ex parte Datafin Plc
[1986] EWCA Civ 8
[1987] 1 QB 815
; [1987] 2 All
R v Jockey Club Disciplinary Committee; Ex parte Agha Khan
[1992] EWCA Civ 7
The Australian cases are
discussed in Aronson (n
See also the discussion in
Acquista Investments Pty Ltd v Urban Renewal
[2014] SASC 206.There
is no reason to discuss them further
(1985) 7 FCR 575
In determining whether a
statutory power has been used for an improper purpose, one must look at the
subject scope and purpose of
the enabling legislation;
R v Toohey; Ex parte
Northern Land Council
[1981] HCA 74
(1981) 151 CLR 170.
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99.
General Newspapers
Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation
(1993) FCR 164, 173.
Khuu & Lee Pty
Ltd v Corporation of The City of Adelaide
(2011) 110 SASR 235
[2010] SASC
Acquista Investments Pty Ltd v Urban Renewal Authority
[2014] SASC 206
Karimbla Properties (No 50) Pty Ltd v State of New
South Wales
[2015] NSWSC 778.
Australian Capital
Territory Health Authority v Berkeley Cleaning Group Pty Ltd
(1985) 7 FCR
Karimbla Properties
(No 50) Pty Ltd v State of New South Wales
[2015] NSWSC 778
Review of the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
: The Ambit of the Act
(1989), [116]–[128].
[118]–[124].
Ibid [118] citing
White Industries Limited v Electricity Commission of NSW
(Supreme Court
of NSW, 20 May 1987, unreported).
[126]–[127].
[154]–[156].
This Bill has stalled in
the House of Representatives. It remains a good model for Tasmanian
legislation.
These are subordinate
legislation made under the
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability
[1982] FCA 191
64 FLR 166.
(1996) 68 FCR 87.
Industrial Relations
empowers the industrial Commission to make awards with
respect to the employees of State government and its agencies.
But not from review
under the prerogative remedies,
R v Tasmanian Industrial Commission; ex parte
the Minister Administering the
State Service Act 2000
[2015] TASSC 54.
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99.
A hearing is required
where a decision-maker exercising a statutory discretion is considering not
applying a settled policy to a
particular case; Aronson, Groves and Weeks (n
R v Criminal Injuries
Compensation Board; Ex parte Lain
[1967] 2 QB 864.
There is a detailed
discussion of the authorities in
Acquista Investments Pty Ltd v Urban Renewal
(2015) 123 SASR 147
[2014] SASC 206
, [245]–[283].
[2014] TASSC 19.
) [161]–[167].
Ibid Recommendation
Justice Catherine
Holmes, ‘Not Making a Difference: Queensland’s Extension of
Statutory Review’
[2016] AIAdminLawF 17
; Matthew Groves,
‘Should we follow the gospel of the ADJR Act?’
[2010] MelbULawRw 15
Melbourne University Law Review
Peter Billings and
Anthony Cassimatis, Submission No 6 to ARC,
Federal Judicial Review in
Australia (2012)
Report 50 (27 June 2011) 4.
Anghel v Minister for
Transport (No 1)
[1995] 1 Qd R 465.
Wide Bay Helicopter
Rescue Services Inc v Minister for Emergency Services
(1999) 5 QAR 1
Mikitas v Director, Department of Justice and Attorney-General
Bituminous Products Pty Ltd v General Manager Road Systems and
Engineering, Department of Main Roads
[2005] QSC 42
[2005] 2 Qd R 344.
ARC, above n
, 5.23–5.49.
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
[135], [152].
[1982] HCA 26
(1982) 151 CLR 342.
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550.
Ibid 616–17.
See above [
(1990) 27 FCR 26.
premature applications for review – the Bond rule or the s 13
Legislation to
reverse the decision in Bond
(2005) 221 CLR 99
[152]. See also [104].
[1990] HCA 33
170 CLR 321.
See above [
(2005) 221 CLR 99
[2003] HCA 35
[2003] HCA 35
(2003) 216 CLR 277.
Ibid [121], [123].
Ibid [105] (Kirby
Forbes v New South
Wales Trotting Club Ltd
[1979] HCA 27
(1979) 143 CLR 242.
[2013] TASFC 9.
Ibid [64] quoted above
[2013] TASFC
, [64] quoted above [
Khuu & Lee Pty
Ltd v Corporation of The City of Adelaide
(2011) 110 SASR 235
[2010] SASC
Acquista Investments Pty Ltd v Urban Renewal Authority
[2014] SASC 206
Karimbla Properties (No 50) Pty Ltd v State of New
South Wales
[2015] NSWSC 778.
[2013] TASFC 9
[1986] EWCA Civ 8
[1987] 1 QB 815
2 All ER 770.
Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs v Gray
(1994) 50 FCR 189
Green v Daniels
[1977] HCA 18
(1977) 13 ALR 1.
The constitutional
requirement that State Supreme Courts retain their jurisdiction with respect to
the prerogative remedies is discussed
in detail in Part 3.1 –
Abolition of the prerogative remedies and Constitutional protection of the
supervisory jurisdiction of State Supreme Courts
Minister for Arts
Heritage and the Environment v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1987) 75 ALR 218.
Court refused leave to appeal in this case, effectively endorsing the
R v Toohey: ex parte
Northern Land Council
[1981] HCA 74
(1981) 151 CLR 170.
)Recommendation 1.
) Recommendation 1, 77.
Ibid [5.22], 83.
Ibid [4.4] 72–3.
This Report suggests
that the prerogative remedies be incorporated in the
Certiorari is also
available for error of law on the face of the record, but non-statutory
decisions rarely generate a record of
the relevant type.
Re Refugee Review
Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
(2000) 204 CLR 82
[2000] HCA 57.
[2013] TASFC 9.
Aronson, Groves and
) Recommendation 1, discussed at [
and other arrangements entered into in the implementation of a policy, or to
deliver a service or benefit
R v Murray and
[1916] HCA 58
(1916) 22 CLR 437, (Isaacs
, Higgins Gavan Duffy and
[1982] HCA 26
(1982) 151 CLR 342.
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550.
The cases are discussed
in Aronson, Groves and Weeks (n
Monash University v
[1984] Vic Rp 30
[1984] VR 383
Dominik v Eutrope
[1984] Vic R
[1984] VicRp 54
[1984] VR 636
Davidson v Australian Mensa Inc
(1996) 10 VAR 42.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (908 KB)
PDF format (1.24 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter