URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDP/2009/75.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:31:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries [2009] ALRCDP 75
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
ALRC Discussion Paper 75
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
Terms of Reference
List of Participants
List of Proposal and Questions
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Scope of the Inquiry
Terminology
Law Reform Process
Organisation of this Discussion Paper
Timeframe for the Inquiry
2. History and Role of Public Inquiries
Introduction
Historical background and trends
Characteristics of public inquiries
Functions of public inquiries
Policy and investigatory inquiries
3. Overview of the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Introduction
Establishment
Coercive powers
Methods of taking evidence
Privileges and immunities
Communication of information
Concurrent Commonwealth and state inquiries
Custody and use of records
4. Comparative Forms of Public Inquiry
Introduction
Models of inquiry in Australian states and territories
Other models of inquiry in Australia
Models of inquiry in overseas jurisdictions
5. A New Statutory Framework for Public Inquiries
Introduction
The current arrangements for public inquiries
Options for reform
Titles of inquiries and new inquiries legislation
Nature of inquiries in the proposed model
Scope for selecting powers for each inquiry
Relationship between tiers of inquiry
6. Establishment
Introduction
Factors for consideration before an inquiry is established
Establishing authority
An inquiry’s terms of reference
Appointment of inquiry members
Multi-member inquiries
Persons assisting an inquiry
7. Reports and Recommendations
Introduction
Inquiry reports
Tabling reports in Parliament
Government responses to public inquiries
Implementation of recommendations
8. Administration and Records
Introduction
Administrative assistance for inquiries
Inquiry records
9. Funding and Costs
Introduction
Costs of inquiry participants
Other inquiry costs
Method of funding inquiries
10. Minimising Costs
Introduction
Sources of information about costs
Other jurisdictions
Costs of public inquiries
Publication of budgets or expenses
Role of inquiry members
Other methods of minimising costs
Introduction
Overview of powers of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
Coercive information-gathering powers
Other investigatory powers
Other issues
12. Protection from Legal Liability
Introduction
Current protection from legal liability
Need for protection from legal liability
Form of protection from legal liability
Gaps in protection from legal liability
Compellability
13. National Security
Introduction
Royal Commissions and inquiries in cases of national security
Overview of the use of national security information by inquiries
Other issues
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
14. Inquiries and Courts
Introduction
Judicial review
Referral of questions of law
Concurrent legal proceedings
15. Procedures
Introduction
Methods of inquiry
Procedural fairness
Examination and cross-examination
Procedural protections
Authorisation of leave to appear
Inquiries affecting Indigenous peoples
Consultations
Rights to information
16. Privileges and Public Interest Immunity
Introduction
Client legal privilege
Privilege against self-incrimination
Pending charges or penalty proceedings
Scope of use immunity
Parliamentary privilege
Public interest immunity
Statutory privileges
17. Statutory Exemptions from Disclosure
Introduction
Secret processes of manufacture
Secrecy provisions
18. Offences
Introduction
Civil or administrative sanctions
Offences of non-compliance
Contravention of directions
Interference with evidence or witnesses
Offences relating to Commissioners or staff
Disclosures by Commissioners or staff
19. Contempt
Introduction
Contempt of court
Application of contempt to public inquiries
The prohibited conduct
20. Penalties, Proceedings and Costs
Introduction
Setting penalties
Present penalties
Submissions and consultations
Penalties for Official Inquiries
Penalties for non-compliance
Unauthorised publications
Offence of substantial disruption
Proceedings
ALRC’s view
Appendix 1. List of Submissions
Appendix 2. List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals Consulted
Appendix 3. List of Abbreviations
Appendix 4. Federal Royal Commissions established since March 1983
Appendix 5. Non-Royal Commission Federal Public Inquiries established since March 1983
Appendix 6. Table of Consequential Amendments
This Discussion Paper reflects the law as at 23 July 2009.
© Commonwealth of Australia 2009
This work is copyright. For further information about reproducing this
document - in whole or in part - please refer to the ALRC’s
ISBN-978-0-9804153-7-7
Commission Reference: DP 75
The Australian Law Reform Commission was established on 1 January 1975 by the
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
(Cth) and reconstituted by the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
(Cth). The office of the ALRC
is at Level 25, 135 King Street, Sydney, NSW, 2000, Australia.
All ALRC publications can be made available in a range of accessible formats
for people with disabilities. If you require assistance,
please contact the
Telephone: within Australia (02) 8238 6333
International +61 2 8238 6333
TTY: (02) 8238 6379
Facsimile: within Australia (02) 8238 6363
International +61 2 8238 6363
info@alrc.gov.au
ALRC homepage:
www.alrc.gov.au
Making a submission
Any public contribution to an inquiry is called a submission and these are
actively sought by the ALRC from a broad cross-section
of the community, as well
as those with a special interest in the inquiry.
Submissions are usually written, but there is no set format and they need not
be formal documents. Where possible, submissions in
electronic format are
It would be helpful if comments addressed specific questions or numbered
paragraphs in this paper.
Open inquiry policy
In the interests of informed public debate, the ALRC is committed to open
access to information. As submissions provide important
evidence to each
inquiry, it is common for the ALRC to draw upon the contents of submissions and
quote from them or refer to them
in publications. As part of ALRC policy,
non-confidential submissions are made available to any person or organisation
upon request
after completion of an inquiry, and also may be published on the
ALRC website. For the purposes of this policy, an inquiry is considered
been completed when the final report has been tabled in Parliament.
However, the ALRC also accepts submissions made in confidence. Confidential
submissions may include personal experiences where there
is a wish to retain
material). Any request for access to
a confidential submission is determined in
accordance with the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
, which has
provisions designed to protect sensitive information given in confidence.
In the absence of a clear indication that a submission is intended to be
confidential, the ALRC will treat the submission as
non-confidential.
Submissions should be sent to:
The Executive Director
Australian Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 3708
royalcommissions@alrc.gov.au
Submissions may also be made using the
on the ALRC’s homepage:
www.alrc.gov.au
‘Talk to Us …
The closing date for submissions in response to DP 75 is
22 September
Terms of Reference
REVIEW OF THE
COMMISSIONS
AND RELATED ISSUES
I, ROBERT McCLELLAND, Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of Australia,
having regard to the need to ensure that the executive government
has available
to it forms of inquiry on matters of public importance which are effective and
efficient in the context of contemporary
requirements, refer to the Australian
Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report, pursuant to
subsection 20(1)
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
, the operation and
provisions of the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(the Act) and the
question whether an alternative form or forms of Commonwealth executive inquiry
should be established by statute.
1. In carrying out its review, the Commission is to consider:
(a) whether there is any need to develop an alternative form or forms of
Commonwealth executive inquiry, with statutory foundations,
to provide more
flexibility, less formality and greater cost-effectiveness than a Royal
Commission (particularly whether there would
be any advantage in codifying
special arrangements and powers that should apply to such alternative forms of
(b) whether there is any need to develop special arrangements and powers
for inquiries involving matters of national security;
(c) the appropriate balances between powers for persons undertaking
inquiries and protections of the rights and liberties of persons
interested in,
or potentially affected by, inquiries;
(d) the appropriateness of restrictions on the disclosure of information
to, and use of information by, Royal Commissions and other
inquiries, including
restrictions contained in other legislation (but not including those arising
from the operation of client legal
privilege); and
(e) suggestions for changes to the Act proposed or raised by Royal
Commissions.
2. In carrying out its review, the Commission will identify and consult with
key stakeholders, including relevant Commonwealth, State
and Territory agencies.
3. The Commission will provide its final report to me by 30 October 2009.
Dated: 14 January 2009
Robert McClelland
Attorney-General
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Senior Legal Officers
Legal Officers
Research Manager
Project Assistants
Legal Interns
Advisory Committee Members
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
The Division of the ALRC constituted under the
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
(Cth) for the purposes of this Inquiry comprises the
Professor David Weisbrot AM (President)
Professor Les McCrimmon
(Commissioner in charge)
Professor Rosalind Croucher
(Commissioner)
Justice Berna Collier (part-time Commissioner)
Susan Kenny (part-time Commissioner)
Senior Legal Officers
Kate Connors (until May 2009)
Legal Officers
Joyce Chia (from March 2009)
Althea Gibson (until February
Catherine Kelso (from March 2009)
Erin Mackay
Research Manager
Jonathan Dobinson
Carolyn Kearney
Project Assistants
Alayne Harland
Tina O’Brien
Legal Interns
Christopher Beshara
Aaron Besser
Marissa Chorn
Advisory Committee Members
Ms Sheila Butler, former Secretary to several recent Commonwealth public
Emeritus Professor Enid Campbell AC OBE, former Dean, Monash
University, Faculty of Law and Sir Isaac Isaacs Professor of Law
Stephen Charles QC, former judge of the Victorian Court of Appeal
Terence Cole AO RDF QC, former judge of the New South Wales Court of
Mr Simon Daley, Australian Government Solicitor
Ms Megan Davis,
Director, Indigenous Law Centre, University of New South Wales
The Hon Tony
Fitzgerald AC QC, former judge of the New South Wales Court of Appeal
Scott Prasser, Senior Lecturer in Management, Faculty of Business, University of
the Sunshine Coast
Acting Justice Ronald Sackville AO QC, New South Wales
Court of Appeal
Mr Michael Sexton SC, New South Wales Solicitor-General
Iris Stevens, former judge of the District Court of South Adelaide
van Barneveld, Director, Policy and Research, Community and Public Sector
Mr Bret Walker SC, Barrister, St James Hall
The Hon Hal Wootten AC
QC, former judge of the New South Wales Supreme Court and Foundation Dean of
Law, University of New South Wales
Mr George Zdenkowski, Visiting Professor
of Law at the University of Tasmania, and former New South Wales
List of Proposals and
5. A New Statutory Framework for Public Inquiries
6. Establishment
7. Reports and Recommendations
8. Administration and Records
9. Funding and Costs
10. Minimising Costs
12. Protection from Legal Liability
13. National Security
14. Inquiries and Courts
15. Procedures
16. Privileges and Public Interest Immunity
17. Statutory Exemptions from Disclosure
18. Offences
19. Contempt
20. Penalties, Proceedings and Costs
List of Proposals and
5. A New Statutory Framework for Public
Proposal 5–1
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) should
(a) amended to enable the establishment of two tiers of public
inquiry—Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries;
(b) renamed the
Inquiries Act
(c) updated to reflect modern drafting practices.
Question 5–1
Should there be a mechanism in place by which the
the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security, can be expanded
temporarily to conduct particular public inquiries?
Proposal 5–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should set out
the specific powers that are conferred on Royal Commissions and Official
Proposal 5–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should include a
mechanism that allows the Australian Government, in accordance with other
provisions of the Act:
(a) with the consent of the Governor-General, to convert an Official Inquiry
to a Royal Commission;
(b) to convert an inquiry established other than under the proposed Act to an
Official Inquiry; and
(c) with the consent of the Governor-General, to convert an inquiry
established other than under the proposed Act into a Royal Commission.
6. Establishment
Proposal 6–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
(a) a Royal Commission may be established if it is intended to inquire into a
matter of substantial public importance; and
(b) an Official Inquiry may be established if it is intended to inquire into
a matter of public importance.
Question 6–1
Should the proposed
Inquiries Act
criteria that the Australian Government should consider before establishing a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry, for example,
(a) a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry is the best way to achieve the
Australian Government’s objectives, or whether it
would be more
appropriate to achieve these objectives another way, for example, through
inquiry by an existing body or through civil
or criminal proceedings;
(b) the recommendations of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry would
facilitate government policy making; and
(c) powers are required and, if so, which powers, having regard to the
subject matter and scope of the inquiry?
Proposal 6–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
(a) the Governor-General establishes Royal Commissions; and
(b) a minister establishes Official Inquiries.
Proposal 6–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries shall be independent in the
performance of their functions.
Proposal 6–4
The Australian Government should develop and
Inquiries Handbook
that addresses the appointment of members
of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. The matters addressed by the
Inquiries Handbook
should include:
(a) whether the potential inquiry member has the skills, knowledge and
experience to conduct the inquiry, having regard to the subject
matter and scope
of the inquiry; and
(b) whether inquiry members should have certain attributes (for example,
gender or cultural attributes).
Proposal 6–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that both Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may have more than one
inquiry member.
Proposal 6–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
(a) in consultation with members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries,
the Attorney-General may appoint legal practitioners
to assist inquiry members;
(b) legal practitioners assisting an inquiry are independent of inquiry
Proposal 6–7
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may appoint an expert or experts
in any field as an advisor to provide
technical or specialist advice.
7. Reports and Recommendations
Proposal 7–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
(a) Royal Commissions report to the Governor-General; and
(b) Official Inquiries report to the minister that established the Official
Proposal 7–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, within 15 sitting days of receiving the final report from a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry, the Australian
Government should table in
Parliament the report or, if a part of the report is not being tabled, a
statement of reasons why the
whole report is not being tabled.
Proposal 7–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that the Australian Government should publish an update on implementation of
recommendations of an inquiry that it
accepts: one year after the tabling of the
final report of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry; and periodically
thereafter to
reflect any ongoing implementation activity.
8. Administration and Records
Proposal 8–1
The proposed
Inquiries Handbook
provide guidance on matters pertaining to the administration of inquiries, for
(a) recruitment;
(b) accommodation;
(c) budget and finance;
(d) information and communications technology; and
(e) records management.
Proposal 8–2
The Australian Government should allocate
responsibility for the administration of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries to a single
Australian Government department. The role of that
department should include responsibility for the following tasks:
(a) assisting with matters preparatory to the formal establishment of the
(b) providing assistance to inquiry members and staff to ensure an efficient
and expedited establishment process and the conduct of
the inquiry;
(c) at the conclusion of the inquiry, facilitating the prompt transfer of an
archival copy of the records of the inquiry to the National
Archives of
Australia; and
(d) monitoring and updating the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
Proposal 8–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
for the custody and use of records of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
in terms equivalent to those in
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Proposal 8–4
Archives Act 1983
should be amended to require the prompt transfer of an archival copy of the
records of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
to the National Archives of
Australia at the conclusion of the inquiry, unless directed otherwise by the
minister to whose ministerial
responsibilities the records most closely
Proposal 8–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries comply with the standards
determined, or record-keeping obligations
imposed, by the National Archives of
9. Funding and Costs
Proposal 9–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
the Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department to determine, at
any stage of a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry, that the costs of legal and
related assistance to witnesses and other inquiry participants should, or should
be met by the Australian Government in whole or in part. The factors to be
considered by the Attorney-General’s Department
in making such a
recommendation should include:
(a) whether the person has a valid reason to seek legal representation;
(b) whether it would cause hardship or injustice for the person to bear the
costs of legal representation or appear without legal
representation;
(c) the nature and possible effect of any allegations made about the
(d) whether the person could be the subject of adverse findings; and
(e) the nature and significance of the contribution that the person will, or
is likely to, make to the inquiry.
Proposal 9–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that individuals and organisations are to be paid a sum sufficient to meet their
reasonable expenses for complying
with notices to produce documents or other
things. The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department may, at
of the inquiry, determine the amount to be paid.
Proposal 9–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that individuals required to attend or appear before Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries are to be paid expenses
in accordance with the
Proposal 9–4
The proposed
Inquiries Handbook
include guidance on the engagement and remuneration of legal practitioners
assisting an inquiry. These terms of engagement
and remuneration should, as far
as practicable, be negotiated on a commercially competitive basis. The
guidelines should set out
the factors that may be relevant in negotiating these
terms, for example:
(a) the nature of the work to be performed, having regard to the subject
matter and scope of the inquiry;
(b) the skills and level of experience of individual legal practitioners;
(c) having regard to the subject matter and scope of the inquiry, the
appropriateness of applying:
(i) daily rates subject to fee caps; or
(ii) fee caps by reference to particular stages or events in the conduct of
an inquiry;
(d) the commercial rates of legal practitioners;
(e) the volume of guaranteed work provided during the inquiry;
(f) the impact that the engagement may have on a legal practitioner’s
usual practice; and
(g) any existing Australian Government policy on the procurement of legal
services and the engagement of counsel, for example, Appendix
Services Directions 2005
10. Minimising Costs
Proposal 10–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that the Australian Government publish summary information about the costs of
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
within a reasonable time of the receipt
of the final report.
Proposal 11–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries to issue notices requiring a person
(a) attend or appear before the inquiry; and
(b) produce documents or other things.
Proposal 11–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries to require a person appearing before
the inquiry to give evidence or answer
questions to swear an oath or make an
affirmation. An inquiry member, or a person authorised by an inquiry member,
should be empowered
to administer an oath or an affirmation to that person.
Proposal 11–3
The power in
Royal Commissions Act
(Cth), which enables a Royal Commission to issue a warrant for the
apprehension of a person who fails to appear before it, should
be redrafted in
the proposed
Inquiries Act
. Royal Commissions should be required to apply
to a judge to issue a warrant for the apprehension and immediate delivery of a
to a police officer or judicial officer.
Question 11–1
Should the proposed
Inquiries Act
power comparable to that found in
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
(Cth), which would allow an inquiry member to prohibit
the disclosure of the existence of a notice, or a matter connected with it?
Proposal 11–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower a
member of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry to issue a notice requiring a
person to provide information in
a form approved by the inquiry, failing which
the person must attend the inquiry as if he or she had been issued with a notice
attend or appear before the inquiry.
Proposal 11–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should contain
provisions, applicable to both Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries,
equivalent to those in
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), which concern the making of inquiries and taking
of evidence outside Australia.
Proposal 11–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries are empowered to inspect, retain
and copy any documents or other things
produced to an inquiry.
Proposal 11–7
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should contain
provisions for a Royal Commission to apply to a judge for a warrant to exercise
entry, search and seizure powers equivalent
to those in
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth). The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that, if an application for a warrant is made to a judge of a
federal court, the judge issues the warrant in his or
her personal capacity.
Question 11–2
Should the provisions in the
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth), that allow the communication of
intercepted information to Royal Commissions in certain circumstances, also
apply to Official
Proposal 11–8
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries to communicate information that relates
to a contravention, or evidence of
contravention, of a law of the Commonwealth
or of a state or territory, to bodies or persons responsible for the
administration or
enforcement of the law as prescribed by regulations under the
Proposal 11–9
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that only Royal Commissions may have concurrent functions and powers conferred
under the proposed Act and state and
territory laws.
Protection from Legal Liability
Proposal 12–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that no civil or criminal proceeding shall lie in respect of any actions done,
or omissions made, in good faith by
members of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries, legal practitioners assisting inquiries or legal representatives of
participants, expert advisors and inquiry staff, in the exercise of, or
intended exercise of, powers or functions under the Act.
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that civil
proceedings shall not lie against a person for loss, damage or injury of any
kind suffered by another person
by reason of the provision of any information or
the making of any statement to Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries, done in
good faith, whether by notice or otherwise.
Proposal 12–3
Inquiries Handbook
Commissions and Official Inquiries should address liability for defamation and
other court action in the case of electronic
publications.
Proposal 12–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries are not compellable to
give evidence about those inquiries,
unless the court gives leave.
13. National Security
Proposal 13–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should contain
provisions dealing specifically with the protection of national security
information in the conduct of Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries.
Proposal 13–2
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries should
retain the ultimate discretion to determine the procedures that will apply in a
inquiry. The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower inquiry
members to make directions on their own motion, or at the request of a person or
body affected by or involved
in the conduct of the inquiry, in relation to the
use of national security information, including, but not limited to, the
(a) determinations of the relevance of any national security information,
including any claims for public interest immunity, and the
use to which that
information may be put in the conduct of the inquiry;
(b) the provision by persons involved with the inquiry of lists of all
national security information that those persons reasonably
anticipate will be
used in the course of the inquiry. The chair of an inquiry may make such
directions as he or she thinks fit in
relation to the specificity with which
national security information is to be described in these lists, the people to
lists are to be given, the use that may be made of the information
and the degree of protection that must be given;
(c) the form in which any national security information may be produced or
otherwise used in the conduct of the inquiry. Such directions
may involve:
(i) the redaction, editing or obscuring of any part of a document containing
or adverting to national security information;
(ii) replacing the national security information with summaries, extracts or
transcriptions of the evidence sought to be used, or
by a statement of facts,
whether agreed by the parties or persons involved in the inquiry or not;
(iii) replacing the national security information with evidence to similar
effect obtained though unclassified means or sources;
(iv) concealing the identity of any witness or person identified in, or
whose identity might reasonably be inferred from, national
security information
or from its use in the conduct of the inquiry (including oral evidence), and
concealing the identity of any
person who comes into contact with national
security information;
(v) the use of written questions and answers during evidence which would
otherwise be given orally;
(vi) the use of technical means by which the identity of witnesses and
contents of national security information may be protected,
for example, through
the use of closed-circuit television, computer monitors and headsets;
(vii) restrictions on the people to whom any national security information
may be given or to whom access to that information may
be given. Such
restrictions may include limiting access to certain material to people holding
security clearances to a specified
(viii) restrictions on the use that can be made by a person with access to
any national security information; and
(ix) restrictions on the extent to which any person who has access to any
national security information may reproduce or disclose
that information.
Proposal 13–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries do not require a
security clearance to access national security
information.
Proposal 13–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
inquiry members, in determining the use or disclosure of information in the
conduct of an inquiry, to request advice
or assistance from the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security concerning:
(a) the damage or prejudice to national security that would, or could
reasonably be expected to, result from the use or disclosure;
(b) whether giving access to the information would divulge any matter
communicated in confidence by, or on behalf of, a foreign government,
authority of a foreign government or an international organisation to the
Australian Government.
Proposal 13–5
Section 34A
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(Cth), which relates to information and
documents that may be given to the Commission of Inquiry into matters relating
to the Australian
Secret Intelligence Service (1995), should be repealed.
Proposal 13–6
The proposed
Inquiries Handbook
include information on the handling and storage of national security information
by inquiries. The information should be developed
in consultation with relevant
government departments or agencies such as the Protective Security Policy
Committee and the Australian
Intelligence Community and may incorporate, as
appropriate, the standards and procedures in the
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual
Proposal 13–7
If requested by members of Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries, the Australian Government should assign appropriately
personnel to advise the inquiry on the handling and storage of national
security information.
14. Inquiries and Courts
Proposal 14–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may refer a question of law to the
Federal Court, either on their own
motion or pursuant to the request of a
participant.
Question 14–1
Should the proposed
Inquiries Act
the body establishing a public inquiry (the Governor-General in the case of a
Royal Commission, and a minister in the case
of an Official Inquiry) to suspend
an inquiry, pending a related investigation or related court proceedings?
15. Procedures
Proposal 15–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may conduct inquiries and gather
information as members consider appropriate,
subject to any other provisions in
the Act and the requirements of procedural fairness. For example, an inquiry
(i) conduct interviews;
(ii) hold hearings;
(iii) call witnesses;
(iv) obtain and receive information in any manner it sees fit; and
(v) allow or restrict the questioning of witnesses.
Proposal 15–2
Inquiries Handbook
should address the
suitability and use of different kinds of procedures that may be used by
inquiries. For example, the
Inquiries Handbook
may address the manner in
which hearings are conducted, the ways in which people may participate in an
inquiry, and how to accord
procedural fairness in the context of different types
of inquiry.
Proposal 15–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that reports of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries should not make any
finding that is adverse to a person, unless
the inquiry has taken all reasonable
steps to give that person reasonable notice of the intention to make that
finding and disclose
to that person the contents of the proposed finding, the
relevant material relied on for that finding, and the reasons on which it
based. Further, the inquiry should take all reasonable steps to give that person
an opportunity to respond to the proposed finding,
and the inquiry should
properly consider any response given.
Question 15–1
Should the proposed
Inquiries Act
provision requiring that, when an inquiry gives an opportunity to a person to
respond to potential adverse findings made
against him or her in a report, that
response or a summary of it should be included in the report?
Question 15–2
What mechanism, if any, should be included in the
Inquiries Act
to address the harm caused to a person who, having
been named or otherwise being identifiable in a public statement as the subject
of an investigation flowing from an inquiry, is cleared in that subsequent
investigation, without any further public statement to
that effect?
Proposal 15–4
(a) The proposed
Inquiries Act
provide that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may make directions
prohibiting or restricting:
(i) public access to a hearing;
(ii) publication of any information that might enable a person to identify a
person giving information to the inquiry; or
(iii) publication of any information provided to the inquiry.
(b) The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that members of Royal
Commissions or Official Inquiries may exercise the power to prohibit or restrict
public access
or publication on the following grounds:
(i) prejudice or hardship to an individual;
(ii) the nature and subject matter of the information that may be
(iii) the potential for prejudice to legal proceedings;
(iv) the efficient and effective conduct of an inquiry; or
(v) any other matter that an inquiry considers appropriate.
Proposal 15–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may allow any person or a
person’s legal representative to participate
in an inquiry, to the extent
that inquiry members consider appropriate. In making that decision, inquiry
members may have regard
(a) any direct or special interest a person may have in the matters relevant
to an inquiry;
(b) the probability that an inquiry may make a finding adverse to that
person’s interests; and
(c) the ability of a person to assist an inquiry.
Proposal 15–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, if a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry is inquiring into matters that
may have a significant effect on Indigenous
peoples, the inquiry should consult
with Indigenous groups, individuals or organisations to inform the development
of appropriate
procedures for the conduct of the inquiry.
Proposal 15–7
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that an interpreter should be appointed if a person is asked to provide
information to a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry and the person is not
sufficiently proficient in English.
16. Privileges and Public Interest Immunity
Proposal 16–1
(a) The proposed
Inquiries Act
empower Royal Commissions, but not Official Inquiries, to require a person to
answer a question, or produce a document or
thing, notwithstanding such answer
or production might incriminate that person or expose the person to a penalty.
(b) The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that a Royal Commission
must not require a person to answer a question, or produce a document or other
thing, about
a matter if that person has been charged with an offence, or is
subject to proceedings for the imposition or recovery of a penalty,
of that matter.
Proposal 16–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that statements or disclosures made by a person to a Royal Commission are not
admissible in evidence against that person
in criminal proceedings, or
proceedings for the imposition or recovery of a penalty, in any court of the
Commonwealth, of a state
or of a territory (‘use immunity’). This
use immunity should:
(a) apply to statements or disclosures to a Royal Commission, whether in oral
or written form;
(b) apply to the fact of the production of a document or other thing to a
Royal Commission;
(c) apply to information provided to an officer or member of a Royal
Commission in connection with, or in preparation for, giving
evidence to a Royal
Commission; and
(d) exclude pre-existing documents or things that were not created in order
to comply with a notice of the Royal Commission.
Proposal 16–3
The use immunity referred to in
Proposal 16–2 should not apply to a proceeding in a federal, state or
territory court:
(a) in respect of the falsity or the misleading nature of the evidence;
(b) for offences relating to the obstruction of Royal Commission
proceedings.
17. Statutory Exemptions from
Proposal 17–1
Section 6D(1)
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), which provides that a person may refuse to disclose a secret process
of manufacture, should be repealed.
Proposal 17–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries may require a person to answer or
produce documents or other things, notwithstanding
any secrecy provision if the
inquiry specifies that the requirement is made notwithstanding that secrecy
provision. This power should
not apply in the case of:
(a) secrecy provisions that specifically govern the disclosure of information
to Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries;
(b) secrecy provisions as prescribed in regulations under the proposed
Inquiries Act
Proposal 17–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that if a person is required to answer questions or produce documents or other
things to a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry notwithstanding a secrecy
provision, that person is not subject to any criminal, civil, administrative or
disciplinary proceedings
as a result of providing that information.
18. Offences
Proposal 18–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide,
with respect to Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, that a person commits
an offence if the person, without
reasonable excuse, refuses or fails to:
(a) swear an oath or make an affirmation when required to do so by an inquiry
(b) answer a question when required by do so by an inquiry member, or a
person authorised by an inquiry member to ask the question;
(c) comply with a notice requiring a person to attend or appear; or
(d) comply with a notice requiring a person to produce a document or other
thing, in the custody or control of that person.
Proposal 18–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that a notice requiring a person to attend or appear before, or requiring a
person to produce a document or other thing
to, a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry should include:
(a) the consequences of not complying;
(b) what is a reasonable excuse for not complying, as provided in the Act;
(c) the time and date for compliance; and
(d) the manner in which the person should comply with a notice requiring the
production of a document or other thing.
Proposal 18–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that the offence of refusing or failing to answer a question is committed only
if the person refuses or fails to answer
after being informed that it is an
offence to do so by the person requiring the answer.
Proposal 18–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that it is a reasonable excuse to refuse or fail to comply with a notice to
attend or appear before, or to produce
a document or other thing to, a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry if an inquiry member determines that it is
impossible or impracticable
for the person to comply, for example, for physical
or practical reasons.
Proposal 18–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that a reasonable excuse to refuse or fail to produce a document or other thing,
or answer a question, includes the
fact that the document, thing, or answer:
(a) is not relevant to the matters into which the Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry is inquiring;
(b) is protected by client legal privilege, the privilege against
self-incrimination, parliamentary privilege, or public interest
subject to the provisions of the proposed Act;
(c) is prohibited from being disclosed by the provision of another Act,
subject to the provisions of the proposed Act;
(d) is prohibited from disclosure by an order of a court; or
(e) would have the tendency to interfere with the administration of justice,
if disclosed.
Proposal 18–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, upon receiving a notice requiring attendance or production of documents or
other things, a person may make a
claim to a member of a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry that he or she is unable to comply, or has a reasonable excuse
complying. If the member considers that the claim has been made out, the
member may vary or revoke the requirement in his or her
discretion.
Proposal 18–7
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that a person commits an offence by contravening a direction of a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry, where that
person knew or should have known of
that direction. The offence should apply to directions made under the proposed
Act concerning
national security information, the prohibition or restriction of
public access to a hearing, and the prohibition or restriction of
publication.
Proposal 18–8
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should include
legislative notes indicating that the following offences apply to Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries:
(a) offences under Part III of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) that prohibit
interference with evidence or witnesses;
(b) offences under Parts 7.6 and 7.8 of the
Criminal Code
prohibit certain conduct in relation to Commonwealth public officials; and
(c) offences in the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) that restrict the disclosure
of information by Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries.
19. Contempt
Proposal 19–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, where a person fails to comply with a notice or a direction of a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry, or threatens
to do so, the chair of the inquiry
may refer the matter to the Federal Court of Australia. The Court, after hearing
any evidence
or representations on the matter certified to it, may enforce such
a notice or direction as if the matter had arisen in proceedings
Proposal 19–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that a person is not liable to be punished twice for the same act or omission,
if the act or omission would constitute
both an offence under the proposed Act
and, if enforced by the Federal Court of Australia, contempt of court.
Proposal 19–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that it is an offence to cause substantial disruption to the proceedings of a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry,
with the intention to disrupt the
proceedings, or recklessness as to whether the conduct would have that
Proposal 19–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that if a person is disrupting the proceedings of an inquiry, a member of a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry may
exclude that person from those
proceedings, and authorise a person to use necessary and reasonable force in
excluding that person.
Proposal 19–5
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) dealing with contempt of Royal Commissions should not be included in
the proposed
Inquiries Act
20. Penalties, Proceedings and Costs
Proposal 20–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, in the case of Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries, the maximum
penalty for the offences of refusing or failing
to swear or affirm, answer a
question, or comply with notices requiring attendance or the production of
evidence, is six months imprisonment
or 30 penalty units.
Proposal 20–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, in the case of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, the maximum
penalty for the offence of contravening
a direction concerning the prohibition
or restriction of public access to a hearing, or the prohibition or restriction
of publication,
is 12 months imprisonment or 60 penalty units.
Proposal 20–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, in the case of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, the maximum
penalty for the offence of contravening
a direction concerning national security
information is two years imprisonment or 120 penalty units.
Proposal 20–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, in the case of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, the maximum
penalty for the offence of causing substantial
disruption is six months
imprisonment or 30 penalty units.
Proposal 20–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should include a
provision dealing with the institution of proceedings for offences under the Act
in equivalent terms to
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Proposal 20–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
for the award of costs in criminal proceedings in terms equivalent to those in
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), but the part of
dealing with the recovery of penalties for offences under the
Commissions Act
should be repealed.
1. Introduction to the
Scope of the Inquiry
Matters Outside the Scope of the Inquiry
Terminology
Law Reform Process
Community consultation and participation
Advisory Committee
Organisation of this Discussion Paper
Timeframe for the Inquiry
1. Introduction to the
1.1 Royal Commissions are a form of non-judicial and non-administrative
governmental investigation.
are ‘institutions of considerable antiquity’, whose ‘origins
are lost in hazy mists of the incompletely recorded
What is clear,
however, is that they are ‘one of the oldest institutions of
government’.
1.2 Clokie and Robinson note that:
As the name implies, Royal Commissions owe their foundation to an exercise of
the royal prerogative. The source of their existence
is to be found in the
generally assumed right of the Crown to appoint officials to perform duties
temporarily or permanently on behalf
Royal Commissions Act 1902
was one of 59 statutes
enacted by the first Parliament of the Commonwealth of
In the Second Reading
Speech for the Royal Commissions Bill 1902 (Cth), the then Attorney-General, the
Hon Mr Alfred Deakin MP, noted
that similar Acts already existed in several
states, and that the appointment of a Royal Commission to inquire into the
of troops from South Africa to Australia on the SS Drayton
during the Boer War had
highlighted the need to introduce legislation providing Royal Commissions with
coercive information-gathering
1.4 The original
Royal Commissions Act
contained only eight
provisions. These were similar to those in the
Witnesses (Public Inquiries)
Protection Act 1892
X v Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
, Kirby J noted that the
language of the UK Act on which the Australian Act was modelled was
expressed with high compression. Packed into a single section were many words
and concepts which today, in the style of contemporary
drafting, would be
divided up so as to deal separately with different ideas and to avoid the
confusion and ambiguity that may attend
such a compressed use of the English
Royal Commissions Act
has been amended 20 times since its
enactment. Some amendments have been of a minor, technical nature. For example,
Statute Law Revision Act 2008
(Cth) reworded certain provisions to
ensure that they contained gender-neutral language. Other amendments, however,
have been substantive,
addressing deficiencies with the legislation identified
by particular Royal Commissions.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982
(Cth), for example,
modified the Act, among other things to empower a Royal Commissioner to apply
for a search warrant. This amendment
was made in response to a request by the
Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers
the Act be amended to enable Royal Commissions to issue search
In addition, a number
of the amendments have been made to facilitate information flows between Royal
Commissions and other bodies.
Scope of the
1.7 This Inquiry is the first comprehensive review of the
Commissions Act
in its 107 year history. While the operation and provisions
of the Act will be a major focus, the Australian Law Reform Commission
also has been asked to inquire into and report on a number of other issues. In
particular, the Terms of Reference—reproduced
at the beginning of this
paper—require the ALRC to consider:
(a) whether there is any need to develop an alternative form or forms of
Commonwealth executive inquiry, with statutory foundations,
to provide more
flexibility, less formality and greater cost-effectiveness than a Royal
Commission (particularly whether there would
be any advantage in codifying
special arrangements and powers that should apply to such alternative forms of
(b) whether there is any need to develop special arrangements and powers for
inquiries involving matters of national security;
(c) the appropriateness of restrictions on the disclosure of information to, and
use of information by, Royal Commissions and other
inquiries, including
restrictions contained in other legislation (but not including those arising
from the operation of client legal
privilege); and
(d) suggestions for changes to the Act proposed or raised by Royal Commissions.
1.8 A major focus of this Inquiry, therefore, will be on whether other forms
of public inquiry should be established by federal legislation
and, if so, the
appropriate statutory model for such bodies and their powers, administration and
1.9 The ALRC is to provide its report to the Attorney-General by 30 October
Matters Outside the
Scope of the Inquiry
1.10 In this Inquiry, the ALRC is considering a particular type of
‘public inquiry’—one that is conducted on an
ad hoc basis by
an entity established by, but external to, the executive arm of government. This
Royal Commissions and other ad hoc inquiries
appointed to investigate issues and make recommendations to government. A review
the operations and constituting Acts of
independent policy
making and investigatory bodies—for example, the Productivity Commission,
the Australian Crime Commission,
the Australian Human Rights Commission, the
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity, and indeed the ALRC
itself—falls
outside the scope of this Inquiry.
1.11 In its submission on the ALRC’s Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
(IP 35), the Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security (IGIS) noted:
In the Issues Paper you have addressed Royal Commissions as “public
inquiries” (defined as ad hoc, independent non-Royal
Commission inquiries
established by government), distinguishing the latter from “executive
inquiries” (other forms of
inquiry conducted by government departments and
other permanent government agencies). Such a distinction needs to be viewed with
care. Both types are, according to traditional theory, exercises of executive
authority. Nor is there of necessity any difference
in the degree of
independence with which the inquiry can be
approached.
1.12 While the ALRC agrees with the observations of the IGIS, the use of the
term ‘public inquiry’ rather than ‘executive
inquiry’ in
IP 35 and in this Discussion Paper highlights the fact that, in addition to
reviewing the
Royal Commissions Act
, the ALRC is focusing on alternate
of Commonwealth executive inquiry to a Royal Commission. The ALRC
does not interpret its Terms of Reference as requiring it to review
instigated by permanent federal government
1.13 While perhaps another term, such as ‘public executive
inquiry’, could have been used to highlight this distinction,
the ALRC has
decided to continue to use the term ‘public inquiry’ in this
Discussion Paper. Further, as is noted below,
a name for the alternate form of
inquiry the ALRC has been directed to investigate—‘Official
Inquiries’—has
been proposed, which may help to dispel any confusion
caused by the ALRC’s choice of terminology.
1.14 The Terms of Reference also expressly direct the ALRC not to consider
the appropriateness of restrictions on the disclosure of
information to, and the
use of information by, Royal Commissions and other forms of public inquiry
arising from a claim for client
legal privilege. Recommendations concerning
client legal privilege in the context of Royal Commissions were made recently by
ALRC in its report,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in
Federal Investigations
While the nature of those
recommendations relevant to Royal Commissions and other public inquiries is
discussed in Chapter 16, this
Inquiry will not revisit the
recommendations.
Terminology
1.15 In this Discussion Paper, references to Royal Commissions and other
public inquiries mean a Royal Commission or other public
inquiry established by
the Australian Government. Where a reference is to a Royal Commission or other
public inquiry established,
for example, by state or territory governments, the
IP 35, the ALRC used the term ‘public inquiry’
rather than ‘executive inquiry’ when referring to ad hoc,
independent,
non-Royal Commission inquiries established by government. For the
reasons discussed in detail in Chapter 2 of IP 35, the word ‘public’
rather than ‘executive’ was used to distinguish this type of inquiry
from the many other forms of executive inquiry conducted
by government
departments and other permanent government agencies.
1.17 In this Discussion Paper a proposal is made to replace the
Commissions Act
Inquiries Act
that enables the
establishment of two tiers of inquiry—‘Royal Commissions’ and
Inquiries’.
Whether the
word ‘royal’ should remain in the title was commented on by a wide
cross-section of stakeholders. It was
suggested by some that replacing the word
‘royal’ would reflect more accurately the status of Australia as an
independent,
sovereign state. A number of stakeholders noted, however, that the
term ‘Royal Commission’ carries with it a certain
developed over a long period of time, and, perhaps more importantly, has a high
degree of public recognition and respect. For the
reasons set out in greater
detail in Chapter 5, the ALRC has proposed that the term ‘Royal
Commission’ be retained to
describe the highest form of public inquiry in
1.18 The ALRC also proposes that the second tier of public inquiry be called
‘Official Inquiry’. This title distinguishes
this form of public
inquiry from ‘Royal Commissions’, and accurately reflects the nature
of this form of inquiry. Other
titles such as ‘Public Inquiry’,
‘Government Inquiry’, ‘Departmental Inquiry’ and
‘Ministerial
Inquiry’ also were considered, but were not proposed
for the reasons noted in Chapter 5.
1.19 For ease of reference when referring to past ALRC inquiries, Royal
Commissions or other forms of public inquiry, the ‘i’
will be in lower case. Where the ALRC refers to ‘this Inquiry’,
meaning the reference which is the subject
of this Discussion Paper, the first
letter of ‘inquiry’ will be in upper case.
1.20 In Chapter 15, the ALRC discusses the circumstances in which it may be
more appropriate to conduct an inquiry using procedures
of a less formal nature
than public hearings—for example, through the use of interviews or the
voluntary provision of written
information. In this Discussion Paper, the ALRC
has attempted to avoid the terminology used in litigation and criminal
proceedings,
unless reference is being made to a formal hearing being held by
Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries.
1.21 Rather than talking of ‘parties’ and
‘witnesses’, for example, reference is made to ‘those
participating
in an inquiry’, or ‘participants’ when referring
to those giving information to an inquiry. The term ‘witnesses’,
where used, is restricted to those who give information at a formal hearing.
Similarly, the ALRC refers to the provision of ‘information’
course of an inquiry, and refers to ‘evidence’ only where such
information is given under oath or affirmation.
1.22 The ALRC is committed to ensuring that all stakeholders and interested
members of the community have an opportunity to participate
in the Inquiry. To
facilitate participation, the ALRC employs a variety of consultation
strategies.
consultation and participation
1.23 Under the terms of its constituting Act, the ALRC ‘may inform
itself in any way it thinks fit’ for the purpose of
reviewing or
considering anything that is the subject of an
One of the most
important features of ALRC inquiries is the commitment to widespread community
consultation.
1.24 The nature and extent of this engagement is normally determined by the
subject matter of the reference. Areas that are seen to
be narrow and technical
tend to be of interest mainly to experts. Some ALRC references—such as
those relating to children and
the law, Aboriginal customary law, the protection
of human genetic information, and privacy—involve a significant level of
interest and involvement from the general public and the media. This Inquiry
does not fall squarely into either category given that
Royal Commissions and
other forms of public inquiry, while procedurally somewhat narrow and technical,
often deal with matters of
great public interest. In this Inquiry, therefore,
accommodation has been made for input by all interested individuals and groups,
particularly through the use of the ‘Talk to Us’ online forum
discussed in detail below.
1.25 To date, approximately 60 consultations and roundtables have been held
in Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Alice Springs,
Darwin and Wellington (New
Zealand) with individuals, government agencies and organisations. The ALRC has
talked to past Royal Commissioners,
Commissioners who have conducted non-Royal
Commission inquiries, judges, counsel assisting, solicitors for participants,
barristers,
solicitors, academics, senior public servants, witnesses who have
appeared before a Royal Commission or other public inquiry, land
councils and
other groups representing the interests of Indigenous persons, members of the
media, union representatives, civil libertarians,
and key office holders such as
the IGIS and the Commonwealth Ombudsman. A list of those with whom the ALRC has
consulted is set out
in Appendix 2.
1.26 In addition, 16 submissions have been received from a range of
stakeholders. A list of submissions is set out in Appendix 1.
The relatively
small number of submissions may be attributable to two factors: the procedurally
narrow and technical nature of the
Inquiry, and the fact that the ALRC has
conducted an extensive round of consulations on the issues raised in
1.27 While it is the policy of the ALRC not to quote comments made by
stakeholders in a consultation, the views of the stakeholders
with whom it
consulted are reflected in this Discussion Paper. While the ALRC generally
refrains from attributing a view to a specific
stakeholder consulted, it often
does indicate the degree of support for any particular issue and direct the
reader to the list of
consultations in Appendix 2.
Participating in the Inquiry
1.28 There are several ways in which those with an interest in this Inquiry
may participate. First, individuals, organisations and
government agencies may
indicate an expression of interest in the Inquiry by contacting the ALRC or
applying online at <
www.alrc.gov.au
Those who wish to be added to the ALRC’s mailing list will receive
notices, press releases and a copy of each consultation
document produced during
the Inquiry.
1.29 Secondly, written submissions on this Discussion Paper may be made to
the ALRC. There is no specified format for submissions.
The ALRC will accept
gratefully anything from handwritten notes and emailed ‘dot points’,
to detailed commentary on matters
related to the Inquiry. The ALRC also receives
confidential submissions. Details about making a submission may be found at the
of this publication.
1.30 Thirdly, the ALRC maintains an active program of direct consultation
with stakeholders and other interested parties. The ALRC
is based in Sydney but,
in recognition of its national character, consultations already have been
conducted around Australia. While
the next round of consultations will not be as
extensive as the consultations conducted on IP 35, individuals, organisations or
agencies with an interest in meeting with the ALRC in relation to the
issues being canvassed in the Inquiry are encouraged to contact
1.31 Finally, the ALRC has established an online forum entitled ‘Talk
to Us … About Royal Commissions’, which can
be accessed through the
ALRC website. The forum is designed to facilitate public communication by
creating a ‘talking space’,
and includes a discussion page to
encourage comments and a page to facilitate the receipt of electronic
submissions.
1.32 It is standard operating procedure for the ALRC to establish an expert
Advisory Committee for each of its inquiries. The members
of the Advisory
Committee established for the purposes of this Inquiry are noted at the front of
this Discussion Paper. Included
are former Royal Commissioners, retired judges,
academics, senior lawyers, and members of constituencies affected by the
of some significant Royal Commissions, such as unions and Indigenous
1.33 The Advisory Committee has met once during the course of the Inquiry to
provide advice and assistance to the ALRC. The Advisory
Committee has particular
value in helping the ALRC to identify the key issues, as well as in providing
quality assurance in the research
and consultation effort. The Advisory
Committee has assisted with the development of reform proposals and will assist
Report recommendations as the Inquiry progresses. The ultimate
responsibility for the Report and the recommendations remains, however,
Commissioners of the ALRC.
Organisation of this
Discussion Paper
1.34 This Discussion Paper is divided into six Parts which, in total, contain
20 chapters. Part A, consisting of chapters one to four,
considers matters
introductory to the Inquiry, including the historical background of Royal
Commissions in England and Australia,
an overview of the
Royal Commissions
, and a discussion of comparative forms of public inquiry.
1.35 This introductory chapter outlines the background and scope of the
Inquiry, matters that fall outside the Inquiry’s scope,
process of law reform, and the timeframe for the Inquiry. In Chapter 2, the ALRC
discusses the role and purpose
of public inquiries. It considers characteristics
and functions of public inquiries, and provides an overview of the types of
inquiries that have been conducted at the federal, state and territory
levels in Australia.
1.36 Chapter 3 provides an overview of the
Royal Commissions Act
primary features of the Act are outlined, followed by a discussion of the issues
arising from the structure and drafting of
the Act. Chapter 4 focuses on the
forms of public inquiry conducted outside the framework of the
Commissions Act
. It considers existing types of public inquiries in federal
territory and overseas jurisdictions.
1.37 Part B, consisting of chapters five to eight, considers a new statutory
framework for public inquiries in Australia. In Chapter
5, the ALRC canvasses
new models of public inquiry that may be appropriate at the federal level in
Australia. The statutory requirements
of such models are discussed, and the
requirements that should rest with the Australian Government upon the completion
of Royal Commissions
or other public inquiries are also considered. Proposals
are made to establish two tiers of public inquiry, to be called ‘Royal
Commissions’ and ‘Official Inquiries’. The distinguishing
features of both tiers of inquiry are canvassed, and
a proposal made to rename
Royal Commissions Act
Inquiries Act
to reflect the
two-tiered nature of statutory inquiries.
1.38 When it is appropriate to establish a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry, and whether there should be greater guidance on drafting
the terms of
reference for either type of inquiry, are discussed in Chapter 6. The ALRC also
considers how both types of inquiry
should be constituted, and whether there is
scope for an expert advisor role within the proposed new statutory
1.39 Chapter 7 canvasses the issues pertaining to reports and recommendations
of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries established
under the proposed
Inquiries Act
. In particular, the ALRC proposes that within 15 sitting
days of receiving the final report from a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry,
the Australian Government should table in Parliament the report, or, if part of
a report is not being tabled, a statement of reasons
setting out why the whole
report is not being tabled. The ALRC also proposes that the Australian
government should publish periodic
updates on the implementation of
recommendations.
1.40 The administration of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries,
including the types of assistance that may be required by inquiry
participants
and inquiry members and staff in the conduct of the inquiry, is considered in
Chapter 8. The ALRC also examines how
administrative, technical and other
assistance should be provided to Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, and
considers important
issues relating to the records of completed Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries.
1.41 Part C contains two chapters which focus on the cost of public
inquiries. Issues relating to the funding and costs of Royal Commissions
Official Inquiries under the proposed
Inquiries Act
are canvassed in
Chapter 9. In particular, the ALRC considers the types of costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct of inquiries,
such as legal costs and the costs of
providing assistance to witnesses and parties participating in inquiries. How
costs of Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries might be minimised is
considered in Chapter 10.
1.42 Part D, consisting of three chapters, focuses on inquiry powers. Chapter
11 discusses the specific powers that should be conferred
on Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries, and concludes that the range of coercive
information-gathering powers of the former
should be wider than the latter.
Other issues are also considered, including: evidence and information obtained
in a foreign country;
the exercise of concurrent functions and powers under
federal and state or territory law; and, the power to refer information and
evidence to other persons or bodies in relation to contraventions of the
1.43 In Chapter 12, the ALRC considers the range of protections that should
be conferred on those involved in Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries. The
ALRC proposes that the protections should be the same for both forms of inquiry.
1.44 At present, the
Royal Commissions Act
does not contain any
specific provisions dealing with the protection of information relating to
national security during the course
of an inquiry or after a Commission’s
proceedings have concluded. In Chapter 13, the ALRC proposes special
arrangements and
powers for Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries which
consider matters that may have an impact on national security.
1.45 Matters relating to the conduct of an inquiry are discussed in Part E.
Chapter 14 examines the different interactions of inquiries
with courts,
beginning with supervision through to judicial review and the referral of a
question of law by an inquiry to the Federal
Court of Australia. Whether
proceedings for contempt of an inquiry are appropriate, and the effect of
inquiries upon subsequent legal
proceedings, are also examined.
1.46 Chapter 15 examines both the appropriateness and effectiveness of the
procedures currently employed by inquiries, and the adequacy
of procedural
protections afforded to those who are called to appear before an inquiry, and to
those who may be affected adversely
by an inquiry finding. In particular, the
ALRC examines various requirements and measures that may minimise the danger of
harm unfairly. These include the requirements of procedural fairness;
the use of public and private hearings; the use of cross-examination;
authorisation of leave to appear; the taking of evidence from Indigenous
witnesses; the provision of information and assistance;
and rights of reply.
1.47 Chapters 16 and 17 examine the exemptions from disclosure that are
justified in the context of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries. In
particular, the ALRC considers whether the following exemptions should apply to
Royal Commission and Official Inquiry
proceedings: the privilege against
self-incrimination; public interest immunity; parliamentary privilege; other
statutory privileges
available under the
Evidence Act 1995
exemption under
Royal Commissions Act
in relation to secret
processes of manufacture; and secrecy provisions in other statutes. As has been
noted above, the applicability
of client legal privilege to proceedings of a
Royal Commission has been considered in ALRC 107.
1.48 Offences and penalties in the context of Royal Commission and Official
Inquiry proceedings are considered in Part F. In Chapter
18, the ALRC considers
whether the offences in the
Royal Commissions Act
should be retained, and
whether similar offences should apply to Official Inquiries. The Act contains
four types of offences: offences
that punish failures to comply with
requirements of the Royal Commission (offences of non-compliance); an offence of
contravening
a direction of a Royal Commission not to publish specified
material; offences that prohibit interference with evidence or witnesses;
in s 6O, the offence of contempt, which prohibits conduct that interferes with
the work or authority of a Royal Commission.
Whether the doctrine of contempt
should apply to Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries is discussed in Chapter
1.49 In the final chapter, the ALRC discusses what penalties should apply to
the offences proposed in Chapters 18 and 19.
Sections 10
Commissions Act
are also examined.
deals with the way in which a
proceeding for an offence under the Act may be instituted, while s 15 confers a
power on a court to
award costs in relation to such a proceeding.
Timeframe for the
1.50 It is the ALRC’s standard operating procedure to produce an Issues
Paper and a Discussion Paper before producing the final
Report. On 6 April 2009,
the ALRC released IP 35. The nine chapters of IP 35 contained a brief overview
of the relevant issues and
contained 47 questions designed to facilitate
participation from interested stakeholders. To facilitate discussion, the ALRC
published on its website an
Inquiry Snapshot
, which provided an
overview of the matters raised in IP 35.
1.51 This Discussion Paper, the second consultation document produced during
the course of this Inquiry, contains a more detailed
treatment of the issues,
and indicates the ALRC’s current thinking in the form of specific
proposals for reform. Both the Issues
Paper and the Discussion Paper may be
obtained free of charge from the ALRC in hard copy or CD ROM format, and also
may be downloaded
free of charge from the ALRC’s website, <
www.alrc.gov.au
1.52 The final report of this Inquiry, which will contain the ALRC’s
recommendations, is due to be presented to the Attorney-General
by 30 October
2009. Once tabled in Parliament, the Report becomes a public
self-executing. The ALRC provides advice and recommendations about the best way
to proceed, but implementation is a matter
for the Australian Government and
1.53 Finally, it should be noted that, in the past, the ALRC has sometimes
drafted legislation as the focus of its law reform effort.
practice now is not to produce draft legislation unless specifically asked to do
so in the Terms of Reference. This
is partly because drafting is a specialised
function better left to the parliamentary experts, and partly because the
time and resources are better directed towards determining the
policy that will shape any resulting legislation. The ALRC has not
been asked to
produce draft legislation in this Inquiry, but the proposals in this Discussion
Paper, and its final Report recommendations,
will specify the nature of any
desired legislative change.
In order to be considered
for use in the final Report, submissions addressing the proposals and questions
in this Discussion Paper
must reach the ALRC by
22 September
. Details about how to make a submission are set out at the front of
this publication.
H Clokie and J Robinson,
Commissions of Inquiry: The Significance of Investigations in British
(1937), 24.
Ibid, 24. Clokie
and Robinson note that the compilation of the Domesday Book between 1080 and
1086 may ‘be regarded as the
result of the first Royal Commission of
Inquiry’: ibid, 28. The history of Royal Commissions is discussed in
greater detail
Royal Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural
(1982), 16.
G Sawer (ed)
Australian Federal
Politics and Law 1901–1929
The Royal Commission on Transport of
Troops from Service in South Africa in the SS
Drayton Grange
Circumstances under which Trooper H Burkitt was not landed at Adelaide from the
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 26 August 1902, 15355
(A Deakin—Attorney-General).
X v Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
[2007] HCA 4
(2007) 226 CLR 630
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 16 November 1982, 2337 (F Chaney—Minister for Social
Security). Powers of a Royal Commission and other public inquiries
are discussed
in detail in Ch 11.
Royal Commissions and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2001
Royal Commissions Amendment (Records) Act 2006
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner (Consequential Amendments) Act 2006
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
12 May 2009.
The Terms of
Reference are set out at the beginning of this Discussion
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
, ALRC 107 (2007), Rec 6–2, Rec
The recommendations
contained in ALRC 107 are being considered by the Australian
Government.
See Proposal
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
The Attorney-General must table the Report within 15 sitting days of receiving
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
The ALRC, however, has a strong
record of having its advice followed. About 60% of the ALRC’s previous
reports have been fully
or substantially implemented; about 27% have been
partially implemented; 8% are under consideration; and 5% have had no
implementation
2. History and Role of Public
Introduction
Historical background and trends
Characteristics of public inquiries
Established by the executive
Public in nature
Perceived independence
Limitations
Functions of public inquiries
Policy and investigatory inquiries
Past Royal Commissions
Other federal inquiries
State and territory inquiries
2. History and Role of Public
Introduction
2.1 In this chapter, the ALRC discusses the role and purpose of public
inquiries. It considers characteristics and functions of public
inquiries and
then provides an overview of the types of public inquiries that have been
conducted at the federal, state and territory
levels in Australia.
Historical background
2.2 Public inquiries have an extensive history in the United Kingdom (UK). In
the 11th century, William the Conqueror appointed Royal
Commissioners
to investigate land title information in English counties for verification and
publication in the Domesday Book.
Royal Commissions were used frequently in the Tudor and early Stuart eras (late
15th to mid 17th century) and then declined in popularity
over the next two
hundred years. The 19th century saw a marked increase of inquiry activity in the
UK, with over 350 Royal Commissions
established by the UK government between
1831 and 1900.
The factors
contributing to this renewed interest are described by Sir William
Holdsworth.
The great social and economic changes which accompanied the industrial
revolution, the changes in men’s political ideas which
resulted directly
or indirectly from the French Revolution, the changes in men’s ideas as to
the expediency of reforms in the
law, caused partly by the obvious need for
making the reforms required by new social and economic conditions and partly by
teaching—all contributed to revive enquiries by means of
royal commissions … into many legal, social, and economic
2.3 Since 1900, Royal Commissions again have dwindled in popularity and are
now ‘a statistical speck amongst the many public
inquiries held in Britain
each year’.
2.4 In Australia, the commission of inquiry mechanism was adopted
early—the colony of Victoria enacted legislation for public
inquiries with
coercive information-gathering powers soon after the Eureka Stockade in
Royal Commissions Act
(Cth) was enacted shortly after Federation, and 127 Royal Commissions
have been appointed under the Act.
2.5 Dr Scott Prasser has examined trends in the numbers of Royal Commissions
appointed by various Australian Governments. He notes
Commissions Act
has not been used
consistently.
For example, 54 Royal
Commissions were established between 1910 and 1929, and 33 appointed between
1972 and 1996. The instrument
was used little in the decades following the
Second World War and relatively infrequently from the mid-1990s to the time of
in early 2009. Also, as discussed below, the many Royal Commissions
established under the
Royal Commissions Act
have differed in nature.
2.6 Historically, Coalition Governments have been less likely than their
Labor counterparts to establish Royal
Commissions.
The Menzies, Holt,
Gorton and McMahon Coalition Governments appointed eight Royal Commissions in 22
years (1949–1972). The
Howard Coalition Government appointed four Royal
Commissions in 11 years
(1996–2007).
In contrast, the
Whitlam Labor Government appointed 13 Royal Commissions in three years
(1972–1975), and the Hawke-Keating
Labor Governments appointed 12 Royal
Commissions in 13 years (1983–1996). This is not a wholly consistent
trend, however, as
the Fraser Coalition Governments appointed eight Royal
Commissions in eight years (1975–1983). Further, since coming to office
November 2007, the Rudd Labor Government has not appointed a Royal Commission.
2.7 Since the 1940s, Australian Governments increasingly have appointed
non-Royal Commission forms of public
For example, both the
Whitlam Labor and Howard Coalition Governments established more than 70 public
inquiries, taskforces, reviews
committees.
2.8 Non-Royal Commission forms of public inquiry are discussed below and in
Characteristics of
public inquiries
Established by the
2.9 In Australia, all arms of government conduct some form of inquiry. The
judicature adjudicates on civil and criminal matters of
fact and law;
legislative committees review and report on proposed and existing laws and
practices; and the executive conducts inquiries
on matters relevant to policy
development and government processes.
2.10 A number of permanent bodies are also established under legislation to
advise the Australian Government on policy development
and law reform. These
bodies may conduct inquiries and also carry out other functions such as
complaint-handling and community education.
Examples of these types of bodies
include: the Australian Human Rights Commission; the ALRC; the Commonwealth
Ombudsman; the Productivity
Commission; and the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security. Other standing bodies advise the Australian
Government on issues
related to crime and corruption—for example, the
Australian Crime Commission and the Australian Institute of Criminology.
2.11 As discussed in Chapter 1, the ALRC is considering a particular
is conducted on an
ad hoc basis by an entity established by the executive arm of government. This
Commissions and other ad hoc inquiries appointed
to investigate issues and make recommendations to government.
2.12 The obvious feature of a public inquiry is that, at least partly, it
takes place in the public domain. This means that the inquiry
and its processes
have a degree of public visibility and accessibility, and members of the public
contribute to the inquiry by providing
information or other relevant material.
Transparent processes play an important role in enhancing the integrity and
accountability
of an inquiry. Public inquiries promote the contribution of
public knowledge and expertise to inquiry decision-making processes that,
turn, may affect government actions. These inquiries may also fulfil an
important social function by providing an opportunity
for individuals to air
grievances against various parties, including
governments.
2.13 Referring to an inquiry as ‘public’, however, does not mean
that all inquiry hearings are held in public. There may
be several reasons why
it is not appropriate to hold particular inquiry hearings in public. The
interests in holding public hearings
need to be balanced against the protection
of the rights and interests of those involved in or affected by the inquiry.
This balancing
of interests is discussed further in Chapter 15.
2.14 Other elements of a ‘public’ inquiry include the advertising
of an inquiry’s existence, scope, and details
of public consultations.
Upon the completion of a public inquiry, its recommendations, report and other
appropriate material are
often made widely available—current practice is
to make this information available
Public participation may
be on a voluntary or mandatory
It may take place in a
range of ways, including online forums. Individuals and group representatives
also may be able to make formal
written submissions to an
independence
2.15 The public is more likely to accept inquiry processes and decisions when
the inquiry is perceived to be at arm’s length
from the executive arm of
government and other influential
stakeholders.
To promote the
perception of an inquiry’s independence, its membership is usually drawn
from outside the executive arm of government—often
from the judiciary.
Membership of Royal Commissions and other public inquiries is discussed further
in Chapters 3 and 6.
2.16 Royal Commissions are sometimes seen to be more independent than other
This perception may be
enhanced by the fact that Royal Commissions are established by the
Governor-General on behalf of the Crown,
rather than by Cabinet or individual
Other factors that
may affect the perceived independence of an inquiry include the scope of its
terms of reference, and whether it
is appropriately funded. These issues are
discussed in greater detail in Chapters 5, 6 and 9.
Limitations
2.17 Inquiries commissioned by the executive arm of government cannot
implement their own recommendations, and are not intended to
discharge the
functions of the judicature or legislature. For example, an inquiry that
investigates and reports upon responsibility
for civil or criminal conduct
cannot make a legal determination on this matter, although its investigation may
lead to a civil action
or criminal prosecution. Similarly, the recommendations
made by an inquiry do not automatically become law, although they may inform
policy development and legislative amendments introduced into Parliament.
2.18 Finally, public inquiries do not always enjoy coercive powers and
protections. Generally, these are conferred upon public inquiries
by statute.
The powers of inquiries established under legislation are discussed further in
Chapter 11.
Functions of public
2.19 Royal Commissions and other public inquiries may take far longer and
cost significantly more than
Further, Royal
Commissions may make unexpected findings or recommendations critical of the
government that appointed them.
There are several reasons, however, why governments continue to establish public
2.20 On one level, the primary function of a public inquiry is to inquire
into, and report on, the subject matter in respect of which
it is established by
the government.
Gilligan notes that the ‘pragmatic’ function of a public inquiry,
such as a Royal Commission, is to ‘investigate
an issue for a government,
collect information, submit a report and make
recommendations’.
argues persuasively, however, that public inquiries such as Royal Commissions
also have a ‘broader political, or ideological,
function as a management
strategy, in particular that of crisis
management’.
2.21 ‘Pragmatic’ reasons for which the government may establish
public inquiries include where it:
is confronted with an issue or problem where immediate action is
lacks the expertise or coercive powers to handle an issue or
investigation;
needs to explore a very complex matter in a manner which is beyond
the scope of administrative resources; or
needs to investigate allegations of impropriety where the
government, or an individual working in government, is
2.22 According
to Prasser, examples of the second, broader, function include where the
government wants to:
provide the appearance of action when confronted with a
controversial issue;
justify a change in direction from the policy of a previous
government, or a policy proposed while in opposition; or
obtain an independent analysis of a problem when a solution or
outcome is already preferred by the
government.
practice, there will be several issues for a government to consider when
determining whether to establish a public inquiry—and,
if so, the type of
public inquiry that should be established. These issues are discussed below and
in Chapter 6.
investigatory inquiries
2.24 Public inquiries may consider subject matter that falls within two broad
categories:
issues of policy or law reform (policy inquiries); or
investigation of facts or allocation of responsibility with respect
to incidents or problems (investigatory
inquiries).
2.25 Policy
and investigatory inquiries fulfil additional functions. Policy inquiries have
an analytical problem-solving role for
issues with systems or processes. These
inquiries may advise government on policy development in areas that are novel or
particularly
2.26 In contrast, investigatory inquiries determine what happened in
particular situations, for example where there has been a major
accident or
disaster, an allegation of corruption, or the death or wrongful imprisonment or
treatment of individuals.
functions of investigatory inquiries include: establishing accountability and
responsibility; allowing stakeholders to learn
from what happened; providing
catharsis or reconciliation; and providing reassurance and rebuilding public
confidence.
2.27 In practice, an investigatory inquiry may consider policy and systemic
issues that are relevant to the investigated incident
or problem. Similarly,
policy inquiries may ‘concentrate on the wrong or malfunction in the
system and as part of this identify
individuals who contributed to such
wrongdoing’.
2.28 Justice Ronald Sackville has explained the distinctive techniques of
(legal) policy and investigatory inquiries.
The first usually involves, among other things, a carefully constructed research
program, the systematic gathering of empirical information,
inter-disciplinary
collaboration, detailed analysis and discussion of policy options, and long-term
planning. The second usually
requires investigative and policy skills, the
ability to identify and follow paper or electronic trails, painstaking analysis
relevant documentation, innovative use of technology and compulsory powers,
forensic experience, and the ability to collate and evaluate
a vast amount of
factual information.
2.29 Several examples of policy and investigatory inquiries in Australia are
discussed below.
inquiries in Australia
2.30 This section provides an overview of the types of public inquiries that
have been established at the federal, state and territory
Commissions
2.31 Royal Commissions have been described as ‘the most prestigious of
executive inquiries in
Australia’.
Their status
is attributed to the fact that they have a statutory basis, are endowed with
coercive information-gathering powers,
and are generally appointed to inquire
into controversial issues.
Another important feature of Royal Commissions is their establishment by the
Governor-General by Letters Patent.
Royal Commissions Act
provides the Australian Government with
a statutory framework for establishing public inquiries with coercive
information-gathering
Under the Act, the scope of the power to establish a Royal Commission is very
broad. The Act provides that the Governor-General,
by Letters Patent, may issue
a commission ‘which relates to or is connected with the peace, order and
good government of the
Commonwealth, or any public purpose or any power of the
Commonwealth’.
description of the Act is contained in Chapter 3.
Classification #1—general areas of
inquiry by Royal Commissions
2.33 There are a number of general areas into which both policy and
investigatory Royal Commissions have inquired since the enactment
Royal Commissions Act
These areas, and an example of a Royal Commission conducted in each, are listed
administration
—Royal Commission on Australian
Government Administration (1976);
communications
—Independent Inquiry into Frequency
Modulation Broadcasting (1974);
constitutional and legal affairs
—Royal Commission on
the Commonwealth
Constitution
corruption and impropriety
—Royal Commission into
Alleged Payments to Australian Maritime Unions (1974);
—Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking
defence and national security
—Royal Commission on
Australia’s Security and Intelligence Agencies (1985);
economy, industry policy and assistance
Commission on the Sugar Industry (1911);
employment and industrial relations
—Royal Commission of
Inquiry into the Building and Construction Industry (2003);
the environment
—Royal Commission into Exploratory and
Production Drilling for Petroleum in the Area of the Great Barrier Reef (1975);
—Royal Commission on Health (1926);
Indigenous affairs
—Royal Commission into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody (1991);
science and technology
—Royal Commission on Television
—Royal Commission on Meat Export Trade
—Commission of Inquiry into Relations between
the CCA and Seaview Air (1996); and
veterans’ affairs
—Royal Commission on the Use and
Effects of Chemical Agents on Australian Personnel in Vietnam
Classification
#2—policy and investigatory Royal Commissions
2.34 In the early decades of the 20th century, both policy and investigatory
Royal Commissions were appointed with regularity. Since
the 1970s, however, the
majority of Royal Commissions have been investigatory inquiries appointed to
investigate incidents or
2.35 Examples of early policy Royal Commissions include: the Royal Commission
on the Navigation Bill (1906), and the Royal Commission
upon the Commonwealth
Electoral Law and Administration (1915). During the time of the Whitlam Labor
Government, several policy inquiries
were issued under the
Royal Commissions
These included the Aboriginal Land Rights Commission (1974) and the
Royal Commission on Human Relationships (1978).
2.36 Early investigatory Royal Commissions include: the Royal Commission on
the Affray at Goaribari Island, British New Guinea, on
the 6th of March, 1904
(1904), and the Royal Commission regarding the Contract for the Erection of
Additions to the General Post
Office, Sydney (1939). More recently,
investigatory Royal Commissions have been issued to investigate the Chamberlain
convictions
(1987), the Centenary House lease (2004), and the actions of certain
Australian companies in relation to the United Nations Oil-For-Food
2.37 Some Royal Commissions, while being tasked with inquiring into a
particular issue, have also made a number of broad policy recommendations
relate to that issue. Examples of ‘mixed’ investigatory and policy
inquiries include the Royal Commission into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody (1991)
and the HIH Royal Commission (2003). Sackville notes that, while the former
inquiry was established to investigate
the deaths of 99 Indigenous persons in
police or prison custody, the inquiry’s report included ‘a very
large number of
recommendations designed to address the social, health and
economic disadvantages suffered by indigenous
Similarly, in
investigating the causes of the HIH insurance collapse, the HIH Royal Commission
made 61 broad policy recommendations
‘on matters of corporate governance,
financial reporting and assurance, regulation of general insurance, taxation and
insurance, and a support scheme for policyholders of failed
Other federal
2.38 Some ad hoc public inquiries have been appointed by Australian
Governments under legislation other than the
Royal Commissions Act
addition, the executive arm of government regularly establishes ad hoc public
inquiries, taskforces, committees and reviews without
statutory foundations.
These inquiries, however, do not have the same powers as Royal Commissions.
2.39 Ad hoc public inquiries are frequently appointed by the Australian
Government to advise it on broad social, economic and cultural
issues. Over the
past decade or so, non-Royal Commission inquiries have been appointed to
consider policies related to: the
housing and urban affairs;
immigration and
ethnic affairs;
regulation;
social security and
telecommunications.
2.40 Non-statutory forms of public inquiry also may conduct investigations
into particular incidents. Recent examples of this type
of inquiry include the
2005 inquiry into the immigration detention of Cornelia Rau, and the 2008
inquiry into the case of Dr Mohamed
Haneef. These inquiries, however, did not
have coercive information-gathering
Non-Royal Commission
forms of public inquiry are discussed further in Chapters 4 and 5.
State and territory
2.41 All states and territories have enacted legislation that provides for
the appointment of Royal
Commissions
or other public
inquiries with powers and
protections.
In addition, some
public inquiries are established jointly with federal and state and territory
governments.
2.42 Prasser observes that
the increasing number of Royal Commissions appointed by federal governments from
the 1970s was a trend
echoed by state
governments.
Inquiries appointed
by state governments in this era, however,
largely reflected state issues and problems with royal commissions into police
corruption, government maladministration, ministerial
improprieties and scandals
in State financial management.
2.43 Several state governments have now established standing bodies that
consider issues of impropriety and
corruption.
In recent years,
state and territory governments have appointed Royal Commissions and other
public inquiries to consider issues relating
child protection in Indigenous and non-Indigenous
communities—NSW,
Territory (NT),
South Australia
and Western
health and disability
services—NSW,
individuals—SA
recently, the Victorian Premier John Brumby announced the appointment of a Royal
Commission to inquire into the bushfires
that occurred in Victoria in February
State and territory
mechanisms used to establish public inquiries are discussed further in
R Sackville, ‘Law Reform Agencies
and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in B Opeskin and
D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274,
W Holdsworth,
A History of
English Law
(1971), 272.
G Gilligan,
‘Royal Commissions of Inquiry’ (2002) 35(3)
Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Criminology
289, 291. In examining the evolution of Royal
Commissions in the UK, Gilligan observes that the rise and decline in the rate
of inquiries
commissioned by the Crown corresponds with the decline and rise of
the supremacy of the UK Parliament. In the 20th century, departmental
have taken over the role once performed by Royal Commissions in the UK: ibid,
Statute of Evidence
Commissions of Inquiry Statute 1854
(Vic). Other
colonial governments also enacted legislation to conduct public inquiries in the
19th century: L Hallett,
Royal Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal
and Procedural Aspects
(1982), 90–91; R Sackville, ‘Law Reform
Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in
and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274, 278, fn 22.
Royal Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
Appendix 1.
[3.12]–[3.17].
Appendix 1.
The Howard Coalition
Government also appointed the Equine Influenza Inquiry, which was established
Quarantine Act 1908
(Cth) but had most of the powers of a Royal
Commission: see
Quarantine Act 1908
(Cth) s 66AZE. Other Royal
Commissions appointed by the Howard Government were: the HIH Royal Commission
(2001); the Royal Commission
into the Building and Construction Industry (2001);
the Commission of Inquiry into the Centenary House Lease (2004); and the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme
Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
Ibid, Appendices 6,
Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Public Inquiries
(1992), 16.
Most Royal Commissions and other
major inquiries conducted in recent years have individual websites that contain
the report of the
inquiry and other material. For example, see:
Inquiry into
Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme
(2006) <www.oilforfoodinquiry.gov.au/> at 4 August
Coercive information-gathering
powers are discussed further in
For example, the current
National Human Rights Consultation,
Share Your Views—National Human
Rights Consultation Submission Form
<www.humanrightsconsultation.gov.au> at 4 August
The requirement of independence
is not set out in Australian legislation establishing public inquiries. In
contrast, Irish legislation
that provides for the establishment of commissions
of investigation expressly states that a commission shall be independent in the
performance of its functions:
Commissions of Investigation Act
(Ireland) s 9. In Ch 6, the ALRC proposes that inquiries
established under its proposed
Inquiries Act
shall be independent in the
performance of their functions but accountable for their use of public
R Sackville, ‘Law Reform
Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in
B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274, 277.
Royal Commissions
of Royal Commissions is discussed in
Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
(2006), [4.6]–[4.14].
For example, the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship
Painters and Dockers Union
(1984) ‘surprised both the Commonwealth and
state governments in the direction that it took’: ibid, [4.7]. In
Queensland,
the findings of the Inquiry into Possible Illegal Activities and
Associated Police Misconduct (1989) (Fitzgerald Inquiry) are credited
factor in ending the 30 year rule of the then incumbent Queensland Government:
Executive Inquiries in Australia—Some Proposals for
Reform (Law and Policy Paper No 8)
(1997) Australian National
University—Centre for International and Public Law,
This function is expressly set out
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
G Gilligan, ‘Royal
Commissions of Inquiry’ (2002) 35(3)
Australian and New Zealand Journal
of Criminology
289, 289–290.
Royal Commissions
and Public Inquiries in Australia
(2006), Figures 4.3, 4.4;
Ibid, 22–29. Note that
the term ‘inquisitorial’ sometimes is used interchangeably with the
term ‘investigatory’.
Prasser contrasts his taxonomy with other
classification systems. For example, Hallett classifies public inquiries as
inquisitorial
investigatory; and Borchadt uses three categories of
classification—inquisitorial, investigatory and advisory: L Hallett,
Royal Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural
(1982); D Borchardt,
Commissions of Inquiry in Australia—A
Brief Survey
(1991). In this Inquiry, the ALRC has adopted Prasser’s
system of classifying public inquiries based on their
See, for example, the
reports of the: Royal Commission on loss of HMAS Voyager (1964); Inquiry into
Certain Australian Companies
in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme
(2006); and Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody (1991).
Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
, LRC 73 (2005),
R Sackville, ‘Law Reform
Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in
B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274, 285–286.
Executive Inquiries in Australia—Some Proposals for
Reform (Law and Policy Paper No 8)
(1997) Australian National
University—Centre for International and Public Law,
Royal Commissions and
Public Inquiries in Australia
[8.3]–[8.4].
The Crown may
establish a Royal Commission at common law. A common law Royal Commission,
however, does not have coercive information-gathering
McGuinness v
Attorney-General (Vic)
[1940] HCA 6
(1940) 63 CLR 73
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
(2006), Appendices
The year in parentheses
indicates the year of the Inquiry’s
completion.
Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
R Sackville, ‘Law Reform
Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in
B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274, 283, fn 43. See also E Johnston,
Royal Commission into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody
(1991), vol 5.
Sackville, ‘Law Reform Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same
Field’ in B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law
(2005) 274, 283, fn 41. See also N Owen,
Report of the HIH Royal
(2003), vol 1,
Inquiry into the
Contemporary Visual Arts and Crafts Sector
Access Card Consumer and
Taskforce on
Urban Design (1994).
Consultation on Human Rights (underway at the time of writing in July
Review of Higher Education
Committee for the Review of
the System for Review of Migration Decisions
Northern Territory Emergency
Response Review Board (2008).
Taskforce on Reducing the Regulatory Burden on Business
Review of the Social Security
Review and Appeals System (1997).
Independent Review of Soccer (2003).
Telecommunications Services Inquiry
A notable exception was the
commission of inquiry into the equine influenza outbreak and related quarantine
requirements and practices
(Equine Influenza Inquiry):
Quarantine Act
(Cth) s 66AZE. The
Quarantine Amendment (Commission of Inquiry)
(Cth) amended the
Quarantine Act
to provide that the
commission was vested with most of the powers of the
Royal Commissions Act
Royal Commissions
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Royal Commissions
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Constitution
(Vic) ss 88B, 88C;
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) ss 14–21C;
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Inquiries Act 1945
(NT). Also see:
Special Commissions
of Inquiry Act 1983
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Commission of Inquiry (Children in State Care and
Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
Inquiries Act 1991
Commission of Inquiry (Deaths in Custody) Act 1987
For example, the Royal
Commission into Grain Storage, Handling and Transport (1988) was established
jointly with the governments
of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, Western
Australia and South Australian. The Royal Commission of Inquiry into Chamberlain
Convictions (1987) was established by the federal and Northern Territory
Governments. Issues to do with powers of concurrent federal
and state or
territory inquiries are considered in
S Prasser, ‘Royal
Commissions in Australia: When Should Governments Appoint Them?’ (2006) 65
Australian journal of Public Administration
Ibid. For example, inquiries into
alleged police misconduct or corruption were appointed in Victoria (1970 and
1975); South Australia
(1977 and 1978); NSW (1979 and 1994); Queensland (1987);
and Western Australia (2002).
example, there are standing bodies that consider corruption issues in: NSW
(Independent Commission Against Corruption, NSW Crime
Commission and Police
Integrity Commission); Victoria (Office of Policy Integrity); Queensland (Crime
and Misconduct Commission);
and Western Australia (Corruption and Crime
Commission).
Special Commission of
Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW (2008), established under the
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Board of Inquiry into the
Protection of Aboriginal Children from Sexual Abuse (2007), established under
Inquiries Act 1945
Commission of Inquiry: Children on APY Lands (2007); Commission of Inquiry:
Children in State Care (2008), established under the
Commission of Inquiry
(Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
Inquiry into Response by
Government Agencies to Complaints of Family Violence and Child Abuse in
Aboriginal Communities (2002),
established under the
Public Sector Management
Special Commission
of Inquiry into Acute Care Services in NSW (2008), established under the
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Queensland Public Hospitals
Commission of Inquiry (2005), established under the
Commissions of Inquiry
Board of Inquiry
into Disability Services (2001), established under the
Inquiries Act 1991
Kapunda Road Royal Commission
(2005), established under
Royal Commissions Act 1917
Office of Inquiry into the Death
of Joseph Gilewicz (2000), established under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Governor of the State
of Victoria,
Terms of Reference—Royal Commission into the 2009
3. Overview of the
Commissions Act 1902
Introduction
Establishment
Coercive powers
Methods of taking evidence
Privileges and immunities
Communication of information
Concurrent Commonwealth and state inquiries
Custody and use of records
3. Overview of the
Commissions Act 1902
Introduction
3.1 This chapter provides an overview of the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth). It outlines the primary features of the Act. In Chapter 5, the
ALRC proposes that the
Royal Commissions Act
should be renamed the
Inquiries Act
and amended to enable the establishment of Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries.
Particular aspects of the proposed
Inquiries Act
are discussed in greater
detail in other chapters in this Discussion Paper.
Establishment
3.2 At common law, the Crown has the power to issue a Royal Commission. This
power has been described as ‘an essential part
of the equipment of all
executive authority’.
Commission issued pursuant to the Crown’s common law powers may inquire
into any matter, so long as the inquiry is
for a purpose of
government.
It does not, however,
have coercive powers, such as the power to compel the attendance of witnesses or
require the production of
3.3 The Crown’s common law power to issue a Royal Commission is
supplemented by
Royal Commissions
This section provides that
the Governor-General may, by Letters Patent, issue a commission to a person or
persons requiring or authorising
him or her to inquire into and report upon
‘any matter specified in the Letters Patent, and which relates to or is
with the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth, or any
public purpose or any power of the Commonwealth’. ‘Letters
Patent’ are a type of legal instrument containing public directions from a
Historically, they have
been used for a variety of purposes, such as conferring powers or privileges on
persons or companies, and
Section 16A
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) provides
that a reference in an Act to the Governor-General shall be read as referring to
the Governor-General acting with the
advice of the Executive Council. The
Executive Council consists of all ministers of state (ministers and
parliamentary secretaries).
Accordingly, Royal Commissions are established by the Governor-General on the
advice of all ministers.
Attorney-General (Cth) v Colonial Sugar Refining Co Ltd,
argued that the
Royal Commissions Act
was invalid because it purported to
authorise the Governor-General to establish Royal Commissions with coercive
powers to inquire
into matters beyond the legislative power of the
Commonwealth.
While the judgment of
the Privy Council in this case cast doubt upon the constitutionality of the Act,
a later judgment of the High
Court of Australia confirmed that the common law
doctrine of severability,
Acts Interpretation Act
, enabled s 1A of
the Act to be read as ‘validly operating in respect of subjects of inquiry
to which Commonwealth powers
3.6 As noted in Chapter 2, Royal Commissions have been established to
inquire into a wide range of matters, including the location
of the seat of
government,
Constitution
grain storage
and handling,
the activities of
and the ‘usual
rich array of alleged
improprieties’.
Commission cannot inquire into a matter if its inquiry would interfere with the
administration of justice.
has been held, for example, that a Royal Commission could not inquire into
allegations that a person has been guilty of criminal
conduct if a criminal
prosecution has been commenced against the person in respect of the alleged
In the United Kingdom,
the minister responsible for establishing a public inquiry may suspend the
inquiry to enable the determination
of civil or criminal proceedings arising out
of matters to which the inquiry
3.7 The ‘jurisdiction’ or ‘charter’ of a Royal
Commission is set out in the Letters Patent issued by the Governor-General.
the purposes of this Discussion Paper, the jurisdiction of a Royal Commission is
referred to as its ‘terms of reference’.
Royal Commissions Act
does not provide any
guidance on the framing of the terms of reference for a Royal Commission. It has
been held, however, that the
word ‘matter’ in the provision has a
wide operation, and that, within constitutional limits, a ‘general
description
of the subject of the inquiry will
3.9 Issues for this Inquiry include whether the proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide further guidance about the subject matter of Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries, or the circumstances in which
they should be
established. These issues are discussed in Chapter 6.
Royal Commissions Act
empowers the
Governor-General to ‘issue such commissions, directed to such person or
persons, as he or she thinks fit’.
Accordingly, Royal Commissioners are
appointed by the Governor-General, on the advice of the Executive Council.
Commissioners are
almost always drawn from outside the government, which
enhances the perception that Royal Commissions are
independent.
3.11 As a matter of practice, Royal Commissions are ‘largely the
province of lawyers’.
the 38 federal Royal Commissions that have been established since 1970, 32 have
been chaired by current or former judges, or legal
practitioners.
The membership of
inquiries that may be established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
discussed in Chapter 6.
3.12 Royal Commissions established under the
Royal Commissions Act
have a number of coercive information-gathering powers. For example, they have
the power to summon witnesses to give
summon or require
witnesses to produce documents or
and require witnesses to
give evidence under oath or
affirmation.
3.13 A person who fails to attend a hearing or produce requested documents or
things, without reasonable excuse, commits an offence,
punishable by a maximum
penalty of $1,100 or imprisonment for six
A person who refuses to
be sworn or make an affirmation, or to answer any relevant question asked by a
Royal Commission, or legal
practitioner assisting or appearing before a Royal
Commission, or a person authorised to appear, also commits an offence punishable
by the same maximum penalty.
3.14 Royal Commissions established under the Act have other powers that are
not strictly information-gathering powers, but which,
if exercised, may
ultimately result in the acquisition of relevant information. For example, a
Commission’
may authorise
a member of the Commission, a member of the Australian Federal Police, or a
member of the police force of a state or
territory to apply for a search warrant
in relation to a matter into which it is
All Royal Commissions
can issue a warrant for the arrest of a witness for failing to attend in answer
to a summons.
3.15 Examination of the powers of Royal Commissions raises a number of
questions. For example, do all inquiries established under
the proposed
Inquiries Act
require the same coercive information-gathering powers? Do
the current coercive information-gathering powers adequately balance individual
rights and the powers of the state, and are the penalties for offences designed
to support the use of a Royal Commission’s
powers appropriate? The powers
of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
are discussed in detail in
Offences and
are discussed further in Part F.
Methods of taking
Royal Commissions Act
does not preclude the taking of
evidence otherwise than on oath or by
affirmation.
The provisions of
the Act, however, ‘envisage that Royal Commissions will obtain evidence
mainly through oral
For example,
s 6FA provides that counsel assisting a Commission, or any person or legal
practitioner authorised by a Commission to
appear before it, may examine or
cross-examine any witness about any matter which the Commission deems relevant,
so far as the Commission
thinks proper. There are not, however, any provisions
expressly enabling evidence to be taken in other ways, for example, by affidavit
or written statement.
3.17 Royal Commissions have a general discretion to determine whether to
conduct their hearings in public or
When exercising this
discretion, a Royal Commission will consider a number of factors, including, for
example, whether the risk that
a person’s reputation will be unfairly
damaged outweighs the public interest in conducting a Royal Commission
Royal Commissions Act
also contains some provisions that deal
with the publication of evidence given before a Royal Commission.
Section 6D(2) of the Act
enables a witness to request that a Royal
Commission take evidence in private where the evidence relates to the profits or
position of any person, and it would be unfairly prejudicial to the
interests of that person to take the evidence in public. Further,
enables a Royal Commission to direct that any evidence given before it, any
document or thing produced to it, or any information
that may enable a person
who has given evidence before it to be identified, shall not be published.
3.19 The taking of evidence by potential inquiries under the proposed
Inquiries Act
is discussed in detail in Part E.
Privileges and
3.20 A ‘privilege’ is a right to resist disclosing information
that would otherwise be required to be
A number of
privileges exist at common law—namely, the privilege against
self-incrimination, client legal privilege, parliamentary
privilege and the
privilege in aid of settlement.
These privileges, as well as some additional privileges, also exist in statutory
3.21 Further, while not strictly a privilege, common law or statutory public
interest immunity also prevents the disclosure of certain
information—namely, information relating to matters of state—when
the public interest in non-disclosure outweighs the
public interest in
disclosure.
Royal Commissions Act
expressly deals with the privilege
against self-incrimination and client legal
It also contains a
provision providing that a witness does not have to disclose any ‘secret
process of manufacture’.
The extent to which other common law or statutory privileges apply to Royal
Commissions is uncertain, and is discussed in detail
in Chapter 16. The
application of privileges to inquiries that may be established under the
Inquiries Act
also is discussed in Chapter 16.
3.23 As noted above, under the
Royal Commissions Act
offence to fail to attend a hearing or produce a requested document or thing, or
to refuse to be sworn, or make an affirmation,
or answer a relevant question.
The Act also contains a number of offence provisions designed to prevent
interference with witnesses
appearing before a Royal Commission. For example, it
is an offence to bribe a person called as a witness before a Royal Commission
give false testimony or to withhold true
to practise any fraud
on a person called as a witness before a Royal Commission with the intent of
affecting his or her testimony,
to prevent a witness from attending before a Royal
Commission,
or to dismiss an
employee for appearing as a witness before a Royal
Commission.
3.24 In addition, s 6M makes it an offence to use, cause or inflict any
violence, punishment, damage, loss, or disadvantage to any
person ‘for or
on account of’ the fact that he or she appeared as a witness before a
Royal Commission, gave evidence
before a Royal Commission, or produced a
document or thing to a Royal Commission.
X v Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
High Court held that s 6M did not prevent the Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority (APRA) from taking administrative action
Insurance Act 1973
(Cth) against witnesses who appeared before the HIH
Royal Commission. This was because the administrative action was a proper
of APRA’s statutory powers and functions, and not ‘for or
on account of’ the evidence that the witnesses gave to
Commission.
3.26 The Act also contains offence provisions preventing interference with
evidence. It makes it an offence to give false or misleading
or to destroy
documents or things that are or may be required by a Royal
Commission.
3.27 It has been noted that the offence provisions in the Act ‘have
been based very largely on the principles developed by the
courts in the
exercise of their contempt
addition, an act of misconduct that does not constitute an offence under the
Royal Commissions Act
may constitute an offence relating to the
administration of justice under
Crimes Act 1914
Chapter 7 of the
Criminal Code
The offences
established by the
Royal Commissions Act
, and the offences that may be
established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
are discussed in detail in
Chapter 18. The nature and adequacy of the penalties attached to these
offences is discussed in detail
in Chapter 20.
Communication of
information
3.28 Section 6P of the Act provides that a Commission may communicate any
information it obtains that relates to a contravention of
a law of the
Commonwealth, or of a state or territory, to certain specified people and
bodies, such as the Director of Public Prosecutions.
In 2003, the Commissioner
conducting the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
recommended that the provision
be amended to enable Royal Commissions to
communicate evidence or information relating to a contravention of any law to
agency or body of the Commonwealth, [or] a State or a Territory
prescribed by the
regulations’.
noted, would overcome the ambiguity in s 6P(1)(e), which enables the
communication of information relating to a contravention
of a law to ‘the
authority or person responsible for the administration or enforcement of that
The power of a Royal
Commission to communicate information pursuant to s 6P, and the potential
power to communicate such information
under the proposed
Inquiries Act
is discussed in Chapter 11.
3.29 Section 6O(1) of the Act deals with contempt of a Royal Commission, and
provides as follows:
Any person who intentionally insults or disturbs a Royal Commission, or
interrupts the proceedings of a Royal Commission, or uses
any insulting language
towards a Royal Commission, or by writing or speech uses words false and
defamatory of a Royal Commission,
or is in any manner guilty of any intentional
contempt of a Royal Commission, shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Two hundred dollars, or imprisonment for three months.
3.30 The law of contempt is concerned with protecting the administration of
justice. Some have argued that the application of the
law of contempt in an
administrative context is
problematic.
This is because
‘the very touchstone whereby the question of contempt or no contempt is to
be judged has been withdrawn and
some new criterion must be
3.31 Section 6O(2) of the Act gives certain judicial officers, in respect of
a contempt committed in the face of the Commission, all
the powers that a
justice of the High Court has in relation to a contempt in the face of the
Court. Concerns have been expressed
that this provision ‘is reminiscent of
a “star chamber”, for it empowers a commissioner to act at once as
prosecutor and
In addition, some
commentators have questioned the constitutionality of the provision, given that
it purports to vest judicial power
in an administrative
3.32 Some acts that could constitute contempt are already punishable as
criminal offences in the
Royal Commissions Act
. For example, it is an
offence to refuse to be sworn or make an affirmation, or answer a relevant
question. This could also constitute
contempt of a Royal Commission. One
question is whether conduct which breaches a specific offence provision in the
Royal Commissions Act
also may be punishable under s 6O(1) of the
The issue of contempt of
inquiries that may be established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
discussed in detail in Chapter 19.
Commonwealth and state inquiries
3.33 Section 7AA of the Act
provides that a Royal Commissioner can
perform any functions or exercise any powers conferred on him or her by the
Governor of a state,
or a minister of a state, provided that the minister has
consented to this course. This provision was inserted into the Act in 1982
‘to remove doubt as to the capacity of a Commonwealth royal commission to
accept powers and functions given to it by a State
government in the form of a
parallel commission’.
Sorby v Commonwealth
Gibbs CJ noted that s 7AA
was a ‘rather curious
because it had
been held previously that a Royal Commissioner could perform the functions of a
Commissioner conferred on him or her
by the Governor of a state while performing
similar functions conferred on him or her by the
Governor-General.
Accordingly,
he noted that s 7AA ‘seems to have been unnecessary, unless it was
intended to be restrictive, in that it makes
the consent of the Minister
necessary where it was not previously
Concurrent inquiries
conducted under the
Royal Commissions Act
and under the proposed
Inquiries Act
are discussed in Chapter 7.
Custody and use of
Royal Commissions Act
enables regulations
to be made about the custody and use of, and access to, Royal Commission
records. It sets out the persons and
bodies who may be given custody of Royal
Commission records by regulations, and provides that, subject to any regulations
contrary, a custodian of a record of a Royal Commission may use the
record for:
the purposes of the performance of the custodian’s functions
and the exercise of the custodian’s powers; and
any other purpose for which the custodian could use the records if
the custodian had acquired them in the performance of the custodian’s
functions or the exercise of the custodian’s powers.
provision was modelled on the provisions of the
HIH Royal Commission
(Transfer or Records) Act 2003
(Cth), which enabled the transfer of certain
records of the HIH Royal Commission to the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission.
It was introduced in 2006 to
remove any argument that there might be a requirement to provide procedural
fairness to persons who could be adversely affected if
documents obtained by the
Cole Inquiry, or any other royal commission, for its purposes, were to be made
available to other persons
or agencies and used for other
3.37 Regulation 8 of the
Royal Commissions Regulations 2001
deals with the custody and use of, and access to, the records of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in Relation
to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme
(2006). The handling of Royal Commission records, and the records of inquiries
that may be established
under the proposed
Inquiries Act
are discussed
in detail in Chapter 8.
Proposal 5–1.
Parker & Co Pty Ltd v Moorhead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
Victoria v Australian Building
Construction Employees’ and Builders Labourers’ Federation
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
McGuinness v
Attorney-General (Vic)
[1940] HCA 6
(1940) 63 CLR 73
In Ch 5, the ALRC discusses the
prerogative, or common law, power of the executive to establish a Royal
Commission.
Companion to Law
(1980), 761.
Constitution
Appointments to the Executive Council are for life, although in
practice only executive councillors who are members of the current
advise the Governor-General: Australian Government Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet,
Federal Executive Council Handbook
Attorney-General (Cth) v
Colonial Sugar Refining Co Ltd
[1913] UKPCHCA 4
(1913) 17 CLR
The doctrine of severability
permits a court to read an Act as if unconstitutional sections of the Act were
not included.
Commonwealth
(1954) 90 CLR 177
Section 15A
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) provides that Acts are to be read and
constructed subject to the
Constitution
Royal Commission on Sites for the
Seat of Government of the Commonwealth
Royal Commission on Taxation
of Leasehold Estates in Crown Lands (1919); Royal Commission on Taxation
Royal Commission on the
Constitution
Royal Commission
into Grain Storage, Handling and Transport
Royal Commission on the
Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union
R Sackville, ‘Law Reform
Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in
B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274, 279.
McGuinness v
Attorney-General (Vic)
[1940] HCA 6
(1940) 63 CLR 73
Hammond v Commonwealth
152 CLR 188
(UK) s 13. The power of a minister to suspend an
inquiry is discussed in Ch 14.
Boath v Wyvill
(1989) 85 ALR 621
Royal Commissions and
Public Inquiries in Australia
R Sackville, ‘Law Reform
Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in
B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274, 282.
Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
Royal Commissions Act
, (2), (3A), (5).
A ‘relevant
Commission’ is a Commission established by Letters Patent that declare
that the Commission is a relevant
Commission for the purposes of the provision
in which the expression appears: ibid
Royal Commissions Act 1902
H Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration
Appendix 4K, 350.
Royal Commissions Act
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and
Construction Industry
(2003), vol 2,
J Gans and A Palmer,
Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Evidence Act
J Gans and A
Australian Principles of Evidence
(2nd ed, 2004),
Referred to as legal professional
privilege under the Act.
Commissions Act 1902
X v Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority
[2007] HCA 4
(2007) 226 CLR 630
Royal Commissions Act
E Campbell,
Contempt of
Royal Commissions
(1984), 36.
Final Report of
the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol
2, Rec 1(c).
Ibid, vol 2, Rec
See, eg, E Campbell,
of Royal Commissions
(1984), 42.
R v Arrowsmith
[1949] VicLawRp 56
[1950] VLR 78
A Brown, ‘The Wig
or the Sword? Separation of Powers and the Plight of the Australian Judge’
[1992] FedLawRw 2
Federal Law Review
Ibid; E Campbell,
Contempt of
Royal Commissions
(1984), 47.
Contempt of Royal Commissions
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 16 November 1982, 2337 (F
Chaney—Minister for Social Security),
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
Winneke; Ex parte Gallagher
(1982) 152 CLR
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
Explanatory Memorandum,
Royal Commissions Amendment (Records) Bill 2006
The ‘Cole Inquiry’ referred to in this Explanatory Memorandum is the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies
in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
Programme (2006).
4. Comparative Forms of Public
Introduction
Models of inquiry in Australian states and territories
New South Wales
South Australia
Western Australia
Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory
Other models of inquiry in Australia
Defence inquiries established by regulations
Models of inquiry in overseas jurisdictions
United Kingdom
New Zealand
4. Comparative Forms of Public
Introduction
4.1 In this chapter, the ALRC discusses comparative models of public
inquiries. It considers models of inquiry in state and territory
those conducted under the
Defence (Inquiries) Regulations 1985
models of inquiry in overseas jurisdictions.
Models of inquiry in
Australian states and territories
4.2 Legislation in all Australian states and territories provides for the
establishment of public inquiries with coercive powers.
Inquiries without
statutory foundations are also established by most state and territory
governments. In the next two sections, the
ALRC outlines distinctive features of
inquiries established by legislation in comparable jurisdictions. In particular,
the ALRC notes
where a model of inquiry differs from the
Royal Commissions
(Cth) with respect to: establishment and membership of an inquiry;
flexibility or rigidity of processes; and the extent of information-gathering
powers and protections.
4.3 In other chapters of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC discusses in detail
issues concerning: inquiry powers; protections of witnesses
and inquiry members;
offences; costs; administration; judicial review of inquiry decisions; and
government responses to inquiry recommendations.
4.4 In New South Wales, the Governor has the prerogative power to establish
public inquiries. Two statutes confer powers on public
inquiries established by
the Governor: the
Royal Commissions Act 1923
(NSW) and the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
For a brief period in
1997–1998, the
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act
(NSW) allowed
either or both Houses of Parliament to resolve to authorise the Governor to
establish a special commission of inquiry
to consider an issue related to
parliamentary proceedings.
4.5 While the Governor is not restricted in his or her choice in relation to
appointment of persons as commissioner or commissioners
of an inquiry
established under the
Royal Commissions Act
only certain
persons may be appointed as commissioners of an inquiry established under the
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act
(NSW). The latter Act provides that a
commission may be issued only to a person who is a judge or legal practitioner
of at least seven
years standing.
As well, some powers in the
Royal Commissions Act
(NSW) may be exercised
only by a judge of a superior court, or a legal practitioner of seven years
standing, who is declared to have
these powers in the Letters Patent
establishing the Royal
Commission.
4.6 Both the
Royal Commissions Act
(NSW) and the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
confer coercive powers upon
inquiries appointed under the Acts.
In inquiries established under the
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act
the special provisions of the
Royal Commissions Act
commissioner has all the powers, rights and privileges as judges with respect to
compelling the: attendance of witnesses; answering
by witnesses of relevant
questions; and production of documents and other
Further, a commissioner
may issue warrants for the apprehension of a witness and the bringing of that
witness before the inquiry.
4.7 Not all inquiries enacted under the
Royal Commissions Act
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act
(NSW) are empowered to
exercise all powers set out in the Acts—both Acts allow the Governor to
set limitations on the powers
available to
Professor Enid
Campbell observed that a provision of this nature ‘provides an element of
flexibility not present in the federal
4.8 Currently, there is no general inquiries statute that provides for the
establishment of public inquiries in Victoria. The Governor
in Council, however,
may issue commissions and appoint boards of inquiry to any person or persons
Constitution
4.9 Powers and other rules of commissions and boards of inquiry are set out
Evidence Act 1958
are few differences between the powers and rules of commissions and boards of
inquiry. The coercive powers of both largely reflect
those in the federal
Royal Commissions Act
Several other Victorian Acts provide that the relevant provisions of the
Evidence Act
apply with respect to investigatory inquiries established
under those Acts.
4.10 In 2006, the Victorian Law Reform Commission recommended the: repeal of
the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1958
that deal with commissions and
boards of inquiries; enactment of a Victorian
Royal Commissions Act
consequential amendment of several Victorian Acts that incorporate by reference
the inquiry provisions of the
Evidence Act
On 1 January
2010, most provisions of the
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic) will come into
force, replacing most provisions of the
Evidence Act
Evidence Act
does not contain provisions dealing with the powers
and procedures of public inquiries. At the time of writing in July 2009, draft
legislation for the establishment of public inquiries has not been introduced
into the Victorian Parliament. The ALRC intends to
monitor developments in this
4.11 In Queensland, the Governor has the prerogative power to establish a
commission of inquiry. Under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
commissions of inquiry with coercive powers may be issued to any person or
Unlike most other
equivalent Acts in Australian jurisdictions, the
Commissions of Inquiry
(Qld) expressly states that the Governor shall establish an inquiry
under the Act with the advice of the Executive
Further, the Governor
in Council may declare that specified provisions of the
Commissions of
Inquiry Act
(Qld) apply to inquiries other than those issued under the
4.12 Inquiries established under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
have the power, in certain circumstances, to enter and search
The commission may
inspect documents and make copies of any material that may be relevant to the
Further, if the
chairperson of the commission is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for
suspecting that there is relevant
material on certain premises, he or she may
issue a warrant to police officers to search the premises and seize relevant
4.13 In South Australia, the Governor has the prerogative power to establish
a Royal Commission. Coercive powers of Royal Commissions
are set out in the
Royal Commissions Act 1917
4.14 While there are no requirements in the
Royal Commissions Act
as to who may be a member of a Royal Commission, there were stringent
requirements for one inquiry established under the
Commission of Inquiry
(Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
(SA). This Act
established a commission of inquiry into the incidence of sexual offences
against children resident on the Aṉangu
Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara
lands in Central Australia. While the Governor may have appointed any person to
be a commissioner
of this inquiry, he or she also needed to appoint two
assistant commissioners of whom:
one needed to be male and one female; and
at least one needed to be of Aboriginal
other instruments providing for the establishment of public inquiries with
coercive powers set out restrictions on the gender
or ethnicity of an inquiry
member. The issue of membership of an inquiry is discussed further in
Royal Commissions Act 1968
(WA) provides that a Royal
Commission with coercive powers may be appointed by the
Commissions Act
(WA) mirrors the federal
Royal Commissions Act
providing a statutory basis for the establishment of Royal Commissions with
coercive powers.
Other Acts may
confer additional powers on inquiries established under the
Royal Commissions
4.17 Any person may be appointed as a member of a Royal Commission
established under the
Royal Commissions Act
(WA). Unlike equivalent Acts
in other jurisdictions, however, the Act also makes special provision for the
appointment of members
of a select committee of either House of Parliament as
members of a Royal Commission.
In such a case, a majority of the members shall form a quorum at any meeting,
and any decision of a majority of members shall be
the decision of the Royal
Commission.
4.18 In Western Australia, some public inquiries also may be established by
an individual minister. The minister responsible for administering
Sector Management Act 1994
(WA) may direct, in writing, a suitably qualified
person or persons to conduct a special inquiry into a matter relating to the
Australian public
Special inquirers
appointed under the Act have some coercive information-gathering powers,
including the power to enter the premises
of any public sector body, and inspect
and retain any book, document or writing produced to him or her upon notice in
4.19 In Tasmania, inquiries with coercive powers are established by the
Governor under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
(Tas). Unlike relevant
legislation in other Australian jurisdictions, this Act sets out criteria for
when a public inquiry may be
established. The Governor may direct that a
commission of inquiry be made into a matter only when he or she is satisfied
is both in the public interest and expedient to do
Commissions of Inquiry Act
(Tas) provides that one or more
persons may be appointed as members of such an inquiry. The Act also sets out
the circumstances in
which such appointment may be
terminated.
4.21 In 2003, the Tasmania Law Reform Institute made several recommendations
with respect to the powers of inquiries established under
Commissions of
Inquiry Act
These recommendations are discussed in Chapter 11.
Inquiries Act 1945
(NT) provides the responsible minister and
the Legislative Assembly with the power to appoint, or resolve to appoint, a
board of inquiry.
the Legislative Assembly passes a resolution for the appointment of an inquiry,
the Administrator of the Northern Territory appoints
the board of inquiry or
inquiry member. Reports are required to be tabled in the Legislative
4.23 Inquiries established under the
Inquiries Act
similar powers to those established under the federal
Royal Commissions Act
In addition, the
Commission of Inquiry (Deaths in Custody) Act 1989
(NT) expressly provided the commissioner of that inquiry with the same
powers, protections and privileges as those contained in the
Commissions Act
state, territory and federal inquiries are discussed in Chapter 11.
Australian Capital
4.24 Royal Commissions and boards of inquiry are appointed by the ACT
executive under the
Royal Commissions Act 1991
(ACT) and the
respectively
Acts generally are similar, but Royal Commissions and boards of inquiry differ
in the scope of their powers. The explanatory memorandum
for the bills makes
clear the parliamentary intention for the different mechanisms—a Royal
Commission is intended to be ‘inquisitorial’
in nature, whereas a
board of inquiry ‘provide[s] the Government of the Territory with
information on a matter of general
importance’.
4.25 Commissioners appointed under the
Royal Commissions Act
must be a judge or a person who has been a lawyer for five
There is no similar
requirement for the membership of boards of inquiry established under the
Inquiries Act
executive may terminate the appointment of a commissioner of a Royal Commission
or member of a board of inquiry on the grounds
of misbehaviour or physical or
mental incapacity.
Other models of
inquiry in Australia
Defence inquiries
established by regulations
4.26 Inquiries established under regulations usually consider issues related
to national security or the Australian Defence Force
(ADF). During, and
immediately following, the World War II, inquiries were conducted under the
National Security (Inquiries) Regulations 1941
One such commission
of inquiry was the Inquiry Concerning the Circumstances Connected with the
Attack made by Enemy Aircraft at Darwin
on 19 February 1942 (1945). This inquiry
considered a range of issues, including: damage sustained in the attack; loss of
life; accuracy
of bombing; whether there was adequate warning of the raid;
preparation of defence services; cooperation between various defence
and changes necessary to ensure defence against recurrence of
4.27 Currently, inquiries may be conducted under the
Defence (Inquiries)
Regulations 1985
which enable the establishment of courts and boards of inquiry to inquire into
matters related to the ADF.
Courts of inquiry are established by, and report to, the Minister for
Boards of inquiry are
established by, and report to, the Australian Secretary for Defence, Chief of
the Defence Force (CDF), or the
Chief Officers of the Navy, Army or Air
Courts and boards of
inquiry tend to examine issues related to an accident, injury or damage to ADF
4.28 In June 2007, the
Defence (Inquiries) Regulations
were amended to
provide for the establishment by the CDF of commissions of
These inquiries may
consider service-related deaths and suicides of ADF
A CDF commission of
inquiry currently is being conducted into the loss of HMAS Sydney II in November
1941 and related loss of
4.29 At least one member of a court or commission of inquiry established
Defence (Inquiries) Regulations
must be a civilian with legal
(or, in the case of a commission of inquiry, judicial)
experience.
Where there is more
than one member of an inquiry, the civilian is to be the president of the
‘assessors’ may be appointed to advise members of a board of
Assessors do not join
in the preparation of the report of the inquiry, but may examine the report
before it is presented to the appointing
4.30 Coercive information-gathering powers are conferred upon members of all
inquiries conducted under the
Defence (Inquiries)
Regulations
The regulations
also address procedural issues, such as whether inquiries should be conducted in
private or public.
Models of inquiry in
overseas jurisdictions
4.31 In this section, the ALRC considers models of inquiry in several
overseas jurisdictions in which the systems of government are
comparable to the
Australian system. In addition, a number of these jurisdictions have conducted
recent reviews of their inquiries
legislation.
4.32 In the United Kingdom (UK) under the
Inquiries Act 2005
minister may establish an inquiry with coercive
Inquiries Act
replaced approximately 30 UK laws for the establishment of
inquiries, including the
Tribunals of Inquiry Act 1921
4.33 Under the
Inquiries Act
inquiries may be established
to consider particular events that have caused, or have the potential to cause,
public concern. A minister
may also establish an inquiry if there is public
concern about a particular event that may have
Within a reasonably
practicable time after establishing an inquiry, the minister needs to inform the
relevant Parliament or Assembly
of the decision to establish the inquiry, the
terms of reference, and the name of the chair of the
4.34 The minister responsible for establishing an inquiry appoints its chair,
and, in consultation with the chair, any additional
The criteria for the
membership of an inquiry are not related directly to professional
qualifications—rather, inquiry members
are appointed on the basis of
‘suitability’ and
‘impartiality’.
4.35 A judge may be appointed as a chair or other inquiry member but he or
she does not exercise different powers to a member who
In addition to appointing
inquiry members, the minister may appoint expert ‘assessors’ to
assist panel members. Assessors
have an advisory role and do not exercise powers
Inquiries Act
Inquiries Act
(UK) provides flexibility in other contexts.
For example, an inquiry commenced other than under the Act may be
‘converted’
to an inquiry under the
A converted inquiry enjoys
the same powers and protections as an inquiry commenced under the
Another flexible feature of
the Act is that the minister responsible for establishing an inquiry may suspend
that inquiry temporarily
to allow the completion of any investigation, or civil
or criminal proceedings, that relate to the
4.37 Two types of inquiries with coercive powers may be established under the
Inquiries Act 1985
(Canada). A ‘public’ inquiry is
established by the Governor-in-Council whenever it considers it would be
expedient to
‘departmental’ inquiry may be established, with the approval of the
Governor-in-Council, by a minister with responsibility
for a federal government
department.
Commissioners of
departmental inquiries investigate and report on matters relating to
departmental business and the conduct of
4.38 Public and departmental inquiries exercise similar powers with respect
to compelling the attendance and answers of witnesses
and the production of
relevant material.
In addition,
commissioners of departmental inquiries may enter any public institution and
Inquiries Act
has some elements of
flexibility. It provides for the appointment of counsel, experts and assistants
to assist the commissioners.
These individuals may be delegated the same powers
as the commissioners.
allows the Governor-in-Council to confer on an international commission or
tribunal any of the powers conferred on public
inquiries. Such a commission or
tribunal may exercise these powers in Canada, subject to any conditions or
limitations that may be
imposed by the
Governor-in-Council.
New Zealand
4.40 The Governor-General of New Zealand may establish Royal Commissions by
use of the royal prerogative. Other public inquiries,
including Royal
Commissions with coercive powers and protections, also may be established by the
Governor-General under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1908
4.41 Under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
(NZ), public inquiries may
be established to consider: the administration of government; the operation,
necessity or expediency of
any legislation; the conduct of any officer in the
service of the Crown; disasters or accidents in which members of the public
or could have been, killed or injured; or any other matter of public
importance.
Judges may be
appointed as members of a public inquiry. Judges, and former judges, of the High
Court have additional powers and protections
4.42 Public inquiries may be commenced under a very large number of other New
Zealand statutes and over 50 statutes incorporate by
reference powers of the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
In addition, at least
12 Acts provide for the establishment of inquiries to consider issues related to
those Acts, with powers akin
to inquiries established under the
Commissions
of Inquiry Act.
4.43 In May 2008, the New Zealand Law Commission (NZLC) released a report,
A New Inquiries Act
. Amongst other things, the NZLC recommended the
repeal of the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
and the enactment of a statute
that provides for the establishment and other aspects of ‘commissions of
inquiry’ and
‘government
inquiries’.
September 2008, the Inquiries Bill 2008 was introduced into the New Zealand
Parliament. If passed, the Bill will implement
many of the recommendations made
by the NZLC.
The ALRC will
monitor developments in this area.
4.44 Statutory commissions with coercive powers and protections may be
established under the
Commissions of Investigation Act 2004
Commissions established under this Act may consider issues of significant public
Before a commission is
established, the Minister for Finance needs to approve a minister’s
proposal to establish a commission,
and both Houses of Parliament (the
Oireachtas) need to resolve to approve the draft
4.45 The Irish Government also has the power to establish a tribunal of
inquiry to consider a matter of ‘urgent public
importance’.
A tribunal of
inquiry has coercive powers vested in it by the
Tribunals of Inquiry
(Evidence) Acts 1921–2004
(Ireland) if both Houses of the Irish
Oireachtas pass a resolution to that
4.46 In 2005, the Law Reform Commission of Ireland (LRCI) released a
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry.
The LRCI made
a number of recommendations for changes to the current system with respect to:
the selection of an appropriate type
of inquiry; drafting appropriate terms of
reference; the rights of individuals and organisations to be heard and
represented; and
the awarding of legal
Following the release of
this report, the Tribunals of Inquiry Bill 2005 (Ireland) was introduced into
the Oireachtas. This Bill
has also been considered by the Select Committee on
Justice, Equality, Defence and Women’s Rights. At the time of writing in
July 2009, the Bill is awaiting passage. The ALRC will monitor developments in
4.47 Two types of public inquiries with coercive powers may be established
Inquiries Act 2007
(Singapore). A ‘commission of
inquiry’ may be established by the President of Singapore whenever he or
she considers
that it would be ‘expedient’ to do so. Such an inquiry
may consider: the conduct of public service officers; the conduct
of any public
service department or public institution; or any matter, in the opinion of the
President, which would be in the public
4.48 A ‘committee of inquiry’ may be established by any minister
whenever he or she considers that it would be expedient
to do so. A committee
may be established for the purpose of inquiring into: an occurrence involving
death, serious personal injury
or serious property damage; an occurrence that
may endanger public safety or public health; the conduct of a ministry,
or statutory body within the minister’s responsibility; or the
conduct of an officer employed by, or seconded to, such a
4.49 Members of commissions and committees of inquiry are appointed by the
person establishing the inquiry (appointing
authority).
At least one member
of a commission of inquiry must be a judge of the High Court of Singapore, and
at least one member of a committee
of inquiry must be a judge of a District
Court of Singapore.
4.50 Both types of public inquiry have identical powers with respect to
procuring evidence, examining witnesses and compelling attendance
Subject to the terms
of reference, both types of inquiry may have the power to admit evidence that
would otherwise be inadmissible
in judicial proceedings, and to hold private
Inquiries Act
(Singapore) provides for the appointment of a
secretary or assessors at the discretion of the appointing
The appointing
authority may also make rules with respect to the inquiry body, for example on
matters of evidence or
With the consent of
the appointing authority, an inquiry may be suspended to allow for the
completion of any relevant investigation
or judicial
proceedings.
4.52 Under the
Inquiries Act
(Singapore), an inquiry may report on
anything it considers relevant to the terms of reference. It may also make
recommendations related
to the terms of reference, including ‘any
recommendations the inquiry body sees fit to make despite not being required to
In other chapters of this Discussion
Paper, the ALRC discusses in detail coercive powers of public inquiries,
penalties for persons
who fail to comply with these requirements, evidentiary
rules applicable to public inquiries, and funding arrangements for various
of inquiry.
Special Commissions of
Inquiry Act
expressly excludes the operation of the
Royal Commissions Act
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Recent inquiries in NSW tend to have been established under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
rather than under the
Royal Commissions Act
See, eg, Special Commission of Inquiry into Acute Care
Services in NSW Public Hospitals (2008); Special Commission of Inquiry into
Child Protection Services in NSW (2008); Special Commission of Inquiry into
Sydney Ferries (2007); Special Commission of Inquiry
into Medical Research and
Compensation Foundation (2004).
amendment was made to allow the Parliament to authorise an inquiry to be held
into certain comments protected by parliamentary
privilege and made in relation
to the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service (1997): New
South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 23 September
1997 (B Debus—Minister for Corrective Services). Part 4A expired six
months after its introduction:
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
(NSW) s 33H. An inquiry established under
attracted an
unsuccessful legal challenge on the basis that certain provisions abrogated
freedom of speech: G Griffith, ‘The
Powers and Privileges of the New South
Wales Legislative Council—Arena v Nader’ (1998) 9(4)
Royal Commissions Act
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
However, a commission of
inquiry that is issued to a judge does not cease to have force only because the
person ceases to be a judge:
s 2A. ‘Judge’ is defined in
s 3 of the Act to include judges of the NSW Land and Environment and
District Courts, as
well as judicial members of the NSW Industrial Relations and
Workers’ Compensation Commission.
Royal Commissions Act 1923
(NSW) div 2
Commissioners who
are also judges of the Supreme Court of NSW may exercise the special powers
without such a declaration by the Governor:
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Further, the
Commission (Police Service) Act 1994
(NSW) was enacted to provide additional
powers to the Wood Royal Commission, which was appointed under the
Commissions Act 1923
Commissions Act 1923
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act
Note that the punishment of contempt differs between
the two Acts:
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Royal Commissions Act
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Royal Commissions Act
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
H Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration
Appendix 4K, [3.7].
Constitution
(Vic) ss 88B, 88C. Campbell notes
‘[t]here appear to be no important differences between the powers of
commissions and of boards.
Though in practice royal commissions have been
reserved for matters of great public importance’: H Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration
(1976), Appendix
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) ss 14–21C.
however, that in 1998 the
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) was amended to confer
on commissions or boards of inquiry established under the
Constitution
(Vic) powers of entry to premises and inspection and possession of
certain documents or things found on the premises:
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 19E.
For a list of
these Acts, see: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Implementing the Uniform
Evidence Act
Appendix 12.
Ibid, Rec 43.
These recommendations were made as a result of the inquiry into uniform evidence
law in Australia conducted jointly
by the ALRC, Victorian Law Reform Commission
and NSW Law Reform Commission: Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales
Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence
, ALRC 102 (2005).
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Ibid 4(1). With respect to the
analogous power of the Governor-General under
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), note that the
Acts Interpretation Act
provides that the reference in an Act to the
Governor-General shall be read as referring to the Governor-General acting with
advice of the Executive Council. This is discussed further in
Commissions of Inquiry
Reed, ‘The “Permanent” Commissions of Inquiry—A
Comparison with Ad Hoc Commissions—
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Royal Commissions Act
Commission of Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act
(SA) s 4A(2), (3). In the Commission of Inquiry into Children on
APY Lands (2007)
the assistant commissioners could have exercised the
powers and have performed the functions of the commissioner under the Act in
accordance with an arrangement entered into with the commissioner: ibid
Royal Commissions Act
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Also see H Reed,
‘The “Permanent” Commissions of Inquiry—A Comparison
with Ad Hoc Commissions—
Australian Journal of
Administrative Law
example, see
Royal Commission (Police) Act 2002
Royal Commissions Act
Public Sector Management Act
(WA) s 11. ‘Public sector’ is defined broadly under
the Act to mean all agencies, ministerial offices and non-state emergency
service organisations: ibid s 3.
Ibid ss 12, 13.
Commissions
of Inquiry Act 1995
Tasmania Law Reform
Report on the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Inquiries Act 1945
. The minister responsible for administering the
Inquiries Act
is the Chief Minister: Northern Territory,
Administrative Arrangements
, 9 February 2009.
Inquiries Act 1945
The tabling of reports of inquiries
established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
is discussed in
Commission of Inquiry
(Deaths in Custody) Act 1987
Royal Commissions Act
Inquiries Act 1991
Explanatory Memorandum,
Royal Commissions Bill 1990, Inquiries Bill 1990, Royal Commissions and
Inquiries (Consequential Provisions)
Bill 1990 (ACT),
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Inquiries Act 1991
(ACT) provides that the ‘Executive may appoint 1
or more people as a board of
Royal Commissions
Inquiries Act 1991
These regulations were made
National Security Act 1939
Justice Lowe,
Commission of
Inquiry Concerning the Circumstances Connected with the Attack Made by Japanese
Aircraft at Darwin on 19 February 1942
These regulations are made
Defence Act 1903
Naval Defence Act 1910
Air Force Act 1923
Defence (Inquiries) Regulations 1985
(Cth) pts II–III.
Combined courts and boards of inquiry also may be appointed: pt III.
Further, in certain circumstances, Inquiry
Officers may inquire into a matter
concerning a part of the ADF: pt 6. The Inspector-General of the Australian
Defence Force also
may carry out inquiries: pts 6,
Ibid regs 5,
Ibid regs 23,
Australian Government Department
of Defence,
Commission of Inquiry—Frequently Asked Questions
http://www.defence.gov.au/coi/inquiries.htm
at 4 August
Defence (Inquiries) Amendment
Regulations 2007
(Inquiries) Regulations 1985
Australian Government
Department of Defence,
Commission of Inquiry into the Loss of HMAS Sydney
http://www.defence.gov.au/sydneyii/index.htm
at 4 August
Defence (Inquiries)
Regulations 1985
(Cth) regs 4, 6,
Ibid regs 7,
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 1. Also note that a ‘minister’ means a minister from
the UK, Scotland or Northern Ireland and references to a minister
also include
references to the National Assembly of Wales.
See United Kingdom Department of
Constitutional Affairs,
Inquiries Act
(2005) <http://www.dca
.gov.uk/legist/inquiries.htm> at 4 August 2009.
Inquiries Act
Ibid ss 4, 7. The
minister also sets the terms of reference for the inquiry in consultation with
the chair: ibid s 5.
Ibid s 10. This
section also provides that some judges may be appointed by the minister only in
consultation with certain other
Ibid ss 15, 16.
Inquiries Act
RSC c I-11 (Canada) s 2. Unless the inquiry is regulated by a
special law, the Governor-in-Council also may appoint commissioners
the inquiry: ibid s 3.
Ibid ss 4, 5,
Commissions of Inquiry
These statutes
are set out in New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No
102 (2008), 187–189.
The inquiries legislation
proposed by the New Zealand Law Commission and the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ)
differ with respect to the
‘tiers’ of inquiry that may be
established under the draft legislation. These models are discussed in detail in
Commissions of
Investigation Act
Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
73 (2005), [2.04].
Tribunals of
Inquiry (Evidence) Acts 1921–2004
Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
73 (2005), Ch 11. Also see Irish Government Citizens Information Board,
Citizens Information—Tribunals of Inquiry
http://www.citizensinformation.ie/categories/government-in-ireland/national-government/tribunals-and-investigations/tribunals_of_inquiry
at 4 August 2009.
(Singapore)
Ibid ss 4(1),
Ibid sch 1 para
ss 6–7, 12–13.
5. A New Statutory Framework for
Public Inquiries
Introduction
The current arrangements for public inquiries
A need for a new statutory framework
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Options for reform
A general inquiries statute
Dual statutory structure
Permanent inquiries body
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Titles of inquiries and new inquiries legislation
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Nature of inquiries in the proposed model
Overview of distinctions between tiers of inquiry
Scope for selecting powers for each inquiry
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Relationship between tiers of inquiry
5. A New Statutory Framework for
Public Inquiries
Introduction
5.1 One of the main issues for the ALRC in this Inquiry is whether the
current arrangements for conducting federal public inquiries,
including Royal
Commissions, are appropriate, or whether a new statutory model is necessary. In
this chapter, the ALRC considers
whether, and how, to reform the statutory
framework. It canvasses stakeholder views on new models of public inquiry in
and proposes several features of a new model for public inquiries. In
Chapter 13, the ALRC makes several proposals specifically directed
inquiries dealing with issues of national security.
The current
arrangements for public inquiries
5.2 The Australian Government may establish inquiries in several ways. Only
certain inquiries, however, have coercive
While the executive has the
prerogative power to establish public inquiries, this power does not extend to
establishing inquiries
with coercive powers. Such powers are conferred on public
inquiries by legislation enacted by the Australian
Parliament.
5.3 Currently, statutory public inquiries may be are established under:
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) (for example, the HIH
Royal Commission (2003); Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
Industry (2003); and Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to
the UN Oil-For-Food Programme (2006));
legislation that confers on a particular inquiry specific powers and
protections contained in the
Royal Commissions Act
(for example, the
Equine Influenza Inquiry (2008) was established under the amended
legislation that provides the executive with the power to establish
an inquiry in a general area (for example, the Inquiry into the
Manner in which
DFAT has dealt with Allegations of Paedophile Activities (1996) was established
Public Service Act 1922
(Cth)); and
legislation establishing permanent bodies to undertake inquiries
into a specific area (for example, the
Ombudsman Act 1976
(Cth) provides
the Commonwealth Ombudsman with powers to consider and investigate complaints
and agencies, and the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(Cth) provides
the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security with powers to inquire into
certain activities of certain intelligence
addition, the Australian Government may establish inquiries without statutory
foundation, such as taskforces, committees, panels
and departmental and
ministerial inquiries. These inquiries may be established to provide advice or
develop policy on a diverse range
of matters. Examples of this kind of
non-statutory policy inquiry include the National Human Rights Consultation
(current) and the
Access Card Consumer and Privacy Taskforce (2006).
5.5 The Australian Government may also establish investigatory inquiries
without statutory foundation. Recent examples of this type
of inquiry include
the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef (2008) (Clarke Inquiry)
and the Palmer Inquiry into the
Circumstances of Detention of Cornelia Rau
5.6 Finally, a number of inquiries relevant to Australian Defence Force
personnel and matters may be established under the
Defence (Inquiries)
Regulations 1985
Defence (Inquiries) Regulations
discussed further in Chapter 4, but detailed discussion of these
regulations falls outside the ambit of this ALRC Inquiry.
A need for a new
statutory framework
5.7 Public inquiries have a range of functions. The ALRC discusses these in
Chapter 2. There are shortcomings, however, with the current
arrangements
for conducting statutory and non-statutory inquiries. For example, non-statutory
inquiries usually have no recourse
to the powers necessary to investigate
relevant matters.
non-statutory inquiries may not provide adequate legal protection to inquiry
members and staff. Further, non-statutory inquiries
generally do not have the
same level of public input as Royal Commissions or other statutory inquiries. In
part, this may be a result
of insufficient protection afforded to individuals
providing information in a public forum—and the lack of consequences for
failing to provide information. Consequently, non-statutory inquiries may not
have all the information necessary to make the best
recommendations.
5.8 There are also issues with statutory inquiries commenced other than under
Royal Commissions Act
. For example, the
Quarantine Act
amended to confer on the Equine Influenza Inquiry most, but not all, of the
powers contained in the
Royal Commissions Act
. It would be better
regulatory practice for all public inquiries to be established within one
statutory framework. Also, the powers
available to inquiries not established
Royal Commissions Act
are not necessarily equivalent to those
enjoyed by Royal Commissions
For example, the Inquiry into the Manner in
which DFAT has dealt with Allegations of Paedophile Activities has been
criticised on
the basis that it did not have adequate powers and protections,
including the power to compel a person to give evidence that may
incriminate himself or herself.
Submissions and
consultations
5.9 There was overwhelming support amongst stakeholders for retaining the
highest statutory form of public inquiry as an essential
aspect of accountable
and transparent government.
example, the Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) noted that, through their
public nature and degree of independence, Royal
Commissions ‘enhance
Australian democracy’.
Law Council of Australia (Law Council) submitted that the ‘robust public
scrutiny’ of governments that may be undertaken
by Royal Commissions
‘has become increasingly critical in the context of expanding executive
5.10 In addition, there was very strong support among stakeholders for a
statutory basis for some non-Royal Commission forms of public
inquiry. For
example, the Law Council expressed concern that
[f]or decades, there has been a trend towards establishing public inquiries
without any statutory framework at all. This lack of
statutory framework, and
corresponding lack of information gathering powers and protections for
witnesses, can lead to a lack of
public confidence in the ability of the inquiry
to obtain all relevant information, despite the integrity of the inquiry head.
5.11 It went on to note that further consideration should be given to the
adoption of legislation that would enable Commonwealth public
inquiries to be
vested with statutory powers and provided with a statutory
5.12 Similarly, the CPSU emphasised that it was important for some public
inquiries to have access to coercive powers.
One of the more controversial aspects of the recent Clarke Inquiry into the
detention of Mohamed Haneef was that the Inquiry was
not a Royal Commission.
This controversy demonstrates … that the effectiveness of an inquiry is
intrinsically linked to the
powers on which the inquiry can
5.13 Graham Millar noted there may not be a need for ‘an Act to cover
inquiries that do not require coercive powers’.
For those inquiries that
do require such powers, however,
[t]here is a clear need for an Act to provide the authority for the executive
government to appoint a person (or persons) to conduct
a high level independent
inquiry, and for that person(s) to have the necessary coercive powers to obtain
information. … In
most cases, such inquiries are conducted openly and,
inevitably, they attract considerable public following. Particularly in view
the availability of coercive powers, the Act should provide the person(s)
conducting the inquiry, and those assisting the inquiry,
with appropriate
protections and immunities.
5.14 Other stakeholder concerns about the current framework related to
uncertainty about the nature of non-statutory and statutory
inquiries not
entitled ‘Royal Commissions’. For example, some stakeholders queried
whether the Inquiry into Certain Australian
Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-For-Food Programme (2006) was in fact a Royal Commission, and if so, why the
formal title of
the inquiry did not include the
A number of stakeholders
expressed surprise upon discovering that the Clarke Inquiry did not enjoy the
same powers and protections
as inquiries established under the
Commissions Act
Others suggested that other forms of public inquiry may not
enjoy the same perception of independence as Royal Commissions.
5.15 Liberty Victoria submitted that the
array of models is confusing and poorly understood (if at all) by the general
public ... At present, the
Royal Commissions Act
is used as a reference
point for other forms of inquiry. While this is a useful device, it also leads
to a great deal of confusion
as it dilutes the image of Royal Commissions and
confuses the public as to the nature and powers of those public inquiries which
exercise some, but not all, of the powers under the
Royal Commissions
5.16 On the other hand, some stakeholders were concerned that a new statutory
framework may diminish the importance of Royal Commissions.
5.17 The ALRC agrees with the majority of stakeholders that reform in this
area is necessary. First, many non-Royal Commission forms
of public inquiry need
access, at least, to coercive information-gathering powers, such as compelling a
person to appear and provide
answers to an inquiry, to ensure the efficient
investigation of a particular issue or event. Secondly, legal protections are
to ensure that the way information is collected in an inquiry reflects
an appropriate balance between the need to determine the facts
and protecting
the rights of individuals involved with, or affected by, the inquiry. Finally,
legal protections can help to prevent
inquiry members and staff from suffering
detriment through being appointed to, or employed by, an inquiry.
5.18 Further, stakeholders expressed concern that non-statutory inquiries do
not enjoy the same public perception of independence
as statutory inquiries.
Stakeholders also indicated confusion about the nature, powers and protections
of statutory and non-statutory
inquiries not called ‘Royal
Commissions’. These views, taken together, strongly indicate a need for
greater clarity around
the arrangements for establishing, conducting and
concluding public inquiries.
5.19 While the ALRC supports the continued existence of the highest form of
public inquiry, it is not desirable to commence all public
inquiries under the
Royal Commissions Act
Royal Commissions fulfil particular
functions, and it would not be desirable to ‘dilute’ their perceived
importance or
prestige by commencing all public inquiries as the
‘highest’ form of executive inquiry. The Australian Government,
is often reticent to establish Royal
Commissions
inquiries frequently are lengthy and expensive, and other forms of public
inquiry often are established because they provide
more flexible, expeditious
and cost-effective options.
5.20 Stakeholders also expressed concerns that Royal Commissions may be
diminished by the introduction of another form of statutory
inquiry. The
executive, however, regularly establishes non-Royal Commission forms of inquiry
and there is little evidence that these
inquiries diminish the importance of
Royal Commissions. On balance, the ALRC’s view is that there should be a
new framework
that accommodates both Royal Commissions and other public
inquiries. As a principal reason for the introduction of such a framework
ensure appropriate access to coercive powers, and such powers may be conferred
on public inquiries only by legislation, this
framework should be of a statutory
character. Another advantage of a statutory framework is that it can clearly set
out other issues
related to public inquiries, for example, the protections
available to participants.
5.21 In the following section, the ALRC considers the most appropriate model
for such a statutory framework.
Options for
5.22 In Issues Paper 35,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
(IP 35), the ALRC asked, if the Australian Government were to introduce
a new statutory framework for conducting public inquiries,
should the most
appropriate model take the form of a:
general inquiries statute;
dual statutory structure;
permanent inquiries body; or
general inquiries statute
5.23 In IP 35, the ALRC suggested that one option for reforming the
current federal model would be to repeal the
Royal Commissions Act
replace it with a general Act for public
The Act could provide
for the establishment of all public inquiries, regardless of the nature of the
inquiry or the powers that it
A general inquiries
statute also could contain separate sections dealing with inquiries that are
less formal than a Royal Commission.
A statute of this nature would be similar
to the Canadian and proposed New Zealand models for public inquiry discussed in
5.24 An advantage of a general inquiries statute may be that it provides a
cohesive framework for all public inquiries with respect
to: inquiry hearings
and other procedures; the review of decisions; and consistent government
responses to inquiry
recommendations.
5.25 There may be some drawbacks, however, to such an
For example, Tom
Sherman has noted that there may be ‘an inevitable tendency to give all
relevant powers and protections to
the official inquiry with the result that it
becomes a royal commission in
statutory structure
5.26 In IP 35, the ALRC suggested that another way to address the issues
with the current model is to retain the
Royal Commissions Act
another statute to provide for the establishment of non-Royal Commission forms
of inquiry with a range of powers and
protections.
The ALRC noted that
a dual statutory structure would have the advantage of preserving the Royal
Commission model and its associated
prestige, at the same time as providing a
flexible statutory framework for other public inquiries. On the other hand, this
may unnecessarily preserve fundamental problems with the current Royal
Commission model. Further, a dual statutory structure may
result in unnecessary
fragmentation of regulation.
inquiries body
5.27 The third option suggested by the ALRC in IP 35 was to establish a
new permanent body to conduct some or all public inquiries,
or to task an
existing body (or bodies) with conducting these
The ALRC queried,
however, whether this task may be carried out more effectively and appropriately
by standing bodies, rather than
For example, in the
context of law reform, Justice Ronald Sackville has suggested that permanent law
reform bodies are under utilised
in the formulation of legal
5.28 The ALRC noted that the advantages of a permanent inquiries body include
the: potential saving of costs in setting up an inquiry;
retention of
institutional knowledge; and capacity to conduct preliminary research to
determine whether a full inquiry is
On the other hand, it
suggested there may not be a consistent or ongoing need for a standing body.
Royal Commissions are established
relatively infrequently, and maintaining a
permanent inquiries body may be an inefficient use of resources. Further, it may
to attract and appoint staff, and determine the administrative
structure and powers of each inquiry, on an ‘as needs’
Submissions and
consultations
5.29 Several stakeholders with whom the ALRC consulted supported the
introduction of a general inquiries
In its submission,
Liberty Victoria expressed the view that all public inquiries should ‘be
created by reference to the one
piece of legislation’.
Ideally one piece of legislation (e.g. a ‘Public Inquiries Act’ or
Royal Commissions Act
) would provide sufficient powers and
protections for public inquiries of all types. It would then create a number of
categories of
public inquiry which would broadly equate to existing models.
Government would then be able to select the category (level) of inquiry
appropriate to the issue. … [T]he highest level of public inquiry may
retain the title of a ‘Royal Commission’
whilst falling within the
general public inquiries scheme; and obviate the need for a dualistic statutory
5.30 Liberty Victoria highlighted multiple benefits of a single piece of
legislation.
This would avoid confusion and allow the public (and anyone involved in an
inquiry) to understand the nature of the inquiry and its
place within the
broader scheme of public inquiries. This may lead to cost savings for all
involved and would streamline the formation
and conduct of
5.31 On the other hand, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC)
supported a dual statutory structure. DIAC noted that
sees value in preserving the
Royal Commissions Act
as a separate piece of
legislation which retains the full complement of powers and protections of
current Royal Commissions. In addition,
DIAC sees value in the creation of an
additional general statute which would underpin the creation and operation of
general ad-hoc
public inquiries and would provide minimum protections and
ability to adjust powers to best achieve the inquiry’s terms of
5.32 Similarly, the Law Council favoured the retention of the
Commissions Act
in addition to the enactment of ‘a separate
Inquiries Act
’. The Law Council noted that a statutory framework of
this nature would reflect the existing arrangements in Australian states
territories.
5.33 DIAC also supported the establishment of a permanent inquiries body to
conduct Royal Commissions and other public inquiries,
noting that the benefits
of such a body would include cost savings, administrative expertise and
independence.
Few of those with
whom the ALRC consulted, however, supported the establishment of a permanent
inquiries body.
Graham Millar
submitted that, while it would be useful to have readily available expertise for
the conduct and support of inquiries,
a permanent inquiries body established
‘solely for that purpose’ was unlikely to be cost-effective.
[p]ersons conducting inquiries are appointed for their particular
qualifications, expertise and standing in relation to the subject
inquiries. It is unlikely that members of a permanent inquiry body would have
the range of expertise required to conduct a
diversity of inquiries. There may
also be questions about the independence of members of a permanent inquiry
5.34 Some stakeholders, however, supported the practice of referring some
inquiries to standing bodies. For example, while supporting
a general inquiries
legislation, Liberty Victoria submitted that:
Depending on the nature of the public inquiry, there is also merit in the use of
standing bodies such as the ALRC, Ombudsman and
others. However, such bodies
must be independent and have guaranteed funding to ensure their independence
(perceived and actual)
government.
5.35 The Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) and the
Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) noted that the Office
of the IGIS was an
appropriate body to undertake public inquiries into matters of national
security. They noted that, in carrying
out its oversight function of the AIC,
the IGIS already exercises similar coercive powers to Royal Commissions, and its
security clearances and knowledge of the relevant subject
5.36 The IGIS also drew attention to
the great difference in cost between [the Office of the IGIS], a standing body
which is flexible and inquisitorial in approach, and
ad hoc inquiries and Royal
Commissions which are relatively formal, borrow significantly from the common
law adversarial approach,
engage commissioners and significant numbers of
lawyers at substantial rates of pay, and must be established anew on every
5.37 The Commonwealth Ombudsman suggested another option.
Where the proposed scope of an inquiry is broadly consistent with what is
already able to be done by an oversight agency, another
option might be that the
oversight agency could be tasked with the whole of the inquiry, and given any
necessary, temporary, expansion
to its powers, functions and resources for the
purpose of conducting the inquiry. The temporary powers and functions could
operative when, for example, a Minister makes a request to the agency or
when Parliament (or a Committee) so
determines.
5.38 A new permanent inquiries body should not be established to conduct
public inquiries. Public inquiries, and investigatory inquiries
in particular,
are established by the Australian Government on an irregular
There may be extended
periods without inquiries and other periods in which multiple inquiries are
commenced. Further, there are a
number of existing standing bodies that have the
capacity to conduct investigatory and policy inquiries. The ALRC, therefore,
whether there is consistent work that would justify the funding of a new
inquiries body. Royal Commissions and other public inquiries
may differ greatly
with respect to both subject matter and process. There may be limited utility in
the Australian Government funding
a new permanent body staffed by persons with
knowledge, skills and experience specific to only certain types of inquiry.
5.39 The ALRC sees merit, however, in formalising arrangements for the
establishment and administrative support of Royal Commissions
and other ad hoc
public inquiries. This may streamline processes and reduce costs. Some public
inquiries, including inquiries dealing
with some national security matters,
should be referred to existing bodies for
The Commonwealth
Ombudsman’s suggestion that existing bodies could enjoy a temporary
expansion of powers, functions and resources
to conduct some executive inquiries
is worthy of further consideration and the ALRC is interested in stakeholder
views on this point.
5.40 Submissions and consultations did not indicate one clearly favoured
statutory model for ad hoc public inquiries. The ALRC’s
view is that Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries should be established under a general
inquiries statute that makes provision
for two tiers of ad hoc public inquiry.
5.41 The enactment of a single Act is preferable to multiple statutes for
several reasons. First, a single statute promotes access
to the law. It provides
a more straightforward way for those affected by inquiries, and others seeking
to ascertain the law relevant
to inquiries, to access this information through a
single entry point.
5.42 Secondly, a single inquiries statute provides clarity about the
relationship between different tiers of
There may be less scope
for separate statutes to explain the correlation, if any, between such
inquiries. Further, a single statute
reduces unnecessary duplication in
drafting. It enhances consistency in regulation when the Act is introduced, and
if future amendments
are made to the regulatory regime. Also, a single statute
may be more likely to fall within the administrative responsibility of
minister, in turn developing administrative consistency. Ultimately, a single
inquiries statute makes good regulatory sense,
and may reduce some of the costs
associated with regulating public inquiries.
5.43 Finally, a single inquiries statute will preserve the prestige of Royal
Commissions. Under the ALRC’s proposed framework,
Royal Commissions may
still be established under inquiries legislation. The sections of the Act
addressing Royal Commissions could
be contained in a different part from those
sections addressing other forms of public inquiry, as is the case in Canadian
and proposed
New Zealand legislation.
5.44 The ALRC’s view is that the
Royal Commissions Act
amended to enable the establishment of two tiers of public inquiry. These
legislative amendments would not preclude the
executive from establishing other
discussed further in Chapter
6. Amending the
Royal Commissions Act
may require consequential amendments to provisions of other federal
legislation that refer to the Act. A number of provisions and
regulations that
may require consequential amendment are set out in Appendix 6.
5.45 Further, any amendment of the
Royal Commissions Act
should also
involve a redrafting of the Act. The Act evinces a variety of drafting styles.
Some of its provisions were inserted in
the early 1900s, and have remained
largely unaltered since this
while others were inserted
as recently as 2006.
provisions in the Act are archaic and contain old-fashioned language and complex
sentence structures that have caused difficulties
of judicial
interpretation.
In addition, the
fact that the Act has been amended on so many occasions means that its structure
is somewhat haphazard: there is
no discernible logic to the sequencing or
numbering of the Act’s provisions.
of inquiries and new inquiries legislation
5.46 In this section, the ALRC considers how to refer to the proposed new
statute enabling the establishment of public inquiries and
the proposed two
tiers of public inquiry.
5.47 In IP 35, the ALRC noted that some countries with a similar
colonial heritage to Australia, and some Australian states and territories,
Acts that enable the executive to establish ad hoc public inquiries with
coercive powers that are not called Royal Commissions.
It further commented that
the removal of the word ‘royal’ from the name of certain public
inquiries, and legislation
establishing public inquiries, may reflect more
accurately the status of Australia as an independent, sovereign
5.48 The name of legislation enabling the establishment of public inquiries
will depend on its content. The Australian Government
Office of Parliamentary
Counsel provides advice on naming legislation to drafters:
you should take particular care when naming Bills to ensure that the names you
choose are as informative as possible (within reason)
and do not cause
unnecessary confusion to the Parliament or to any other users of legislation.
… this involves avoiding names
that could easily be confused with the
names of other current Bills.
5.49 Comparative jurisdictions do not use consistent nomenclature. In the
United Kingdom, ‘inquiries’ may be established
Inquiries Act 2005
In Canada, ‘public’ and
‘departmental’ inquiries may be established under the
In New Zealand, currently, ‘commissions of
inquiry’ and ‘royal commissions’ may be established under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1908
‘Public’ and
‘government’ inquiries and ‘royal commissions’ may be
established under the Inquiries
Bill 2008 (NZ) currently before the New Zealand
Parliament. In Singapore, ‘commissions’ and ‘committees’
of inquiry may be established under the
Inquiries Act 2007
In Ireland, ‘commissions of investigation’ may be established
Commissions of Investigation Act 2004
(Ireland) and
‘tribunals of inquiry’ may be established under the
Tribunals of
Inquiry (Evidence) Acts
Submissions and
consultations
5.50 Stakeholders had differing views on whether the
Royal Commissions Act
was an appropriate title for legislation establishing public inquiries. Some
stakeholders indicated that the term ‘Royal’
was outdated. Further,
it was suggested that the term ‘Royal Commission’ implied the use of
the prerogative power, which
is misleading given that coercive powers are
conferred on Royal Commissions by legislation.
5.51 Stakeholders did not express strong views about an alternative name for
the highest form of public inquiries or the legislation
establishing such
inquiries. Graham Millar thought that, if it were deemed necessary to make a
change to the name of the enabling
legislation, appropriate names may include
‘Independent Commissions of Inquiry Act’ or ‘Supreme
Commissions of
Inquiry Act’ on the basis that the name of the legislation
would indicate the nature of the
Other suggestions for a
new name of the highest form of inquiry included ‘Commission of
Inquiry’ and ‘Australian
National Commission’.
5.52 On the other hand, most stakeholders supported the retention of the term
‘Royal Commission’, whether in legislation
establishing public
inquiries or the name of the inquiry itself. Frequently, this view was expressed
with an acknowledgement that
the term may not reflect the independent nature of
the Australian system of government. On balance, however, most stakeholders
that the term carried with it a certain gravitas and status that had
developed over more than a century. The well-understood term
straightforward way for the public to distinguish between the highest form of
public inquiry and other inquiries. For
example, while Liberty Victoria strongly
supported change to the model for public inquiries, it submitted that
Commission” is an inquiry title which has high public
recognition and respect’.
5.53 In a roundtable discussion at the Northern Territory Law Society it was
noted that, following the Royal Commission into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody
(RCIADIC), Royal Commissions have a particular significance for Indigenous
peoples. For example, calls for a Royal
Commission and references to RCIADIC
often follow a negative interaction between law enforcement authorities and
Indigenous peoples.
5.54 If the ALRC’s proposed model is accepted, the title
Commissions Act
would no longer reflect the content of the legislation,
which would enable the establishment of two tiers of public inquiry. The amended
Act, therefore, requires a new name.
5.55 Stakeholders did not express firm views on the name of legislation
establishing public inquiries. The names that stakeholders
suggested did not
accommodate the tiered statutory model proposed in this chapter.
5.56 The ALRC proposes that new legislation establishing Royal Commissions
and other public inquiries should be called the
Inquiries Act.
succinct and accurate description of the nature of the proposed Act. Also, the
proposed title does not conflict with titles
of existing Commonwealth
legislation. Finally, it is broad enough to cover the establishment of Royal
Commissions and other forms
of public inquiry.
5.57 In relation to the actual titles of each tier of inquiry, the ALRC is
reticent to propose a change to the use of the title ‘Royal
Commission’. This is for two main reasons. First, the term ‘Royal
Commission’ is extremely well-known, which means
that it is a clear way to
communicate to the public the extraordinary nature of such an inquiry. The ALRC
notes how important this
was in the New Zealand context, where the New Zealand
Law Commission (NZLC) recently recommended the abolition of Royal Commissions
with statutory powers, preferring the introduction of
‘public’—very similar to existing Royal Commissions—and
‘government’ inquiries. The New Zealand Government did not accept
this recommendation in full, introducing legislation
into the New Zealand
Parliament that would enable the establishment of public inquiries, government
Royal Commissions with statutory powers.
5.58 Secondly, the title ‘Royal Commission’ is helpful in that it
indicates how the highest form of public inquiry is
established. While Royal
Commissions with statutory powers are established under the
Royal Commissions
rather than by exercise of the royal prerogative power, the Act provides
that the representative of the monarch of Great Britain
is responsible for their
establishment. As the ALRC proposes in Chapter 6, the Australian head of
state should continue to be responsible
for establishing the highest form of
public inquiry in Australia. If changes to Australia’s system of
government result in
a change to the way the head of state is chosen, for
example, through the election or appointment of a President, it would make
at that stage, for the title of the highest form of inquiry to be amended
to reflect that position.
5.59 The ALRC did not receive any feedback on an appropriate title for the
proposed second tier of inquiry. One title that may reflect
the nature of this
recognisable and distinct from ‘Royal
Commission’ and may be defined
in the proposed
Inquiries Act
. The ALRC does not prefer the term
‘public inquiry’ for the reason that, as discussed in
Chapter 15, it will not always
be appropriate to conduct all hearings of
statutory inquiries in public. The ALRC also is concerned that referring to a
second tier
of inquiry as a ‘government’, ‘departmental’
or ‘ministerial’ inquiry may cast doubt over the
independence of such an inquiry.
5.60 The ALRC’s view, however, is that the issue of nomenclature
requires further consultation and ultimately will be an issue
for the political
and drafting processes. The priority for the ALRC is to ensure clarity with
respect to the features of its proposed
two-tier model.
Proposal 5–1
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) should
(a) amended to enable the establishment of two tiers of public
inquiry—Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries;
(b) renamed the
Inquiries Act
(c) updated to reflect modern drafting practices.
Should there be a mechanism in place by which the jurisdiction and
powers of existing bodies, such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman and
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security, can be expanded temporarily to
conduct particular public inquiries?
Nature of inquiries
in the proposed model
5.61 The proposed statutory framework is intended to enhance clarity,
transparency and accountability, and preserve, as far as possible,
the rights of
individuals.
As the federal executive has the prerogative power to
establish public inquiries, albeit without formal powers, a statutory framework
needs to be designed in such a way that ensures its use.
5.62 The Law Council highlighted the importance of this balance, noting that
a second tier of inquiry needs to ‘provide effective
scrutiny of
government action’ but also needs to be
seen as an attractive tool for government to utilise as an alternative to
establishing a Royal Commission. This means making sure
that inquiries conducted
under the Act can be undertaken relatively quickly, with less expense and
greater flexibility than those
conducted under the [
Royal Commissions
5.63 The statutory framework proposed by the ALRC in this Discussion Paper
has been designed to achieve these aims.
Overview of
distinctions between tiers of inquiry
5.64 The ALRC proposes a number of distinctions between tiers of inquiry to
ensure that each inquiry has the necessary tools to carry
out its investigations
without inappropriately infringing on the rights of persons involved with, or
affected by, its processes.
What coercive powers may be exercised by each tier
of inquiry is a key distinction. In Chapter 11, the ALRC includes a table
identifies the specific powers that it proposes may be exercised by Royal
Commissions and those that it proposes may be exercised
by Official Inquiries.
Each distinction is discussed in detail in other sections of this Discussion
Table 5.1: Distinctions between Royal Commissions and Official
Royal Commissions
Official Inquiries
Established by and reports to
Governor-General
Matters of substantial public importance
Matters of public importance
Wide range of coercive powers, for example, may apply for warrants to
exercise entry, search and seizure powers or to apprehend a
person who does not
Reduced range of coercive powers
Concurrent inquiries
May have concurrent functions and powers conferred under state and
territory laws
May not have concurrent functions and powers conferred under state and
territory laws
Privilege against self-incrimination
May be abrogated (with a use immunity)
May not be abrogated
Client legal privilege
May be abrogated as stipulated in Letters Patent
May not be abrogated
Scope for selecting
powers for each inquiry
5.65 A key point of distinction between the proposed two tiers of inquiry is
the exercise of coercive and other investigatory powers.
How should the
circumstances in which coercive powers conferred on inquiries be determined? In
1977, the Canadian Law Reform Commission
took the view that Commissions should
be armed with coercive powers only when they are undertaking investigatory
inquiries of major
importance.
In 1966, the Royal Commission on Tribunals of Inquiry in the United Kingdom
took a similar view, recommending that the use of coercive
powers by inquiries
should be limited to ‘matters of vital public importance concerning which
there is something in the nature
of a nation-wide crisis in
confidence’.
5.66 In IP 35, the ALRC noted that one benefit of a general inquiries
statute may be the scope for inquiries established under that
statute to have
different powers in certain
circumstances.
For example,
Professor Enid Campbell has commented that a potential general inquiries
need not impose a uniform regime on all inquiries conducted under its aegis. One
could devise a statute which conferred a minimum
set of powers on all
commissions, committees, boards, etc established under the Act, and which
authorised the Governor-General to
declare additional provisions of the Act
applicable to a particular commission. The statute could also differentiate
between the
commission’s powers according to whether its chairman was a
5.67 The NZLC, in a recent review of the equivalent New Zealand laws,
considered whether inquiries legislation should have a ‘menu’
powers, procedures and immunities that could be applied to each inquiry on a
case-by-case basis. It decided against such a process
on the basis that it is
not always possible to determine what powers will be required by an inquiry.
For instance, in what appears to be a straightforward policy inquiry, it may not
become clear until later that commercial or professional
interests will dissuade
key witnesses from giving evidence on relevant matters. The menu option also
provides ground for politically
motivated horse-trading and litigation at the
inception of, and during an inquiry, around which powers are or are not needed.
The idea that commissioners may need to go back to Government to seek
additional coercive powers in such cases is unattractive, as
it may undermine
the independence of a commission. Nor would it be appropriate for courts to be
able to order additional powers since
this could encourage inquiry participants
to seek judicial intervention.
5.68 The NZLC concluded that it would be preferable for all inquiries to
‘have recourse to statutory powers should they be
It was of the
view that coercive powers encouraged cooperation with those involved with an
inquiry, and inquiries should have appropriate
tools to carry out their tasks.
The NZLC also noted that there was no evidence to suggest that such powers have
been abused in New
It is worth noting,
however, that existing and proposed New Zealand inquiries legislation does not
provide for the extensive range
of coercive powers that may be exercised under
the Australian
Royal Commissions Act
5.69 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether it was desirable for different
inquiries to have different powers conferred on them in certain
circumstances,
and what those circumstances might
For example, legislation
establishing a Royal Commission or other public inquiry could include provisions
to allow the Australian
Government to choose which coercive powers it wished
that specific inquiry to have, based on criteria such as the subject matter
the inquiry and the types of evidence likely to be sought.
Submissions and
consultations
5.70 In the context of improving flexibility and minimising costs, DIAC
supported inquiries having ‘access to coercive powers
that best suit the
purpose of the inquiry’. It also noted that,
when selecting coercive powers under statute, there should be a formal approval
process where coercive powers can be selected and
approved. There should
correspondingly be some limitations on what coercive powers can be chosen, for
example, powers that should
remain within the exclusive realm of Royal
Commissions.
5.71 The Law Council was in favour of determining the powers available to
each inquiry on a case-by-case basis. It submitted that
general inquiries
legislation should have ‘flexibility in terms of which powers and
procedures apply to particular inquiries’.
This would involve allowing the
head of an inquiry or its appointing body to select which coercive powers should
apply in that inquiry.
5.72 This view, however, did not enjoy widespread support among most
stakeholders. For example, Liberty Victoria was of the view that
public inquiries should have access to the widest range of coercive powers,
but there should be limitations on when these powers may
be exercised. It noted
any given public inquiry may find itself lacking the requisite powers and
protections as the matter unfolds. Moreover, inadequate
powers and protections
could be used in the same way that inadequate funding can be used to curtail an
5.73 In the alternative, Liberty Victoria submitted that public inquiries
should be ‘rated’ according to which powers
they exercise and their
level of funding. In other words,
Royal Commissions would have the highest rating and smaller, more confined
inquiries would have a lower rating. ... The rating framework
would be publicly
available and allow the public to readily understand and comment on the
appropriateness of the type of inquiry
selected by
government.
5.74 With specific reference to Royal Commissions, the CPSU was strongly of
the view that legislation should make clear what powers
may be exercised by an
inquiry. The chair of the inquiry then should determine how to use the powers
conferred by the statute. In
the CPSU’s view, if the executive were able
to determine which powers were available to an inquiry,
the powers available to one Royal Commission may differ to another. This creates
problems in how the findings of a Royal Commission
are perceived. If a Royal
Commission inquiry is hampered because certain powers were not given to it, the
findings of that Commission
should not be given the same standing as another
Royal Commission which was fully empowered to investigate the issues. It is
a matter of not comparing like with
5.75 The CPSU also was concerned about ‘politicising’ Royal
Commissions.
A Government may yield to public pressure to hold a Royal Commission into a
particularly controversial issue, but then refuse to
grant it the requisite
powers to properly conduct the inquiry. The potential for this to occur weakens
the legitimacy and standing
Commissions.
5.76 The ALRC’s view is that the Australian Government should not be
able to determine what specific powers may be exercised
by an inquiry at the
time that it establishes that inquiry. As discussed in Chapter 11, Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries
can often be characterised as
‘fishing expeditions’. At the outset of certain inquiries, it may be
clear that the inquiry
does not require any coercive powers. For example, a
policy inquiry such as the current National Human Rights Consultation is
to require coercive powers to carry out its task of considering the
best form of human rights protection in Australia. It may be
less clear at the
outset of an investigatory inquiry, however, which specific powers will be
necessary for it to carry out its task.
It is not the most practical option,
therefore, for the executive to stipulate the specific powers that may be
exercised by an inquiry
at the time of establishing that particular inquiry. The
ALRC also agrees with the NZLC that this will reduce the likelihood of any
‘politically motivated horse-trading’ around whether powers are
needed by a particular inquiry.
5.77 While inquiry members may be able to seek, and be granted, additional
powers while an inquiry is on foot, there are reasons why
this may not be
desirable. It may politicise the inquiry process and affect the perceived
independence of an inquiry. Amending an
inquiry’s powers midway through an
inquiry may also affect the way in which information is
For example, where an
inquiry has powers to compel a person to provide information, that person may
then be able to claim privilege
over that information. Also, seeking an
extension of powers likely will result in delay, which, among other things, will
the overall cost of an inquiry.
5.78 Further, a main aim in designing a new statutory framework is to enhance
clarity in the arrangements for establishing and conducting
public inquiries.
The ALRC is concerned that stipulating which powers may be exercised by a
particular inquiry will lead to confusion
established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
. On the one hand, allowing
the executive to determine the specific powers that apply to a particular
inquiry may lead to all inquiries
being provided with all available coercive
powers. There is risk that inadequate consideration will be given to the
appropriate balance
between exercise of powers and infringement of the rights of
individuals. On the other hand, the executive may not provide certain
with powers that may be necessary in specific circumstances, limiting that
inquiry’s capacity for investigation and
affecting the perception of
independence of inquiries conducted within the proposed statutory framework.
5.79 The approach preferred by the ALRC is for the proposed
to set out the powers available to each tier of inquiry. As noted above,
one of the main distinguishing features between the two
tiers of inquiry is the
nature of the powers that may be exercised by each inquiry. This ensures a clear
delineation between the
two tiers of inquiry. It also allows a more flexible
approach than the current arrangements.
5.80 Under the proposed
Inquiries Act
, the executive may determine
whether a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry should be established. The chair
of the inquiry will
have control over which, when and how powers available to
that inquiry under the legislation may be exercised. In the next section,
ALRC discusses a mechanism to ‘convert’ an Official Inquiry to a
Royal Commission. In Chapter 11, the ARLC discusses
the precise nature of
the powers that should be available to Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries.
In Chapter 6, the ALRC discusses
the factors that should be considered
before the executive establishes either tier of inquiry.
Proposal 5–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should set out
the specific powers that are conferred on Royal Commissions and Official
Relationship between
tiers of inquiry
5.81 An important element of the ALRC’s proposed statutory model is the
relationship between Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries, and the
relationship between these inquiries and other inquiries that are established
outside the ALRC’s proposed
statutory model. Very little feedback was
received by the ALRC on these issues.
5.82 In IP 35, the ALRC noted that the
Inquiries Act
enables the ‘conversion’ of an inquiry commenced other than
under the Act to an inquiry under the
A converted inquiry enjoys
the same powers and protections as an inquiry commenced under the
The process for the
conversion of an inquiry is set out in s 15 of the
Inquiries Act
(a) an inquiry (‘the original inquiry’) is being held, or is due to
be held, by one or more persons appointed otherwise
than under this Act,
(b) a Minister gives a notice under this section to those persons, and
(c) the person who caused the original inquiry to be held consents,
the original inquiry becomes an inquiry under this Act as from the date of the
notice or such later date as may be specified in the
notice (the ‘date of
conversion’).
Inquiries Act
(UK) provides that, before converting an
inquiry in this way, the relevant minister needs to consult the chair of the
original inquiry.
The minister
also needs to consult with the chair of the inquiry before providing him or her
with terms of reference that differ
from those provided to the original
5.84 A similar mechanism to that contained in the UK inquiries legislation
should be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act.
This mechanism should
provide for the conversion of Official Inquiries into Royal Commissions. The
mechanism also should make clear
what process needs to be followed in the case
of such a conversion.
5.85 As discussed in Part D, an inquiry’s exercise of coercive
powers may seriously impact on the rights of individuals. The
extent of the
coercive powers available to Royal Commissions, and the partial abrogation of
the privilege against self-incrimination,
are reasons why Royal Commissions
should be established only in extraordinary circumstances. The ALRC’s
view, therefore, is
that it is not desirable for the executive to establish a
Royal Commission on the basis that the inquiry
require access to
these powers. It would be preferable for the executive to establish an Official
Inquiry, and if it transpires that
the inquiry actually requires the more
extensive powers of a Royal Commission, convert the Official Inquiry into a
Royal Commission
at that stage.
5.86 The ALRC proposes that the Governor-General should provide his or her
consent for a conversion from an Official Inquiry to a
Royal Commission. This is
consistent with the requirements for establishing a Royal Commission proposed in
Chapter 6. The ALRC’s
view is that there is no need to require the
consent of the chair of the inquiry, as the chair should not be able to prevent
a conversion
between inquiries by withholding his or her consent. The ALRC also
considers that the minister who established the Official Inquiry
should not be
required to consent to the conversion of the inquiry to a Royal
Commission.
In practice, the
Governor-General acts on the advice of the Federal Executive Council, and the
view of a single minister would be
overridden by those of the several ministers
who form the Federal Executive Council.
5.87 The proposed mechanism also should apply to converting inquiries
commenced outside the proposed statutory framework into Official
Inquiries or
Royal Commissions.
5.88 Finally, inquiries only should be converted in accordance with other
provisions of the proposed
Inquiries Act.
For example, an Official
Inquiry or inquiry established outside the proposed
Inquiries Act
be converted to a Royal Commission only if it is intended to consider a matter
of substantial public importance, and an inquiry
established outside the
Inquiries Act
should be converted to an Official Inquiry only if
it is intended to consider a matter of public
importance.
Proposal 5–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should include a
mechanism that allows the Australian Government, in accordance with other
provisions of the Act:
(a) with the consent of the Governor-General, to convert an Official Inquiry
to a Royal Commission;
(b) to convert an inquiry established other than under the proposed Act to
an Official Inquiry; and
(c) with the consent of the Governor-General, to convert an inquiry
established other than under the proposed Act into a Royal Commission.
McGuinness v Attorney-General
[1940] HCA 6
(1940) 63 CLR 73
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) was enacted by the Australian Parliament
under s 51(xxxix) of the
Constitution
, which confers on
the Australian Parliament the power to make laws for the peace, order, and good
government of the Commonwealth
with respect to matters incidental to the
execution of powers vested in the legislature, executive or
judicature.
See, eg, A Lynch,
from Haneef
(2009) Inside Story
http://inside.org.au
at 4 August
2009. The ALRC discusses coercive powers in detail in
Examples of
Public Sector Inquiries—Commonwealth Paedophile Inquiry
(1996–1997) Department of the Parliamentary Library, Information and
Research Services, 13–17.
See Appendix 2 for a List of
Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
Community and Public Sector
22 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
Community and Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
The Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme
was established by Letters Patent issued
by the Governor-General on
10 November 2005 in accordance with
Commissions Act 1902
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Details about
the Royal Commissions and other public inquiries established by past and
previous Australian Governments are set out
In Ch 12, the ALRC
discusses protections for inquiry members and inquiry participants under the
proposed statutory framework.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Questions 5–1,
H Coombs and others,
Commission on Australian Government Administration
(1976), Appendix 4K,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Inquiries in Australia—Some Proposals for Reform (Law and Policy Paper No
(1997) Australian National University—Centre for International and
Public Law, 18.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
R Sackville, ‘Law Reform
Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in
B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274, 285–286.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper
35 (2009), [5.13]. See also Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
, LRC 73 (2005),
[2.38]–[2.46].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35
(2009), [5.13]. See also Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Report on Public
Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
, LRC 73 (2005),
[2.38]–[2.46].
See Appendix 2
for a List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Department of Immigration and
Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009. As
discussed in Ch 4, some states and territories have a dual statutory
structure of this nature.
of Immigration and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
See Appendix 2
for a List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
17 May 2009.
6 May 2009.
Intelligence Community,
2 June 2009;
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
12 May 2009.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
12 May 2009.
Commonwealth
4 June 2009.
In Ch 2, the ALRC discusses the
varied nature of the several Royal Commissions and other public inquiries that
have been established
by previous Australian
Governments.
These issues are
discussed in greater detail later in this chapter and in
In the context of national
security, the ALRC proposes that the proposed
Inquiries Act
empower members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, in determining the
use or disclosure of information in the conduct
of an inquiry, to request advice
or assistance from the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security with
respect to certain matters:
Proposal 13–4.
relationship between tiers of inquiry is discussed later in this
Royal Commissions
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
[2007] HCA 4
(2007) 226 CLR
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 5–4, [5.16].
Australian Government Office of Parliamentary Counsel,
Drafting Direction No
1.1—Long and Short Titles of Bills and References to Proposed Acts
This advice is provided to drafters in relation to determining the
‘short name’ of a Bill. Separate advice is provided
to drafters
determining the ‘long name’ of a
17 May 2009.
6 May 2009.
Territory Law Society,
Roundtable,
22 May 2009.
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
The distinction
between advisory and investigatory inquiries is discussed in detail in Ch 2. Law
Reform Commission of Canada,
Commissions of Inquiry
, Working Paper 17
(1977), 23. See also H Reed, ‘The “Permanent” Commissions of
Inquiry—A Comparison with
Ad Hoc Commissions—Part II’ (1995)
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
Report of the Royal
Commission on Tribunals of Inquiry
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
H Coombs and others,
Commission on Australian Government Administration
(1976), Appendix 4K,
New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 7–2.
Department of
Immigration and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
6 May 2009.
Community and Public Sector
22 May 2009.
These issues are discussed in
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 15. See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Inquiries Act
(UK) ss 15, 16.
In Ch 6, the ALRC
proposes that a minister should be able to establish an Official
See Proposal 6–1
and accompanying text in Ch 6.
6. Establishment
Introduction
Factors for consideration before an inquiry is established
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Establishing authority
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
An inquiry’s terms of reference
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Appointment of inquiry members
Eligibility of serving judges
Other issues
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Multi-member inquiries
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Persons assisting an inquiry
Legal practitioners
Expert advisor
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
6. Establishment
Introduction
6.1 In this chapter, the ALRC considers when it is appropriate to establish a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry, and whether there
should be greater
guidance on drafting the terms of reference for either type of inquiry. The ALRC
also considers how both types
of inquiry should be constituted, and whether
there is scope for an expert advisor role within the proposed new statutory
for consideration before an inquiry is established
6.2 As noted in Chapter 3, there is very little guidance in the
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) as to when a Royal Commission should be
established. The Act provides that the Governor-General may establish a Royal
to consider ‘any matter specified in the Letters Patent, and
which relates to or is connected with the peace, order and good
government of
the Commonwealth, or any public purpose or any power of the
Commonwealth’.
Outside of the
Act, there is little publicly available guidance on when it may be appropriate
to establish a Royal Commission or
other type of executive inquiry.
6.3 The Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and
Docker’s Union (1984) (Costigan Royal Commission)
suggested the
introduction of a more principled approach to the decision to establish a Royal
Commission.
It was noted in the
report of that Royal Commission that not all ‘aberrant’ or
unexplained conduct may warrant an executive
inquiry. Instead, there should be a
‘complaint of substance’ or a ‘reasonable suspicion based on
“articulable
facts” of past, present or future criminal
activities’.
reflected the fact that inquiries can have a profound effect on those who are
involved with them—indeed, even the
act of calling a person to appear
before an inquiry may have a permanent negative impact on the reputation of that
The report also cautioned
that, with the aim of trying to ascertain responsibility for illegal conduct,
the attention of the executive
may be ‘diverted’ from potential
infringement of civil liberties.
6.4 Another issue for the executive to consider before establishing an
inquiry is whether it may adversely affect future legal proceedings.
example, an inquiry may cause delay in commencing legal proceedings, and
evidence gathered by an inquiry may be afforded certain
protections from
subsequent use.
6.5 In addition to considering whether an inquiry should be established at
all, consideration may also be given to the type of inquiry
most suited to a
particular situation. This is particularly relevant because, in Chapter 5,
the ALRC proposes the
Royal Commissions Act
should be amended to provide
for the establishment of two tiers of inquiry (Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries). Inquiries also
may be conducted outside of the proposed statutory
structure, for example, by permanent bodies such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
It also is anticipated that the executive may continue to appoint ad hoc public
inquiries without statutory powers, for example,
departmental inquiries. All
these inquiries differ in nature and scope, and it may be beneficial for the
executive to consider certain
factors before deciding to establish a particular
6.6 Legislation in other jurisdictions provides some guidance about whether a
Royal Commission or similar inquiry should be established.
Legislation in
Tasmania enables the Governor to establish a Royal Commission if he or she is
satisfied that it is both in the public
interest and expedient to do
Legislation in the United
Kingdom (UK) enables inquiries to be established into events that have caused,
or may cause, ‘public
legislation in New Zealand sets out a list of matters which may be the subject
of a public inquiry, including ‘any
matter of public
importance’.
If passed, the
Inquiries Bill currently before the New Zealand Parliament would enable
inquiries to be established to consider ‘any
matter of public
importance’.
6.7 There has been little consideration of the types of factors that should
be considered before establishing an inquiry. In the context
of suggesting the
establishment of a United States nonpartisan commission of inquiry into
counter-terrorism policy after 11 September
2001, Frederick Schwartz at the
Brennan Center for Justice at New York University considered three main
principles:
the likely consequences of not holding an inquiry;
if an inquiry were held, the likelihood that its recommendations
would assist the development of improved policies; and
whether other mechanisms would be more appropriate (for example,
proceedings).
Issues Paper 35,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
the ALRC asked whether legislation establishing public inquiries should provide
further guidance about the circumstances
in which such inquiries should be
established, and what those circumstances should
Submissions and
consultations
6.9 It was noted in consultations that often the decision to establish a
Royal Commission is made quickly in the face of considerable
public and media
pressure. There may be forms of inquiry or investigation other than a Royal
Commission that could—and perhaps
should—be undertaken. Stakeholders
suggested that more thought needed to be given to whether a Royal Commission
should be established
and, if so, why.
6.10 The ALRC did not receive extensive feedback from submissions on this
point. The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) noted
the approach taken in
the UK and submitted that legislation establishing public inquiries should
include criteria to be considered
before inquiries are
established.
Graham Millar
submitted that, generally, if an inquiry does not require coercive powers, it
‘does not need to be a Royal
Commission’.
6.11 As noted in Chapter 2, Royal Commissions and other public inquiries
have important functions, such as determining what happened
in a particular
situation and providing a forum for public catharsis. The ALRC is mindful,
however, that persons may be negatively
affected by any involvement with a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry. Further, inquiries—and particularly Royal
Commissions—may
be very costly exercises.
6.12 There should be some guidance, therefore, on when inquiries should be
established. Such guidance is necessary particularly if
proposal for the introduction of a new form of statutory inquiry, the Official
Inquiry, is accepted.
6.13 The ALRC is concerned that a statutory requirement to consider certain
factors before establishing an inquiry might limit flexibility.
The proposed
Inquiries Act
, however, should
not be completely silent on when a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry may be established. Some guidance in
legislation is necessary
to ensure clarity and transparency. The ALRC sees value
in including in the proposed
Inquiries Act
the following statutory
requirements:
a Royal Commission may be established to inquire into a matter of
‘substantial public importance’; and
an Official Inquiry may be established to inquire into a matter of
‘public importance’.
6.14 The proposed requirements are
phrased in sufficiently general terms to ensure flexibility. At the same time,
they make clear
that relevant members of the executive should give thought to
of the issue at hand when deciding which form of inquiry
should be established, or whether an inquiry should be established at all.
different terms also distinguish between the two types of inquiry that may be
established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
, and are a strong indication
that Royal Commissions should be established only in exceptional circumstances.
6.15 In Chapter 5, the ALRC proposes that a mechanism for converting
inquiries should be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act.
that is to be converted from an Official Inquiry into a Royal Commission, or an
inquiry established outside the statutory
framework that is to be converted into
an Official Inquiry or Royal Commission, also should meet the relevant test
before it is converted.
6.16 There may be an argument that a stronger requirement should be included
in the legislation with respect to the matters that the
executive should
consider before establishing an Official Inquiry. This is because Official
Inquiries, as proposed by the ALRC, will
have access to coercive powers, may
affect the reputations of those involved, and may be more costly than, for
example, a departmental
6.17 The ALRC has reached the preliminary view, however, that the requirement
that a matter be of ‘public importance’
is sufficient for the
establishment of an Official Inquiry. It will require the executive to direct
their attention to the nature
of the issue and whether it is necessary to
establish an inquiry. At the same time, the proposed term is sufficiently broad
to encourage,
where appropriate, the establishment of inquiries within the
proposed new statutory framework. The proposed test for establishing
an Official
Inquiry is in line with a recent recommendation of the New Zealand Law
Commission (NZLC) that inquiries legislation should
provide that inquiries may
be established into ‘any matter of public
importance’.
6.18 The ALRC is interested in hearing stakeholder views on whether the
Australian Government should be required to consider certain
matters before
establishing a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry. For example, should the
Inquiries Act
require the Australian Government to consider
a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry is the best way to achieve
the Australian Government’s objectives, or whether it would
appropriate to achieve these objectives another way, for example, through
inquiry by an existing body or through civil or
criminal proceedings;
the recommendations of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry would
facilitate government policy making; and
powers are required and, if so, which powers, having regard to the
subject matter and scope of the inquiry?
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that:
(a) a Royal Commission may be established if it is intended to inquire into
a matter of substantial public importance; and
(b) an Official Inquiry may be established if it is intended to inquire
into a matter of public importance.
Should the proposed
Inquiries Act
include criteria that the
Australian Government should consider before establishing a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry, for example,
(a) a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry is the best way to achieve the
Australian Government’s objectives, or whether it
would be more
appropriate to achieve these objectives another way, for example, through
inquiry by an existing body or through civil
or criminal proceedings;
(b) the recommendations of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry would
facilitate government policy making; and
(c) powers are required and, if so, which powers, having regard to the
subject matter and scope of the inquiry?
Establishing
6.19 As noted in Chapter 3, Royal Commissions with statutory powers are
established by the Governor-General acting with the advice
of the Federal
Executive Council.
In light of
the ALRC’s proposal that the
Royal Commissions Act
be amended to
enable the establishment of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, and
renamed the
Inquiries Act
, two specific issues arise. First, should the
current arrangements in the
Royal Commissions Act
continue with respect
to Royal Commissions established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
Secondly, who should establish Official Inquiries?
6.20 The issue of how different inquiries should be established was recently
considered by the NZLC. It recommended the enactment
of a general Act that
enabled the establishment of two tiers of inquiry—‘public
inquiries’ and ‘government
inquiries’. In the NZLC’s
recommended model, a principal distinguishing feature between these inquiries
would be the
way in which they are established. The NZLC intended public
inquiries to have a similar stature and be established in the same way
inquiries established under the existing
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1908
(NZ)—that is, by the New Zealand Governor-General by Order in Council.
On the other hand,
[g]overnment inquiries are designed to remove the need for non-statutory
ministerial inquiries. They should be appointed by a Minister
and should report
directly to the Minister.
6.21 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether legislation establishing Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries should address who should
establish such inquiries. It suggested that establishing authorities may include
the Governor-General, the Cabinet, a
Minister, or one or both Houses of
Parliament.
Submissions and
consultations
6.22 With respect to Royal Commissions, Graham Millar submitted:
Royal Commissions are appointed by the Governor-General on the advice of the
executive government. They are therefore ‘creatures’
executive government and, in practice, they result from Cabinet Decisions made
by the Prime Minister and senior ministers.
This long-standing practice seems to
work well and, in the context of our system of government, I am not aware of any
good reasons
to depart from it.
6.23 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) did not agree that a new
statutory framework for inquiries was necessary. In this context,
it suggested
that the issue of who should establish a Royal Commission was a decision for
government and should not be set out in
legislation.
6.24 In consultations, it was suggested that each Royal Commission should be
established under the general
Royal Commissions Act
and a short enabling
Act. There was limited support, however, for the Parliament to be involved in
the establishment of individual
inquiries. Stakeholders also noted that, as a
practical issue, there may be resourcing issues for an inquiry not established
executive arm of government.
6.25 The ALRC received limited feedback on how a second tier of inquiry, or
Official Inquiry, should be established. The Law Council
indirectly indicated
that such an inquiry may be established by a minister. It suggested that
reporting requirements in new inquiries
legislation would vary depending on who
established an inquiry, and that if an inquiry was established by a minister, it
appropriate for the inquiry to report to that minister. It also
indicated, however, that inquiry members appointed under general
legislation should be appointed by the Governor-General, which may indicate a
view that the Governor-General should be
involved in the establishment of
non-Royal Commission forms of
6.26 To ensure openness, transparency and accountability, the body
establishing an inquiry should be set out in legislation. The ALRC
stakeholder views that the current arrangements for the establishment of Royal
Commissions appear to be working well. The ALRC
agrees that the Parliament
should not have a role in establishing individual Royal Commissions or Official
Inquiries. If the executive
wants to commence an inquiry, it should have the
flexibility to do so. If the Parliament deems it necessary to inquire into a
there are other mechanisms available.
6.27 Stakeholders indicated how important it is for the public to have
confidence in the independence of a Royal Commission. The ALRC
symbolic importance in having the Governor-General establish the highest form of
Australian inquiry by Letters Patent.
If changes to Australia’s system of
government result in another head of state, it would make sense, at that stage,
arrangements concerning the establishment of Royal Commissions to be
amended to reflect that position.
6.28 An underlying principle in designing a new statutory framework is to
provide for more flexible arrangements for inquiries that
may exercise coercive
powers. At the same time, appropriate protections to those involved with or
affected by such inquiries should
be provided.
6.29 To promote flexibility, it should be easier for the executive to
establish an Official Inquiry than a Royal Commission. The ALRC
has reached the
preliminary view, therefore, that an individual minister should be able to
establish an Official Inquiry. While the
ability to establish non-statutory
inquiries would remain, such inquiries should be limited to matters that do not
require coercive
powers and are not of great public importance, such as matters
internal to government departments.
6.30 The ALRC notes that the establishment of Official Inquiries by a
minister is similar to the current practice whereby ministers
(non-statutory) inquiries. For example, the Attorney-General, the Hon Robert
McClelland MP, announced the establishment
of the Inquiry into the Case of Dr
Mohamed Haneef on 13 March 2008, and the then Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs,
Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone, announced the
establishment of the Inquiry into the Circumstances of the Immigration Detention
Cornelia Rau on 9 February 2005.
6.31 The ALRC suggests that public servants should not be able to establish a
statutory inquiry with coercive powers. As discussed
in Chapter 2, the
decision to establish a public inquiry is inherently political, and therefore,
beyond the scope of the apolitical
role of even senior public servants.
6.32 The proposed statutory framework is a considerable shift from the
current arrangements. As discussed in Chapter 5, it is not
anticipated that
every inquiry established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
will need to
exercise coercive powers; however, the decision to establish any inquiry with
access to such powers should not be taken
lightly. The ALRC suggests that
empowering a minister to establish such an Official Inquiry provides a measure
of flexibility while
at the same time ensuring accountability.
6.33 The main features of responsible government are collective ministerial
responsibility and individual ministerial
responsibility.
An effect of
collective ministerial responsibility is that, if the government loses the
confidence of the House of Representatives,
the entire ministry must resign or
the Prime Minister should recommend to the Governor-General that the House be
dissolved and an
If dismissal of an
individual minister is warranted, this action tends to be taken by the prime
minister rather than by
Parliament.
In 1976, the Royal
Commission on Australian Government Administration noted that
there is little evidence that a minister’s responsibility is now seen as
requiring him to bear the blame for all the faults
and shortcomings of his
public service subordinates, regardless of his own involvement, or to tender his
resignation in every case
where fault is found. The evidence tends to suggest
rather that while ministers continue to be held accountable to Parliament in
sense of being obliged to answer to it when Parliament so demands, and to
indicate corrective action if that is called for, they
themselves are not held
culpable—and in consequence bound to resign or suffer
dismissal—unless the action which stands
condemned was theirs, or taken on
their direction, or was action with which they ought obviously to have been
6.34 The ALRC notes that
Ministers of State Act 1952
(Cth) has the effect of providing that parliamentary secretaries are
appointed as ministers for constitutional
Further, the effect of
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
minister may authorise a non-portfolio minister or a parliamentary secretary to
act on his or her behalf.
provisions enhance flexibility in how statutory inquiries may be
established.
6.35 As a matter of practice, the Cabinet may endorse a minister’s
intention to establish an Official Inquiry. The Cabinet also
may be of the view
that an inquiry is of significant public importance, and may involve two or more
ministries, but does not warrant
the full powers of a Royal Commission. In such
an instance, an Official Inquiry could be established by a minister or jointly
two or more ministers. The ALRC is not convinced, however, that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should require Cabinet to be involved formally in the
decision to establish an Official Inquiry. The ALRC has reached the preliminary
view that there are appropriate safeguards around empowering a minister to
establish an inquiry, and sees no need to include further
prescription in the
Inquiries Act.
An inquiry’s
terms of reference
6.36 An issue closely related to the establishment of an inquiry is whether
there needs to be guidance about the drafting of its terms
of reference. As
noted in Chapter 3, the
Royal Commissions Act
does not provide any
guidance on the framing of the terms of reference for a Royal Commission. The
drafting of the terms of reference
for an inquiry, however, is fundamental to
its success. Terms of reference that are too wide can lead to unnecessary cost,
and delay, and can leave an inquiry ‘floundering in a
wilderness of possible avenues of
investigation’.
addition, carefully defined terms of reference may ‘limit the
opportunities for wide-ranging investigations without the
safeguards associated
with investigations by traditional law enforcement
6.37 Terms of reference that are too narrow can undermine the efficacy of an
inquiry. Some Royal Commissions have been criticised
for the narrowness of their
terms of reference. For example, the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies
in Relation to the UN
Oil-For-Food Programme (2006) (AWB Inquiry) was criticised
for having terms of reference that were so narrow that they did not enable
relevant issues to be examined
adequately.
6.38 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether legislation establishing public
inquiries should address the framing of terms of reference for
Commission in greater detail.
For example, should it require that there be consultation on the draft terms of
reference for a Royal Commission and, if so, with
whom? Should there be a
legislative requirement to publish the terms of reference in a particular
manner, and should legislation
establishing inquiries
contain provisions
dealing with the amendment of terms of reference during the course of an
6.39 The ALRC also sought views on whether the Act should attempt to address
the content of terms of
Commissions of
Investigation Act 2004
(Ireland), for example, contains a provision that
stipulates the matters to be included in the terms of reference of an inquiry
up under the Act, including the dates on which events occurred, the location
of the events, and the persons to be
investigated.
It also contains a
provision outlining the circumstances in which the terms of reference for an
inquiry can be amended.
Submissions and
consultations
6.40 In consultation, stakeholders noted how important it was for governments
to understand fully the nature of an issue before it
referred that issue to a
Royal Commission. It also was suggested that governments need to give more
thought to the drafting of an
inquiry’s terms of reference.
6.41 Those making submissions on this issue were not in favour of a statutory
requirement for the Australian Government to do or consider
certain things
before formulating terms of reference. Commenting on Royal Commissions, Graham
Millar submitted:
The usual practice is that the person being appointed as Commissioner is
consulted on the terms of reference before they are finalised
and, if there is a
need for subsequent amendments, it is also usual practice for the Commissioner
to be consulted before the amendments
are made. … this practice seems to
work well and I do not see any need for it to be covered by
legislation.
6.42 The AGS also agreed that the current practice worked well.
AGS doubts the need for statutory prescription regarding consultation on draft
terms of reference, or as to requirements regarding
publication of terms of
reference, or dealing with the amendment of terms of reference during the course
of an inquiry. We are not
aware of any difficulties which have arisen as a
result of the Act not prescribing these matters. For example, it is relatively
commonplace
for the terms of reference of Royal Commissions and inquiries to be
amended during the life of an inquiry, often more than
6.43 Under the current arrangements, and the proposed
Inquiries Act
the executive arm of government establishes Royal Commissions and other
inquiries. The executive, therefore, should have responsibility
for preparing
terms of reference for these inquiries.
6.44 The ALRC agrees that the chair of an inquiry should consider the terms
of reference before the commencement of an inquiry. It
also agrees that there
should be the capacity to amend terms of reference once an inquiry has
commenced. The ALRC’s view, however,
is that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should not require the executive to consult with the chair of an inquiry on
terms of reference, nor should it set out a process for
amending terms of
reference. The ALRC has not received feedback that suggests that a person
currently does not have the opportunity
to comment on terms of reference before
agreeing to chair an inquiry. A person is not obliged to agree to chair an
inquiry if he
or she believes its terms of reference are unsatisfactory.
Further, the ALRC notes that terms of reference frequently have been amended
the course of past Royal Commissions and similar inquiries. In the absence of
any indication that the current process is not working,
no change to the current
arrangement is proposed.
Appointment of
inquiry members
6.45 Another issue for this Inquiry is whether the proposed
should provide guidance on who should be appointed as a member of an
inquiry established under the Act,
or the procedure to be followed when
appointing them. This is particularly relevant in the context of the proposed
Act, which would
enable the establishment of different tiers of inquiry that may
require members with different skills, experience or attributes.
6.46 Currently, the Governor-General may issue a Royal Commission to one or
more persons ‘as he or she thinks
Commissions Act
does not provide any further guidance on the appointment of
Royal Commissioners. As Dr Scott Prasser has explained,
appointing members to a public inquiry, unlike other government or public
service positions, is not undertaken via advertisement
or formal selection
processes; rather, it is achieved by private ‘soundings’ of
potential candidates, usually between
the relevant minister’s office and
the department. This process may take considerable time, as locating those who
are competent,
have the appropriate status, and are available and willing, is
not always easy.
6.47 While there is no requirement in the
Royal Commissions Act
appoint a person with a legal background, most Royal Commissions are chaired by
current or former judges or legal practitioners.
This has been the case for 32
of the 38 federal Royal Commissions that have been established since
6.48 Legislation in the UK provides guidance both in terms of procedure and
eligibility. The
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) requires the minister
responsible for establishing an inquiry to consider whether a proposed member of
an inquiry panel has a
suitable amount of
and prohibits the
appointment of a person if it appears to the minister that he or she has a
direct interest in the inquiry or a
close association with an interested party
to the inquiry.
Further, it
requires the minister to consult with the chair of the inquiry before appointing
any other members to an inquiry
and to consult with
certain senior members of the judiciary before appointing a judge as a panel
6.49 In addition, the NZLC recently recommended that new inquiries
legislation in New Zealand should provide that inquiries established
legislation are independent from the executive:
the integrity of an inquiry’s work and its outcome are reliant on the
extent to which it is viewed as independent. The principle
that justice should
be done and be seen to be done applies to inquiries as well as courts. An
inquiry’s independence should
be made clear, rather than simply
6.50 Section 10 of the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) requires inquiry members
to act independently, impartially, and fairly in exercising
performing duties under the Bill.
Eligibility of
serving judges
6.51 One issue that has attracted comment in Australia is the use of serving
judges to conduct Royal
Commissions.
Commissions Act
expressly contemplates the appointment of judges to conduct
Royal Commissions, as s 6O of the Act confers additional powers on a
Commissioner
who is also a judge (including a judge of a federal court) to
punish contempt.
6.52 It has been observed that judges are appointed as Royal Commissioners
for a number of reasons. First, they possess skills and
abilities that may be
useful in an investigative inquiry, such as the ability to collect, collate and
analyse evidence, assess the
credibility of witnesses, and make findings of
Secondly, they may enhance
the perception of the independence and impartiality of a Royal
Commission.
6.53 One concern, however, is that using judges to inquire into politically
controversial matters could undermine public confidence
in the individual
or the judiciary as a
It also has been argued
that judges do not always possess the relevant skills to conduct a Royal
Commission. For example, in evidence
before the House of Commons Public
Administration Select Committee, Lord Laming stated:
I would like to suggest that there are few judges who have managed a big
workforce, managed a public agency, managed big budgets
in competing priorities,
dealt with the party political machine, both locally and nationally, dealt with
trade unions going about
their perfectly legitimate business and dealt with the
media day by day.
6.54 It has long been established that judicial officers may act in
administrative roles if they are acting in their personal capacity
persona designata
Professor George Winterton has noted that it is unlikely that the consensual
appointment of a judge of a state court to a federal
Royal Commission would
present a constitutional
Following the decision
of the High Court in
Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Affairs
), however,
there may be a question whether a judge
currently serving on a federal court may be a member of a Royal Commission or an
, a Federal Court judge was nominated to provide a report in her
personal capacity to a minister pursuant to s 10 of the
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Heritage Act 1984
(Cth). A majority of the High Court
found that this conferred a non-judicial function on a federal judge in a way
that was incompatible
with the holding of judicial office under Chapter III
Constitution
6.55 The majority in
indicated that, in some circumstances,
serving federal judges may be appointed to Royal Commissions. This was on the
basis that Royal
Commissioners perform different functions to those of a
reporter appointed under s 10 of the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Heritage Act—
in particular, members of Royal Commissions
generally determine facts and apply the law, rather than advise a minister on
he or she should make a particular decision. Relevant considerations for
deciding whether the appointment of a serving federal judge
Commission is compatible with the holding of judicial office under
Chapter III would include the terms of reference of
the Royal Commission,
and the legislation enabling its
establishment.
Justice Gaudron also noted that, historically, ‘it is necessary to
bear in mind that, to a large extent, functions [of Royal
Commissions] were not
carried out by Ch III
6.56 The policy of the Federal Court generally is not to allow the
appointment of a Federal Court judge as a Royal Commissioner, although
be circumstances in which such appointment may be possible. An appointment only
may be made with the agreement of the Chief
Justice. Before approaching an
individual judge, the executive should first consult with the Chief Justice, who
in turn should conduct
consultation.
6.57 In IP 35, the ALRC suggested that, if legislation establishing
public inquiries were to include criteria about the appointment
members, such criteria may include specific qualifications and gender and
regional balance. The ALRC also sought views
on whether the procedure by which
appointment is made should be set out in
legislation.
Submissions and
consultations
Serving and retired judges
6.58 Commenting on Royal Commissions, the Law Council submitted:
There are numerous reasons why judicial officers are viewed as the appropriate
members of society to undertake this role. Firstly,
judicial officers possess
the skills and experience that make them uniquely qualified to conduct public
inquiries, which generally
require the examination of evidence, fact finding,
assessment of the credibility of witnesses and setting out reasons for
Secondly, judicial officers bring to a public inquiry a necessary
perception of independence and impartiality from government and
afford a sense
of authority to the proceedings. These skills are particularly necessary when
the inquiry is examining issues of conduct,
as opposed to inquiries into social
or economic policy.
6.59 The Law Council noted that drawbacks of appointing serving judges as
inquiry members inquiry included: potentially politicising
judges; undermining
judicial independence; and ‘depleting already scarce judicial
resources’. Further, judges may not
have the necessary skills to conduct a
specific inquiry. On balance, the Law Council was not opposed to the appointment
judges as inquiry members. Where possible, however, the Law Council
preferred the appointment of a ‘suitably qualified senior
member of the
profession or retired judicial
6.60 If a serving judge were to be appointed as an inquiry member, the Law
Council suggested that this should be done in accordance
with procedures set out
by the Council of Chief Justices of Australia and New Zealand, which are similar
to those of the Federal
Court, discussed above.
The Law Council understands that they have been generally followed when
appointing judicial inquirers in the past. The Law Council
agrees that these
practices should continue to be followed, as they go some way to overcoming many
of the problems discussed above.
It is not necessary, however, to formalise the
guidelines by way of legislation as it appears that the procedures are generally
as a matter of course.
6.61 In consultations, it was noted that the appointment of serving federal
judges to inquiries was a live issue. Some stakeholders
opposed the appointment
of any serving judge on the basis that this would potentially require judges to
review a decision made by
a judge as inquiry member who may be more senior to
6.62 Another stakeholder indicated, in consultation, that it was important
for inquiry members to have a strong understanding of natural
justice issues. In
that context, it would be more appropriate for those with judicial experience to
conduct inquiries as even experienced
barristers have not had the same level of
experience with ensuring natural justice. Another stakeholder indicated that
training was
essential for inquiry members, regardless of whether they had
judicial experience, because conducting an inquiry required a particular
set. Further, it was noted that Australian lawyers and judges were trained in
adversarial processes, which differ significantly
from inquisitorial processes
of inquiry.
Other criteria
6.63 In consultations, some stakeholders encouraged a more transparent
process for the appointment of inquiry members. The Law Council
submitted that
members of a non-Royal Commission statutory public inquiry
appointed in accordance with ‘publicly available criteria’. Such
criteria need not include judicial experience,
but should include
‘experience, suitability and
impartiality’.
6.64 Liberty Victoria submitted that there should be a ‘flexible
approach’ to the appointment of all inquiry members,
so long as they
have sufficient qualifications and experience to conduct inquiries effectively.
Typically this would require Commissioners to have
judicial or at least post
admission legal experience. However, in some instances, it may be more
appropriate to have someone with
equivalent qualifications in other fields. The
key requirement being that the Commissioner is competent for the type of inquiry
ostensibly independent of
Government.
6.65 On the other hand, Graham Millar cautioned against prescribing any
criteria for the appointment of inquiry members on the basis
‘may have the effect of eliminating the most suitable appointee(s) to
conduct a particular
The AGS also
doubted whether it was necessary to prescribe criteria for the process or
appointment of inquiry members.
6.66 With respect to other characteristics of inquiry members, Liberty
Victoria noted that:
Selection of personnel should be entirely merit based, but should also recognise
the nature and sensitivities of the inquiry. For
instance, a public inquiry into
indigenous issues should be headed by an indigenous person or someone with
appropriate experience
and knowledge. However, the overriding consideration must
be his or her independence and objectivity (both in fact and as a public
perception).
6.67 Several stakeholders with whom the ALRC consulted in the Northern
Territory suggested that, if an inquiry considered issues affecting
peoples, then Indigenous peoples should be represented as inquiry members. One
stakeholder noted that there may be circumstances
in which it would be
appropriate to require the appointment of a woman as an inquiry member.
6.68 It is appropriate for the person or authority that establishes an
inquiry to appoint members of that inquiry. The Governor-General
or minister
that establishes an inquiry should consider, on a case-by-case basis, the
skills, knowledge or experience necessary to
conduct that particular inquiry.
There is no evidence that suggests that, currently, the executive fails to
consider these matters.
6.69 The ALRC agrees with the NZLC that the independence of inquiry members
should be made clear in legislation. The ALRC’s
view, therefore, is that
the proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that inquiry members shall be
independent in the performance of their functions. This will help to ensure
public confidence
in the independence of the inquiry. It also may allay some of
the concerns in
with respect to the independence of serving
federal judges acting as inquiry
6.70 Care still should be taken, however, before the executive approaches a
serving federal judge with the intention of appointing
that judge as a member of
a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry. The ALRC notes existing policies of the
Federal Court require consultation
with the Chief Justice and other judges, and
the consent of the Chief Justice, before such an appointment is made. Therefore,
around the appointment of serving federal judges should be addressed
through policies and guidance, discussed below.
6.71 The ALRC also notes that decisions to establish an inquiry and appoint
inquiry members may be made relatively quickly. Statutory
prescription may limit
flexibility within the proposed statutory framework without obvious benefit. The
ALRC’s view, therefore,
is that there is no need to prescribe in the
Inquiries Act
criteria for the appointment of an inquiry member.
6.72 Issues around the appointment of inquiry members, however, should be
addressed in an
Inquiries Handbook
developed and published by the
Australian Government. In particular, there should be some guidance concerning
the necessary skills,
knowledge or experience that an inquiry member should
have. The ALRC suggests that many inquiries will require the involvement of
those with legal or judicial experience. For example, given that Royal
Commissions may exercise serious coercive powers, it may be
more appropriate for
a person who has an extensive understanding of the implications of such powers
to be involved with this type
of inquiry. Many other inquiries, however, may
benefit from having inquiry members with skills, knowledge or experience within
subject-matter of a specific inquiry. If an inquiry is unlikely to abrogate
privileges or have serious adverse legal implications
for those involved with
the inquiry, a person without prior experience in the use of coercive powers may
be a suitable inquiry member.
6.73 The skills, knowledge and experience of those involved with Royal
Commissions or Official Inquiries, therefore, should be assessed
case-by-case basis. Further, the ALRC does not consider that it will always be
necessary for the chair of an inquiry to have
specific skills, knowledge or
experience. Instead, the ALRC sees benefit in formalising the arrangements for
assisting the chair
of an inquiry. In later sections of this chapter, the ALRC
makes proposals with respect to multi-member inquiries and expert advisors
assist inquiries.
6.74 If, in a particular inquiry, it is deemed necessary to appoint an
inquiry member with legal or judicial experience, the establishing
should consider precisely what experience is necessary. The ALRC notes that the
experience of a legal practitioner is not
entirely analogous with the experience
of a judge. An advocate’s role is to argue or defend a particular case,
whereas a judge
is tasked with determining questions of fact and law based on
the evidence, and to ensure that procedural fairness is afforded to
the parties.
Also, as discussed in Chapter 15, inquiries conducted under the proposed
Inquiries Act
are more inquisitorial in nature than the procedure adopted
in Australian courts.
6.75 In addition, information on the role of an inquiry member should be
provided to persons regardless of their experience. This
guidance could take the
form of training, and could include information about inquiry procedures and
implications of the exercise
of inquiry powers. The precise matters that could
be included in guidance or training are discussed further in Parts D and
6.76 Finally, the ALRC notes a lack of broad representation among members of
Royal Commissions and other inquiries. For example, the
only federal Royal
Commission chaired by a woman reported in
The ALRC suggests that
establishing authorities should consider ensuring a broader representation on
inquiries established under
the proposed
Inquiries Act
. The ALRC’s
preliminary view, therefore, is that the Australian Government should develop
and publish an
Inquiries Handbook
that addresses, amongst other matters,
the appointment of members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries,
including whether
inquiry members should have certain attributes, such as gender
or cultural attributes.
chapters of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC proposes other matters that should
be included in the
Inquiries Handbook
Proposal 6–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
(a) the Governor-General establishes Royal Commissions; and
(b) a minister establishes Official Inquiries.
Proposal 6–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries shall be independent in the
performance of their functions.
Proposal 6–4
The Australian Government should develop and
Inquiries Handbook
that addresses the appointment of members
of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. The matters addressed by the
Inquiries Handbook
should include:
(a) whether the potential inquiry member has the skills, knowledge and
experience to conduct the inquiry, having regard to the subject
matter and scope
of the inquiry; and
(b) whether inquiry members should have certain attributes (for example,
gender or cultural attributes).
Multi-member
6.77 Another issue for this Inquiry is whether the proposed
Inquiries Act
should allow the appointment of more than one member of a Royal Commission
or Official Inquiry.
6.78 Currently, Royal Commissions can be conducted by one or more
commissioners.
It has been noted
that investigatory Royal Commissions—that is, Royal Commissions
established to investigate a particular matter,
such as the cause of a
particular disaster or an allegation of corruption—tend to have fewer
members than Royal Commissions
established to provide policy advice. Only 18.5%
of investigatory Royal Commissions appointed since 1950 has had more than one
while 53% of the policy Royal Commissions appointed since this time have
been multi-member Commissions.
6.79 In IP 35, the ALRC sought feedback from stakeholders on
multi-member inquiries.
that there are advantages and disadvantages associated with multi-member Royal
Commissions. For example, appointing a number
of inquiry members may help to
ensure that it is conducted by people who, collectively, possess adequate skills
and knowledge. Appointing
a number of inquiry members, however, may cause delays
in the finalisation of reports and recommendations, and also may lead to reports
that contain divergent views.
Submissions and
consultations
6.80 Graham Millar submitted that, in some inquiries, it may be appropriate
to have several inquiry members with a mix of
qualifications.
The question of
how to deal with conflicting views among multiple inquiry members also attracted
comment in consultations. One suggestion
was that the legislation enabling the
establishment of an inquiry, or its terms of reference, could make clear
procedures with respect
to how hearings should be conducted or findings made.
Another suggestion was a more informal division of work, for example, determined
by inquiry members in a given inquiry.
6.81 In consultations, the majority of stakeholders who commented on this
issue supported the appointment of more than one inquiry
member. This was on the
basis that multi-member inquiries increase the diversity of skills, knowledge
and experience within an inquiry.
Depending on the subject-matter of the
inquiry, it also may be appropriate for persons with certain attributes or
characteristics
to be appointed as inquiry members. Further, it was suggested
that multi-member inquiries may be an efficient use of government resources,
with multiple inquiry members able to share the inquiry workload. One
stakeholder suggested that the appointment of multi-member
inquiries should be
prescribed in legislation establishing public inquiries. Some stakeholders
expressed the alternative view that
only one inquiry member should be appointed
as there may be difficulties in managing multi-member inquiries.
6.82 Some stakeholders favouring multi-member inquiries suggested that a
person with judicial experience should chair such an inquiry.
It also was
suggested that inquiry members should produce a joint report, or at least agree
on findings.
6.83 The ALRC notes that most recent Royal Commissions have had one member.
Notwithstanding this, the ALRC notes the several advantages
suggested by
stakeholders with respect to appointing more than one member of an inquiry. The
Inquiries Act
, therefore,
should provide that Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries may have more than one inquiry member. The
chair of a multi-member inquiry,
however, should have responsibility for making
certain decisions. In other chapters of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC notes
it is appropriate for the chair of an inquiry to make a
6.84 The ALRC is not convinced that the proposed
Inquiries Act
set out other matters with respect to the appointment of multiple members of
Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries.
As discussed above, the nature
of each inquiry will determine what skills, knowledge and experience should be
possessed by an inquiry
member or chair of an inquiry.
Proposal 6–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that both Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may have more than one
inquiry member.
Persons assisting an
6.85 In this section, the ALRC considers whether the current arrangements for
the appointment and role of counsel and solicitors assisting
an inquiry are
appropriate and should be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act.
considers whether the proposed Act should provide for the appointment of expert
advisors. Remuneration issues are considered
in Chapter 9.
Legal practitioners
Section 6FA
Royal Commissions Act
provides for the
examination or cross-examination of a witness by certain persons, including a
legal practitioner appointed by the
Attorney-General. The only other provision
in the Act that refers to a ‘legal practitioner’ is s 7, which
provides that:
A legal practitioner assisting a Commission or appearing on behalf of a person
at a hearing before a Commission has the same protection
and immunity as a
barrister has in appearing for a party in proceedings in the High Court.
6.87 Recent practice has been to appoint both counsel and solicitors to
assist Royal Commissions, referred to as ‘counsel assisting’
‘solicitors assisting’.
Counsel assisting
6.88 At the outset of the AWB Inquiry, the Attorney-General appointed four
counsel to assist the inquiry. These appointments were
based on the
recommendations of the Commissioner in charge of the Inquiry, the Hon Terence
Cole QC (Commissioner Cole). In turn,
as noted in the inquiry report,
Commissioner Cole based his recommendations on a shortlist of candidates drawn
up by the AWB Inquiry
in consultation with the Attorney-General’s
Department (AGD).
Commissioner
Cole noted that efforts were made to select ‘experienced barristers who
possessed a range of skills and expertise
relevant to the areas of investigation
and law the Inquiry was likely to
encounter’.
6.89 In contrast, the report of the Royal Commission into the Building and
Construction Industry (2003) (Building Royal Commission)
notes that, at the
outset of the inquiry, expressions of interest were invited by persons
interested in becoming counsel assisting
the inquiry. On the basis of
applications received, and on the recommendations of Commissioner Cole, the
Attorney-General appointed
13 counsel to assist the
6.90 While the Act does not define the nature of the role of counsel
assisting, in practice he or she has a number of onerous duties,
identify and obtain all relevant evidence for the
Commission.
It has been noted
that counsel assisting an inquiry
can play an important role in interacting with witnesses and will play a central
role in hearings, where they are held, by making
opening and closing statements,
calling witnesses, and where appropriate, examining or cross-examining
Solicitors assisting
6.91 In some Royal Commissions, the provision of solicitors’ legal work
has been reserved for, or ‘tied’ to, the
AGS. For example, at the
outset of the AWB Inquiry, the Attorney-General issued a legal services
direction that provided that legal
work for solicitors assisting the inquiry was
to be provided by the AGS.
6.92 The type of work carried out by solicitors assisting the AWB inquiry is
detailed in its final report:
interviewing potential witnesses and assisting with the preparation
of witness statements;
assisting in obtaining, analysing and preparing material to be
presented by counsel assisting;
aiding counsel assisting to finalise submissions arising from
providing specialist legal advice; and
carrying out related legal
Building Royal Commission again provides a contrast. In this inquiry,
expressions of interest were sought from persons or
firms interested in
providing legal support to the inquiry. Solicitors were appointed by the inquiry
in accordance with criteria
contained in its
guidelines.
The inquiry noted
that it may be an advantage if solicitors were able to draw on existing support
structures and additional legal
and other resources. The other criteria required
the prospective solicitors to:
• Be able to commence work with the Commission in the immediate future;
• Be able to operate effectively and efficiently over the whole period of
the Commission’s inquiry;
• Be able to be based in Melbourne, but have the capacity to support
hearings in all capital cities; and
• Be able to demonstrate that [the legal team] has no current or potential
conflicts of interest, actual or
6.94 A number of applications were received by the
Only the AGS was able
to fulfil all the criteria, however, so it provided all the solicitors that
assisted the Building Royal
Commission.
6.95 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether legislation establishing Royal
Commissions or other public inquiries should set out criteria
appointment of counsel and solicitors assisting, and if so, what these criteria
6.96 In IP 35, the ALRC also sought feedback on whether it was always
appropriate for those assisting an inquiry to be legal
practitioners.
For example, the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) provides for the appointment of expert
‘assessors’ to assist inquiry members. Assessors have an advisory
do not exercise powers under the
The explanatory notes to
the Act state:
The role of assessors will vary from inquiry to inquiry, but in essence they are
experts in their own particular field whose knowledge,
where necessary, can
provide the panel with the expertise it needs in order to fulfil an
inquiry’s terms of reference. For
example in the Victoria Climbi inquiry,
four expert assessors, including a consultant paediatrician and a detective
superintendent,
joined the chairman, Lord Laming. Assessors do not have any of
the inquiry panel’s powers and are not responsible for the inquiry
or findings. An assessor could be appointed for the duration of the inquiry, but
it would also be possible to appoint an assessor
only for part of the inquiry,
to assist when evidence on a particular subject was being
considered.
6.97 In the context of Federal Court proceedings,
Order 34B of the
Federal Court Rules
provides for the appointment of
a person with specialised knowledge to assist a judge (‘expert
assistant’). An expert
assistant may be appointed only with the consent of
the parties, and may not provide evidence in the proceedings. Further, an expert
assistant may provide assistance only on issues identified by the Court or
Judge, and in the form of a written
6.98 In its 2000 Report,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil
Justice System,
the ALRC considered the appointment of expert assistants and
assessors under federal legislation and Federal Court Rules. The ALRC
several benefits in an expert advisory role, but also noted some stakeholder
concerns about the scope of such a
The ALRC recommended that
the Federal Court should continue to develop appropriate procedures and
arrangements, in consultation with
legal professional and user groups, to allow
judges to benefit from expert assistance in understanding the effect or meaning
Submissions and
consultations
6.99 The ALRC heard few issues about the way in which counsel and solicitors
assisting an inquiry were appointed. Graham Millar noted
that counsel and
solicitors assisting were selected by the Commissioner with the assistance of
the AGD. He cautioned against limiting
flexibility in the appointment process,
suggesting a range of matters that need to considered in any appointment
process, including:
• the Commissioner’s personal experience and soundings in relation
to prospective appointees
• the mix of skills required for the particular inquiry
• the availability of the appointees for the duration of the inquiry ie
they may need to be away from their practice for some
• any issues of conflict, and
• the location of the
6.100 The ALRC did not hear of any issues concerning the appointment of
solicitors assisting. AGS submitted:
We do not see that there is any marked difference in the underlying nature of
the roles to be performed by counsel and solicitors
assisting and for that
reason we consider that it probably is desirable that solicitors as well as
counsel are engaged on the same
basis by being ‘appointed’ within
the meaning of s 6FA [of the
Royal Commissions
6.101 In the context of supporting general inquiries legislation in addition
to the retention of the
Royal Commissions Act
, the Law Council suggested
that the chair of a second tier of inquiry should be able to appoint counsel
assisting. Counsel assisting
should not be able to exercise coercive powers
under general inquiries
legislation.
6.102 The role of legal practitioners appointed to assist inquiries attracted
some comment. AGS favoured a flexible approach to determining
the role of a
legal practitioner, suggesting that the most appropriate system ‘will
depend upon the Commissioner’s own
preferences and the nature and breadth
of the matter the subject of inquiry’. It noted that legal practitioners
need to carry
out independent tasks such as marshalling and tendering evidence
as well as play an advisory role to inquiry
6.103 AGS suggested that, in some cases,
it may be appropriate to have a structure that builds in a degree of separation
between the commissioner and the investigative process.
This might be necessary
in cases where the parties before the commission are conducting themselves in an
adversarial manner and are
likely to make collateral challenges to a
commissioner’s authority, for example, where there has been an allegation
6.104 In contrast, AGS noted circumstances in which an inquiry member was
criticised for not being inquisitorial and relying too heavily
on counsel and
solicitors assisting.
consultations, it was suggested that the role of counsel assisting and inquiry
members should be clarified. In particular, legislation
should make clear that
the position is independent and counsel assisting do not need to do the
‘bidding’, or share the
opinions, of a commissioner. On the other
hand, it was suggested that the appointment and role of counsel assisting did
to be addressed in legislation at all. It was noted that statutory
provisions addressing counsel assisting indicated that an inquiry
conducted in an adversarial way.
6.105 Several stakeholders supported the introduction of a more general
advisor role in legislation establishing public inquiries.
The Law Council
suggested that counsel assisting appointed under general inquiries legislation
could be legally qualified
appointed for their expertise in the
subject matter of a particular
Some stakeholders
suggested that Royal Commissions do not need to be dominated by lawyers. It was
suggested that appointing non-legal
advisors would not undermine the role of
legal counsel, but rather would enhance the information and advice available to
6.106 The ALRC notes stakeholder views that inquiries tend to be dominated,
sometimes unnecessarily, by lawyers. If inquiry members
adopt an adversarial
procedure, the need for the advocacy experience of counsel or solicitors may be
necessary. Not all inquiries
established within the ALRC’s proposed
statutory framework will need to appoint legal practitioners, for example, to
cross-examine
6.107 The best way to address this, however, is not to exclude from the
Inquiries Act
provisions that deal with the appointment and role
of legal practitioners in both Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. In many
inquiries, it will be appropriate to appoint legal practitioners. A statutory
provision could set out a general process for appointment
of legal practitioners
and make it clear that a legal practitioner is independent of inquiry members. A
statutory provision also
could make clear what immunities and protections are
enjoyed by a legal practitioner assisting an
A legal practitioner
assisting an inquiry, however, should not be able to exercise coercive
information-gathering
6.108 The ALRC’s view is that the proposed
Inquiries Act
preserve the current arrangements for appointing legal practitioners to assist
an inquiry. The ALRC agrees with stakeholders
who suggested that the role of a
legal practitioner should be made clear—in other words, they should be
independent of an inquiry
member. Legal practitioners have professional ethical
obligations, and should not be required to do the ‘bidding’ of
inquiry members. It follows, therefore, that a person other than an inquiry
member should have a role in their appointment. The ALRC’s
view is that it
is appropriate that the Attorney-General continue to appoint legal
practitioners. Also, in practice, inquiry members
will need to work closely with
legal practitioners. The proposed
Inquiries Act,
therefore, should make
clear that inquiry members should be consulted before legal practitioners are
appointed to assist an inquiry.
6.109 The ALRC notes that the AGS has provided solicitors to assist most
recent Royal Commissions. This continuity improves institutional
memory between
ad hoc inquiries. In several cases, the AGS may be the only firm without a
conflict of interest. The ALRC’s
view, however, is that the proposed
Inquiries Act
does not need to require that legal assistance to inquiries
established under the Act is reserved for, or ‘tied’ to, the
6.110 In addition, the ALRC has reached the view that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide for the appointment of ‘expert
advisors’ to members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. This
allow for the appointment to an inquiry of a non-legal advisor where an
inquiry member has legal experience rather than detailed
knowledge of the
subject-matter of the inquiry. It also will allow for the appointment of a legal
advisor where an inquiry member
is appointed because he or she has experience
with the subject-matter of the inquiry but does not have extensive legal
A statutory advisor role suggests that persons assisting an inquiry
do not necessarily need to be legal practitioners.
6.111 As the role of the expert advisor is to provide advice or opinions to
an inquiry member where necessary, it is appropriate for
the advisor to be
appointed by the member of an inquiry. Unlike the role of a legal practitioner,
there is no need for the proposed
Inquiries Act
to stipulate that an
advisor is independent of the inquiry member. The advisor role should be as
flexible as possible—for example,
an advisor may be appointed for part or
all of an inquiry. The proposed
Inquiries Act
should make clear, however,
that an advisor may not exercise coercive information-gathering powers under the
Proposal 6–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
(a) in consultation with members of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries, the Attorney-General may appoint legal practitioners
inquiry members; and
(b) legal practitioners assisting an inquiry are independent of inquiry
Proposal 6–7
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may appoint an expert or experts
in any field as an advisor to provide
technical or specialist advice.
Royal Commissions Act 1902
This provision operates ‘in respect of subjects of inquiry to
which Commonwealth powers extend’:
Lockwood v Commonwealth
[1954] HCA 31
F Costigan,
Final Report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship
Painters and Dockers Union
(1984), vol 2,
Ibid, vol 2,
Ibid, vol 2, 92–93,
Ibid, vol 2,
These issues are discussed in
Chs 14 and 16.
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1995
Inquiries Act
Commissions of Inquiry
(NZ) s 2. New Zealand Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ)
cl 6(2), (3). This conforms to the view recently expressed by the New
Zealand Law Commission that the other
categories were redundant: New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
F Schwartz,
the Truth Through a Nonpartisan Commission of Inquiry—Written Testimony to
United States Committee on the Judiciary
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
[3.7]. See also
Question 5–3.
Law Council
of Australia,
19 May 2009. See
also I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Rec 7. This
test is included in the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ)
Royal Commissions Act
Section 16A
Acts Interpretation Act
(Cth) provides that a reference in an Act to the Governor-General shall
be read as referring to the Governor-General acting with the
advice of the
Executive Council.
New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
[2.27]–[2.28]. This recommendation was not accepted fully by the New
Zealand Government. The Inquiries
Bill 2008 (NZ) enables the establishment of
Royal Commissions in addition to public and government
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 5–3(a).
17 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Parliament of
Australia—House of Representatives,
House of Representatives
(2005), 47–50.
Ibid, 49. Also note that
the Senate may pass a censure motion against an individual minister in the House
of Representatives or
Senate, but ministers who are the subject of such motions
have not resigned in the past.
Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government
Administration
(1976), 59–60.
Ministers of State and
Other Legislation 2000
Amended by the
Acts Interpretation Amendment Act 1998
Royal Commissions
and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural Aspects
(1982), 52.
R Sackville, ‘Royal Commissions
in Australia: What Price Truth?’ (1984) 60(12)
Current Affairs Bulletin
Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 5–3(b).
Commissions of
Investigation Act
17 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Royal Commissions Act
Royal Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 8. See also
Commissions of Investigation Act
(Ireland) s 7.
Ibid s 4(3).
New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), [3.18].
A Brown, ‘The Wig or the Sword?
Separation of Powers and the Plight of the Australian Judge’
[1992] FedLawRw 2
Federal Law Review
, 54; R Sackville, ‘Royal Commissions in
Australia: What Price Truth?’ (1984) 60(12)
Current Affairs Bulletin
In Ch 19 the ALRC
expresses the view that a contempt power should not be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act
‘The Wig or the Sword? Separation of Powers and the Plight of the
Australian Judge’
[1992] FedLawRw 2
Federal Law Review
House of Commons Public
Administration Select Committee—Parliament of the United Kingdom,
Public Administration—First Report
R Sackville,
‘Royal Commissions in Australia: What Price Truth?’ (1984) 60(12)
Current Affairs Bulletin
House of Commons Public Administration Select Committee—Parliament of the
United Kingdom,
Public Administration—First Report
A Brown, ‘The Wig or the
Sword? Separation of Powers and the Plight of the Australian Judge’
[1992] FedLawRw 2
Federal Law Review
Winterton, ‘Judges as Royal Commissioners’
[1987] UNSWLawJl 8
of New South Wales Law Journal
Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
[1996] HCA 18
(1996) 189 CLR 1.
In Ch 7, the ALRC proposes that
Royal Commissions should continue to report to the Governor-General, and
Official Inquiries should
report to the minister who established the Official
Inquiry: Proposal 7–1.
Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
[1996] HCA 18
(1996) 189 CLR 1
See, eg, Council of Chief Justices
of Australia and New Zealand,
Statement on Appointment of Judges to Other
Offices by the Executive
(May 1998). See also more recent policies, eg,
the Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration,
Guide to Judicial
(2007), 21.
Question 5–3.
Law Council
of Australia,
19 May 2009.
In Ch 14, the ALRC
discusses judicial review of decisions made by members of Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
12 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Liberty Victoria,
12 May 2009.
ALRC’s view is that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries should be
independent in the performance of their functions,
these inquiries also should
be accountable for their use of public funds. This is discussed further in
The Royal Commission on
Human Relationships was chaired by the Hon Elizabeth Evatt AC between 1974 and
The term ‘attribute’
is used in some anti-discrimination, human rights and equal opportunity
legislation, for example,
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
Royal Commissions Act
Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper
35 (2009), [3.19].
Ibid, [3.19],
Question 5–3(a).
17 May 2009.
Proposals 5–3 and 9–2.
Report of the Inquiry into
Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), Appendix 10, [198].
Appendix 10, 127.
This number
included three Queens Counsel and one Senior Counsel: T Cole,
Final Report of
the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
vol 22, [21]–[22].
Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Report of the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), Appendix 10, 125. Legal services directions are
issued by the Australian Government Attorney-General under the
Judiciary Act
s 55ZF(1)(b).
Report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to
the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 22, [29].
vol 22, [29]–[30].
vol 22, [31].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Proposal 6–2.
Inquiries Act
Explanatory Notes,
Inquiries Act 2005 (UK), [23].
Federal Court Rules
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice
, ALRC 89 (2000), [7.148]–[7.157].
Ibid, Recs 85, 76.
17 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Ch 12, the ALRC discusses the scope of immunities and protections available
to legal practitioners assisting a Royal Commission
or Official
This is discussed further
This is discussed
further in Part D.
7. Reports and
Recommendations
Introduction
Inquiry reports
Tabling reports in Parliament
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Government responses to public inquiries
Formal response in Parliament
Other government responses
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Implementation of recommendations
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
7. Reports and
Recommendations
Introduction
7.1 In Chapter 5, the ALRC proposes that the
Royal Commissions Act
(Cth) should be renamed the
Inquiries Act
and amended to enable
the establishment of Royal Commissions and Official
In this chapter, the
ALRC considers issues relating to reports and recommendations of Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries established
under the proposed
. In particular, the ALRC considers whether there should be any
government follow-up in response to inquiry reports and recommendations.
7.2 As discussed in Chapter 2, the primary function of a public inquiry
is to inquire into, and report on, the subject matter in respect
of which it is
established by the executive arm of government. Public inquiries, therefore,
have an advisory function—the executive
is not required to implement
inquiry recommendations. Further, there are no obligations on the executive to
table in Parliament reports
of Royal Commissions or other public inquiries,
respond to inquiry recommendations, or publish updates on implementation of
recommendations.
7.3 The reporting stage of an inquiry is an essential component of the
inquiry process. Members of Royal Commissions make findings
recommendations for action or reform, and deliver these findings to the
Governor-General in the form of a
7.4 The ALRC did not hear concerns from stakeholders about the process for
delivering reports, and sees benefit in preserving a similar
process for the
delivery of reports of inquiries established under the proposed
In other words, an inquiry established under the Act should report to
the authority that establishes it. Further, while inquiry staff
assisting an inquiry also may assist in the preparation of an inquiry report,
the ALRC’s view is that inquiry members
should be responsible for an
inquiry’s report and recommendations.
7.5 If the ALRC’s proposals in Chapter 6 are accepted, Royal
Commissions would continue to report to the Governor-General, and
Inquiries would report to a minister. Generally, an Official Inquiry would
report to the minister that established it, but
in some circumstances it may be
appropriate for it to report to another minister. The effect of
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
is that a minister may
authorise a non-portfolio minister or a parliamentary secretary to act on his or
her behalf. Further,
and 19BA of the
Acts Interpretation Act
provide that the Governor-General may make orders directing that statutory
provisions may have effect with respect to substituted
ministers where: the
ministerial position specified in a statutory provision no longer exists; or
where a reference to a minister
is inconsistent with changed administrative
arrangements. In the ALRC’s view, these provisions adequately address
situations where it is no longer appropriate or possible for an
Official Inquiry to report to the minister that established it.
Proposal 7–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
(a) Royal Commissions report to the Governor-General; and
(b) Official Inquiries report to the minister that established the Official
reports in Parliament
7.6 The effect of tabling a report in Parliament is that it is made public.
The standing orders of the Senate and House of Representatives
provide that all
documents presented to the chamber are authorised for
publication.
Further, significant
documents tabled in either House of Parliament are contained in the
Parliamentary Papers Series
which is distributed to several
libraries in Australia.
Royal Commissions Act
does not require the tabling in
Parliament of a report prepared as a result of an inquiry established under that
Act. In practice,
however, the Australian Government tends to table Royal
Commission reports promptly.
Issues Paper 35,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
the ALRC asked whether there should be a tabling requirement for reports of
Royal Commissions and other public
7.8 The tabling of Royal Commission reports is noted briefly in Australian
Government guidelines that address the tabling of government
Some documents are required to be tabled by statute. These include annual
reports and reports of the Australian Law Reform Commission
and the Productivity
Commission. Other documents that are tabled include Treaties and reports of
Royal Commissions. …
The [Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet] Tabling Officer should be
consulted well in advance in regard to the tabling of
reports of Royal
Commissions. Factors to be considered include whether:
• a ministerial statement is to be made by the Minister to coincide with
the tabling of the report, and
• the volume of the report requires any special arrangements to be
considered for copy requirements.
7.9 Several state and territory Acts address the tabling in Parliament of
reports prepared by public inquiries. The Victorian and
South Australian
Parliaments have enacted legislation to provide for the tabling of reports
resulting from specific inquiries.
In Queensland, the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
(Qld) provides that a
report received by a minister
be tabled in the Legislative
In the ACT, the
Commissions Act 1991
Inquiries Act
provide that the Chief Minister
present a report, or part of a
report, to the Legislative
If this does not take
place, however, the Chief Minister is required to provide a written explanation
to the Legislative Assembly.
7.10 Reports tabled in Parliament attract parliamentary privilege, which
means that civil or criminal actions cannot be taken against
‘an officer
of a House’ who lays a document before either House of
Parliament.
Notwithstanding
this, there may be reasons why there should be restrictions on the tabling of
some parts of an inquiry report. For
example, parts of a report may disclose
national security information, or identify or adversely affect a person who was
not the subject
of an adverse
Royal Commissions are
also exempt from the operation of the
(Cth), which means
that such inquiries do not need to comply with privacy principles such as those
dealing with disclosure of personal
information.
Submissions and
consultations
7.11 Most stakeholders supported the introduction of a tabling requirement
for Royal Commission reports. For example, the Community
and Public Sector Union
(CPSU) submitted that, while the executive generally does table inquiry
it would be preferable that such reporting requirements were contained in the
legislation. … In deciding to hold a Royal Commission
inquiry, the
Government has obviously determined that the particular issue is of such
significance that the expense and time involved
in Royal Commission proceedings
are justified. It should follow, therefore, that it is incumbent on the
Government to properly publish
and respond to its
7.12 The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) supported a statutory
requirement to table reports of Royal Commissions in Parliament.
The need to formally inform Parliament of the recommendations of a Royal
Commission or other form of public inquiry has been recognised
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK)] provides a requirement that the findings of a public inquiry be laid
before Parliament.
7.13 On the other hand, the Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) did not
support a statutory requirement to table inquiry reports.
In our experience, it is the usual practice of governments to table in
Parliament reports by Royal Commissions and other public inquiries.
see these as matters for the government of the
7.14 It was also suggested in consultations that there was no need to include
a tabling requirement in inquiries legislation because
an inquiry report would
be tabled in Parliament to attract parliamentary privilege. It was also noted
that, even if there was a requirement
to table inquiry reports, this would not
guarantee parliamentary scrutiny of a report tabled at a busy time.
7.15 Some stakeholders directly addressed the tabling of reports arising from
non-Royal Commission forms of inquiry. In consultations,
concerns were expressed
that a failure to table reports of any inquiry would create public
suspicion—particularly if hearings
were held in private, or an inquiry
found there was no wrongdoing.
7.16 Stakeholders noted that a requirement to table the report of an inquiry
should not always require the tabling of that report
in its entirety. For
example, Liberty Victoria submitted that ‘reports from public inquiries
should be tabled in Parliament
(redacted or amended as
necessary)’.
Further, the
Law Council suggested that consideration should be given to ‘means to
protect personal information or information
concerning national
Graham Millar
noted that a requirement to table reports should be ‘subject to any
confidentiality requirements for part or
all of a particular
7.17 The CPSU suggested that a statutory tabling requirement should set out a
specified time period in which that report should be
Graham Millar suggested
that a Royal Commission report should be tabled within three months of its
receipt by the Governor-General.
7.18 The ALRC’s view is that the proposed
Inquiries Act
contain a presumption that reports of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
will be tabled. With respect to Royal Commissions,
such a requirement merely
formalises an existing practice and will not result in an additional burden on
government. Further, a tabling
requirement for Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries is in keeping with principles of government openness, transparency and
accountability.
Such a requirement is also consistent with requirements in
federal legislation to table reports of reviews or inquiries, such as
Productivity Commission Act 1998
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Act 1986
7.19 The ALRC agrees there are circumstances in which parts of a report
should not be tabled in Parliament—for example, when
an inquiry report
deals with matters of national security or identifies a person who was not the
subject of an adverse finding. One
option is to prescribe in the proposed
Inquiries Act
categories of information that may form the basis of
excisions from an inquiry report. The ALRC’s view is that this is not the
best approach. An exhaustive list in such a provision may not cover all relevant
situations, and if it includes a catch-all provision,
may leave too much
discretion in the hands of the executive. Instead, the ALRC proposes that the
Australian Government should table
the entire final report of a Royal Commission
or Official Inquiry, and if it does not table a part or parts of the report, it
also table a statement of reasons explaining why it has not tabled the
whole report. This is comparable to the ACT inquiries legislation,
above. It is a flexible approach that preserves executive accountability to
Parliament.
7.20 The ALRC also proposes that inquiry reports should be tabled within a
specified time period. Legislation requiring the tabling
in Parliament of the
reports of inquiries conducted by standing bodies generally include a
requirement that such reports are to be
tabled by the relevant minister within
15 sitting days, and occasionally within 25 sitting
7.21 The ALRC’s view is that, given that the inquiries established
under the proposed
Inquiries Act
will consider matters of public
importance—and, in the case of Royal Commissions, substantial public
importance—reports
should be tabled in a period less than 25 sitting days
after their receipt by the Australian Government. A period of 15 sitting days
provides a reasonable time for the Australian Government to consider whether it
will accept or reject an inquiry’s recommendations.
The ALRC’s view,
therefore, is that the Australian Government should be required, within 15
sitting days of receiving an inquiry
report, to table the whole report or a
statement of reasons why the whole report is not being tabled.
7.22 Finally, if Proposal 6–3 is accepted, Royal Commissions will
report to the Governor-General. As a matter of practice, therefore,
Governor-General should ensure that the relevant minister has a copy of the
report of a Royal Commission soon after the Governor-General
receives it, so
that the minister is able to table that report within the required time
Proposal 7–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, within 15 sitting days of receiving the final report from a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry, the Australian
Government should table in
Parliament the report or, if a part of the report is not being tabled, a
statement of reasons why the
whole report is not being tabled.
Government responses
to public inquiries
7.23 Another issue for this Inquiry is whether the proposed
Inquiries Act
should require the Australian Government to respond formally to
recommendations made in an inquiry report. This response could be
in the form of
a ministerial statement or other formal response in Parliament, or in another
form. Currently, the
Royal Commissions Act
does not contain any such
requirement.
Formal response in
7.24 In practice, the federal minister tabling a report from an inquiry
appointed under the
Royal Commissions Act
may inform Parliament of the
government’s position on the report
For example, when
tabling the report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation
to the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), the Hon Philip Ruddock MP stated
that, ‘[a]s recommended, the government will establish a task force of
relevant Australian
government agencies to consider possible prosecutions in
consultation with the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions’
would ‘move speedily’ to consider other recommendations made in the
7.25 Further, a federal minister may deliver a formal ministerial
When tabling the
report of the Royal Commission to Inquire into the Centenary House Lease, the
then Attorney-General, the Hon Philip
Ruddock MP, made a ministerial statement
supporting the findings of the Royal Commission.
7.26 A recent South Australian Act expressly sets out an obligation for the
government to respond to recommendations made in two specific
inquiries. The
Commissions of Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act
(SA) required the minister responsible for administering the Act to
respond in Parliament to the recommendations made in those two
Other government
7.27 In addition to making a formal response in Parliament to a report of a
Royal Commission or other public inquiry, federal ministers
may make a public
statement through a press
The Australian
Government also has published official responses to some Royal Commission
recommendations.
7.28 In December 2008, the Australian Government released its response to an
inquiry that was not established under the
Royal Commissions
—the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef (Clarke
Inquiry). The Clarke Inquiry has its own website, which contains
the report from
the inquiry and other
information.
In addition, this
website contains a hyperlink to the website of the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department, which
contains the Government’s
response to the Clarke Inquiry.
7.29 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether the Australian Government should
be required by statute within a specific time frame to respond
recommendations made by Royal Commissions and other public
Submissions
and consultations
7.30 Several stakeholders agreed that the government should be required to
provide a response to recommendations made by public inquiries.
For example,
Liberty Victoria was of the view that inquiry reports should ‘require a
formal government response within 90 days.
Ideally both the report and the
government’s response should be available
7.31 The CPSU agreed that the Australian Government should be required to
respond to recommendations made by an inquiry.
Royal Commissions have often inquired into matters that are highly
controversial, such as the AWB Inquiry. If the Government can
hide behind the
auspices of a Royal Commission inquiry without ever having to deal with the
substantive issues and recommendations
coming out of that inquiry in a
meaningful way, Royal Commissions will be a potential tool for eroding openness
and transparency
in government, rather than enhancing
7.32 The Law Council suggested that new inquiries legislation could include a
more formal requirement for a minister to respond in
Parliament. It cautioned,
however, that
[w]hile Governments are generally quick to provide some form of public statement
in response to the findings of a Royal Commission,
this is generally not
followed by any formal commitment to implement the
recommendations.
7.33 The AGS did not support a statutory requirement for the Australian
Government to respond publicly to recommendations made by
Royal Commissions and
other public inquiries. It suggested that responding to inquiry recommendations
was usual practice, and, in
any event, a matter for the government of the day.
7.34 The ALRC’s view is that the proposed
Inquiries Act
not require the Australian Government to provide a formal response in
Parliament, or any other response, to reports of Royal
Commissions and Official
Inquiries. If the ALRC’s proposal with respect to tabling inquiry reports
is accepted, a minister
tabling a report or statement generally will make some
comment about the Australian Government’s response to recommendations.
members of Parliament are concerned that a minister does not do so, or disagree
with his or her comments, that minister will be
subject to parliamentary
scrutiny in the normal way.
7.35 The ALRC notes concerns that positive comments about inquiry
recommendations, made by the Australian Government at the time it
releases an
inquiry report, do not always mean that those recommendations will be
implemented. The Australian Government may need
some months to consider
precisely how to implement recommendations made by Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries. The ALRC’s
view, therefore, is that requiring the
Australian Government to respond to inquiry recommendations at the time of
tabling an inquiry
report would be of limited practical benefit to the public. A
more pressing issue is whether there should be a requirement to provide
information about actual implementation of inquiry recommendations.
Implementation of
recommendations
7.36 Given the many and varied functions of public inquiries, their
effectiveness is measured in a number of ways, for example, implementation
reports, critical feedback from experts, judicial and academic citation of
reports, or even the way that recommendations affect
popular thinking on social
Implementation of
recommendations is one important measure of the effectiveness of inquiries. An
issue for this Inquiry is whether
the proposed
Inquiries Act
require the Australian Government to provide information about implementation of
recommendations made by Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries.
Royal Commissions Act
does not require the Australian
Government to provide updates on implementation of Royal Commission
recommendations. The
Commissions of Inquiry (Children in State Care and
Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
(SA) again provides a contrast. The minister
responsible for administering that Act is required to provide a number of
ongoing reports
in Parliament on the implementation of the recommendations
arising from these
7.38 Currently, the Australian Government provides ad hoc updates on
implementation of recommendations made by public inquiries. One
comprehensive online reporting relates to a recent inquiry that was not
appointed under the
Royal Commissions Act
. The website of the Equine
Influenza Inquiry (2008) contains the report from, and other information about,
the inquiry.
It also contains a
link to the Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Forestry (DAFF) website.
provides access to the Government’s official response to the inquiry
report, and a telephone number for general inquiries
Government’s response. The DAFF website also provides a link to the
website of the Australian Quarantine
Inspection Service, which provides
extensive information about ongoing implementation of recommendations, including
Implementation
7.39 There is no central body or website, however, that provides access to
official responses to Royal Commission recommendations.
Further, there is no
central body or website that tracks implementation of accepted recommendations.
The most recent inquiries conducted
Royal Commissions Act
their own websites from which the inquiry reports, and other material, may be
downloaded. These websites, however, do not contain
information about the
Government’s response to the reports or actual implementation of
recommendations.
7.40 In Australia, there is no dedicated body that assists with the
implementation of recommendations made by Royal Commissions or
other public
This may be
contrasted with recent amendments to New Zealand Cabinet practice. Upon the
completion of a project referred to the New
Zealand Law Commission (NZLC) by the
New Zealand Government, the NZLC prepares on behalf of the relevant minister the
Cabinet position
paper on the
If the minister and
relevant Cabinet Committee approves of the paper, it is submitted to a Cabinet
committee for approval of the
recommendations.
accepts the recommendations, and a Bill is required, Cabinet will add this Bill
to the Legislation Programme.
The New Zealand Cabinet Office monitors the progress of responses to NZLC
7.41 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether the Australian Government should
be required to make publicly available information about its
implementation of
recommendations made by Royal Commissions or other public
In addition, the ALRC
asked whether a government department or some other permanent body should be
required to coordinate the government’s
response to, and monitor the
implementation of, recommendations made by Royal Commissions or other public
Submissions and
consultations
7.42 Stakeholders almost uniformly agreed that the decision to implement
inquiry recommendations is a matter for government. The Law
Council also noted,
however, that:
[t]he failure to implement key recommendations threatens to undermine the
public’s confidence in Royal Commissions as an effective
form of public
scrutiny of executive action. It also challenges the effectiveness of Royal
Commissions and other forms of Inquiry
as mechanisms to achieve policy
7.43 The Law Council suggested ways to review implementation of inquiry
recommendations. For example, a minister could ‘provide
regular, public
updates as to the implementation of recommendations made by the Royal
Commission’. Alternatively, or in addition,
government departments or other statutory bodies, such as the Commonwealth
Ombudsman or the Inspector General of Intelligence and
Security, could be
required to regularly review and report on the implementation of the
recommendations of Royal
Commissions.
7.44 The Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union submitted that,
where an inquiry recommends an ongoing process of reform,
the Australian
Government should provide periodic updates to Parliament on the status of each
recommendation.
In our experience, the present lack of any positive obligation in this respect
gives too much scope for the Government to avoid dealing
with controversial or
inconvenient recommendations and fails to provide sufficient finality to the
proceedings, particularly for
individuals or organisations against whom adverse
findings have been made.
7.45 Liberty Victoria suggested that the Australian Government should provide
such information ‘in a timely manner’ once
an inquiry had
Graham Millar
submitted that, to ensure ‘more accountability and transparency in the
follow-up of Royal Commission reports’,
inquiries legislation could
within a period between one year and two years after the inquiry report is
tabled, the tabling of a report by the government (which
could be in the form of
a ministerial statement) on the outcome of the government’s response to
the inquiry report; the government’s
report should specify whether any
subsequent such reports will be made to the Parliament (an interim government
report to the Parliament
could also be presented before the one to two year
7.46 The CPSU emphasised the importance of adequate funding for government
agencies tasked with implementing inquiry recommendations.
We also note that the value and viability of recommendations coming out of Royal
Commissions or public inquiries depends on the Government’s
willingness to
appropriately resource and fund the implementation of those
recommendations.
7.47 On the other hand, it was suggested in consultations that funding the
implementation of inquiry recommendations may prioritise
funding of some issues
over other issues that, while important, were not the subject of inquiry.
7.48 With respect to coordinating the implementation of inquiry
recommendations, Liberty Victoria supported the creation of a new
small body to
‘be tasked with coordinating and tracking all public inquiries’. It
suggested that such a body could publish
information about inquiries on a public
inquiries website.
7.49 The CPSU was concerned that the creation of a coordinating department or
body may be counterproductive if this meant that
other agencies did not have to take responsibility for problems within that
agency or that the coordinating department merely impeded
the implementation of
recommendations within other agencies by creating another level of oversight. It
is also likely that implementation
by the relevant agency of the specific
recommendations of a Royal Commission serves to enhance that agency’s
processes and
procedures more
7.50 The AGS submitted that:
In practice, relevant investigatory and prosecution agencies are responsible for
acting on a Royal Commission or Inquiry’s
recommendations, once the
government response has been decided on. With policy inquiries the relevant
department with responsibility
for the area of policy in question will be
responsible for coordinating the implementation of the government’s policy
Whether the establishment of a permanent body to undertake these roles would be
justifiable and if so the extent of its resources
would be a matter for
government to assess having regard to the past trends in the establishment of
such inquiries. The sporadic
nature of Royal Commissions and similar inquiries
is likely to be a relevant factor to consider in assessing whether such a role
would be justified.
7.51 The ALRC agrees that the decision to implement recommendations made by
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries should be a matter
for the Australian
Government. The ALRC notes, however, that it is difficult to ascertain the
status of implementation of recommendations
made by most recent Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries, and agrees that there should be more
information available about
implementation of recommendations made by Royal
Commissions. As the same principles of government openness, transparency and
accountability
apply to Official Inquiries, the ALRC’s view is that there
should be an obligation on government to track implementation of
recommendations
made by both tiers of inquiry established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
and make the results of such tracking publicly available
7.52 In Chapter 8, the ALRC expresses the view that a permanent body
should not be established to assist the administration of inquiries
established
under the proposed Act. The ALRC is also of the view that there is no need to
create a permanent body solely for the
purpose of tracking implementation.
Further, the ALRC is concerned about placing an onerous burden for tracking
implementation of
recommendations on small existing bodies, such as the
Commonwealth Ombudsman and Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security.
ALRC’s view, therefore, is that the Australian Government should have
primary responsibility for tracking implementation
of recommendations made by
inquiries established under the proposed
Inquiries Act.
This does not
preclude the Australian Government from delegating this function to existing
bodies, as appropriate.
7.53 Further, the ALRC has reached the view that the Australian Government
should not be required to table in Parliament information
of inquiry recommendations that it has accepted. Instead, the Australian
Government should publish this information
in electronic form, for example, on a
website. While inquiry reports should be tabled in Parliament, the ALRC sees no
need to require
the Australian Government to account to Parliament on an ongoing
basis about recommendations it is not required to implement. The
that, if this proposal is accepted, the Australian Government still may be
questioned in Parliament about information
published online. Further, the
requirement to provide updates on implementation should apply only to
recommendations that the Australian
Government accepts.
7.54 The ALRC received limited feedback on appropriate time periods for the
publication of information about implementation of recommendations.
ALRC’s view is that the Australian Government should be required to
publish this information one year after tabling the
report of an inquiry or the
statement of reasons why part of a report is not being tabled. This allows
appropriate time for the Australian
Government to determine how to deal with the
issues raised by an inquiry. Further, it does not preclude the Australian
from publishing information about implementation of inquiry
recommendations within the year following the tabling of an inquiry report.
ALRC also proposes that, after one year, the Australian Government should
publish, on a periodic basis, information that reflects
any ongoing
implementation activity.
7.55 Finally, the ALRC notes there are already government processes in place
for the coordination of implementation of recommendations
made by Royal
Commissions. If the ALRC’s proposal to introduce Official Inquiries is
accepted, these processes should extend
to the coordination of recommendations
made by Official Inquiries. The ALRC, therefore, does not propose that a
particular government
department or some other permanent body be responsible for
the coordination of implementation of recommendations established under
Inquiries Act.
Proposal 7–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that the Australian Government should publish an update on implementation of
recommendations of an inquiry that it
accepts: one year after the tabling of the
final report of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry; and periodically
thereafter to
reflect any ongoing implementation activity.
Proposal 5–1.
Commissions Act 1902
Parliament of Australia—House of Representatives,
Standing and
Sessional Orders
(1 December 2008), Standing Order 203; Parliament of
Australia—Senate,
Standing and Sessional Orders
, 1 June 2009,
Senate Order 167.
For example, recent
Royal Commission reports tabled in Parliament include D Hunt,
Report of the
Inquiry into the Centenary House Lease
(2004) and T Cole,
Report of the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006): Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
Representatives, 9 December 2004, 101 (P Ruddock—Attorney-General);
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 27
November 2006, 45
(P Ruddock—Attorney-General).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 5–5(a).
Government Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
Guidelines for the
Presentation of Government Documents to the Parliament (Including Government
Responses to Committee Reports, Ministerial
Statements, Annual Reports and Other
Instruments)
, [2.2], [4.34].
Longford Royal Commission (Report) Act 1999
Commission of Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act
(SA) s 11. Also see the
Bushfires Royal Commission (Report) Bill
Royal Commissions Act 1923
(NSW) sets out the
requirements for tabling reports when the Parliament is not sitting:
Commissions Act 1923
By implication, reports are also
required to be tabled when Parliament is
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Royal Commissions Act
Inquiries Act 1991
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Inquiries Act 1991
Parliamentary
Privileges Act 1987
Also note that, in Ch 15, the
ALRC proposes that an inquiry should not make any finding that is adverse to a
person unless the inquiry
has taken all reasonable steps to give that person an
opportunity to respond to the proposed finding, and the inquiry considers any
response given: Proposal 15–1.
7(1)(a)(v).
In 2008, the ALRC expressed the view that Royal Commissions should
continue to be exempt from the operation of the
recommended that the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, in
consultation with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner,
should develop and
publish information-handling guidelines for Royal Commissions: Australian Law
Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
, ALRC 108 (2008), Rec 38–1. If the ALRC’s
proposals in this Discussion Paper are accepted, the
require consequential amendment to exclude acts and practices of Official
Inquiries: see Appendix 6.
Community and Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
Productivity
Commission Act 1998
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission Act 1986
For examples of statutory
provisions requiring the tabling of comparable reports within 15 sittings
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
Ombudsman Act 1976
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission Act 1986
Productivity
Commission Act 1998
(Cth) provides that a comparable report needs to be
tabled within 25 sittings days.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 27
November 2006, 45
(P Ruddock—Attorney-General).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 9
December 2004, 101 (P Ruddock—Attorney-General).
Commission of Inquiry (Children in
State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
(SA) s 11A. This Act
provided for the establishment of two inquiries to consider: allegations of
failure on the part of government
agencies, employees or other relevant persons
to investigate or appropriately deal with allegations concerning sexual offences
children under the guardianship, custody, care or control of the South
Australian Minister responsible for the protection of children;
incidence of sexual offences against children resident on the A
Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara lands in Central Australia.
Upon the tabling of the report of the
inquiry into the HIH Royal Commission, the then Treasurer, the Hon Peter
Costello MP, suggested
in a press release that the Australian Government
supported ‘in-principle’ some of the inquiry’s
recommendations,
and would ‘consider expeditiously the Report’s
other recommendations and announce further details of its response’:
Costello (Treasurer), ‘Report of the HIH Royal Commission’ (Press
Release, 16 April 2003).
For example,
in 1992 the Keating Government released a response to the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody (1991):
Australian Government,
Aboriginal Deaths
in Custody—Response by Governments to the Royal Commission
Clarke Inquiry into the
Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
(2008) <www.haneefcaseinquiry.gov.au/> at
4 August 2009.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government
Responses to the Clarke Inquiry and other Counter-Terrorism
Reviews—December 2008
(2008) <www.ag.gov.au> at 4 August
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 5–5(b).
6 May 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
‘Measuring Success’ in B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 202,
Commission of
Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
Equine Influenza
(2008) <www.equineinfluenzainquiry.gov.au/> at 4 August 2009.
Note that the Equine Influenza Inquiry had many of the same powers
commissions established under the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
was established under the
Quarantine Act 1908
Australian Government
Department of Agriculture Fisheries and Forestry,
Equine Influenza Inquiry
Report and Response
<www.daff.gov.au/about/publications/eiinquiry/> at 4 August 2009.
Australian Government Australian
Quarantine and Inspection Service,
Equine Influenza Inquiry—The
Government’s Response
<www.daff.gov.au/aqis/about/eiimplementation> at 4 August 2009.
The HIH Royal
<www.pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/23212/20030418-0000/www.hihroyalcom.gov.au/index.html>
at 4 August 2009;
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
<www.pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/24143/20040427-0000/www.royalcombci.
gov.au/index.html> at 4 August 2009;
Inquiry into the Centenary House
(2004) <www.ag.gov.au/agd/www/centenaryhome.nsf> at 4 August
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-For-Food Programme
(2006) <www.oilforfoodinquiry.gov.au/> at 4
August 2009.
The establishment in 2005
of the Office of the Building and Construction Commissioner represents a partial
implementation of a recommendation
of the Royal Commission into the Building and
Construction Industry: T Cole,
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the
Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 1, 27, 29; Australian
Government Office of the Building and Construction Commissioner,
(2009) <www.abcc.gov.au/abcc/AboutUs/> at 4 August 2009.
New Zealand Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet,
Cabinet Office Circular [CO (07) 4]—Law
Commission: Processes for Project Selection and Government Response to
, 2 August 2007, [12]. This Cabinet paper is to reflect ‘the
views of the Minister and all relevant agencies, and incorporating
recommendations where there is no consensus’. This takes place unless the
NZLC otherwise is directed by the relevant
Ibid, [11].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 5–5(c).
Question 5–6.
Law Council
of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Construction, Forestry, Mining
and Energy Union,
17 May 2009.
6 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
6 May 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
18 June 2009.
8. Administration and
Introduction
Administrative assistance for inquiries
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Inquiry records
Custody and use of inquiry records
Archiving of inquiry records
Other methods of access to inquiry records
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
8. Administration and
Introduction
8.1 Royal Commissions and other public inquiries are often appointed at short
notice and may relate to incidents or events that have
not been the subject of
previous public scrutiny. Some or all inquiry members and staff may have had
little or no involvement in
other inquiries and may be unfamiliar with the
practical aspects of establishing and conducting such an inquiry. As the New
Law Commission (NZLC) noted, because inquiries occur infrequently, they
may encounter difficulties from a lack of institutional knowledge
and each time
an inquiry is appointed, there may be ‘some reinvention of the
8.2 In this chapter, the ALRC considers the administration of Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries, including the types of assistance
be required to support the conduct of an inquiry. The ALRC considers ways in
which to preserve institutional knowledge acquired
from previous Royal
Commissions and inquiries and how administrative, technical and other assistance
should be provided to Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries.
8.3 At present, there is no permanent administrative body for inquiries. The
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
(AGD) is currently
responsible for providing administrative support for Royal Commissions and
certain other inquiries.
8.4 In this chapter, the ALRC also considers important issues relating to the
records of completed Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries. The utility of
such inquiries depends in large part upon the extent to which their findings and
recommendations are able
to be acted upon and the uses to which their records
may subsequently be put.
Administrative
assistance for inquiries
8.5 Customarily, responsibility for providing administrative support for
Royal Commissions and certain other inquiries within the
Australian Government
has been allocated in accordance with the
Administrative Arrangements
The AGD currently holds
this responsibility, although it has been allocated to other departments in the
past. For example, the then
Department of Finance and Administration was the
designated department from 1998, until responsibility was transferred to the AGD
in November 2001.
The Department of
Finance and Administration provided administrative support in the initial
stages, to both the HIH Royal Commission
and the Royal Commission into the
Building and Construction Industry (Building Royal
Commission).
8.6 While there is no permanent central body, such as an inquiries office,
that has responsibility for providing administrative assistance
Commissions and other public inquiries, several people have accumulated
significant institutional knowledge in the administration
of inquiries. These
include senior departmental officers in the AGD and the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet (PM&C),
well as those who have acted as executive officers in recent inquiries.
8.7 Typically, when a new Royal Commission or public inquiry is announced,
the administrative apparatus to conduct the inquiry is
not yet in existence. The
inquiry members must be formally appointed and the inquiry established. The
executive officer is often
one of the first personnel to be appointed and he or
she oversees the inquiry’s establishment including staffing,
accommodation,
hearing room facilities, office services and information
technology infrastructure.
8.8 There are no formal procedures or criteria for the appointment of the
executive officer. The role is generally understood to encompass
responsibility
for the practical issues of setting up and managing the administration and
operation of the inquiry processes, including
its budget and finances. In recent
inquiries, the executive officer has been contracted on an ad hoc basis when the
inquiry is established
and the role often has been filled by former or seconded
senior public servants. These individuals have previous experience in the
administration of inquiries, are familiar with public administration, the
financial accountability of public bodies, and with the
workings of government.
8.9 A significant amount of planning and organisation is required to
establish and run an ad hoc inquiry such as a Royal Commission.
preliminary stages, assessments of the administrative and technical requirements
of the inquiry must be made, having regard
to the likely size and duration of
the inquiry, the number and type of participants and the proposed methods of
inquiry. Any difficulties
encountered in these preliminary stages—for
example, unavailability of accommodation or hearing rooms—may impact on
capacity of the inquiry to report within the timeframe set out in its terms
of reference.
8.10 While there is accumulated institutional knowledge within the Australian
Government in relation to the administration of inquiries
as described above,
there are no formal mechanisms in place to consolidate and preserve this
knowledge of administrative arrangements—for
example, in a handbook or in
written guidelines.
8.11 In contrast, the New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs—which
provides some administrative assistance to Royal Commissions
and Commissions of
— has produced
guidelines which provide information to all parties involved with a public
inquiry. The guidelines address matters
relevant to ministers considering the
establishment of an inquiry, members of the public appearing before an inquiry
and those involved
in the conduct and administration of inquiries such as
inquiry members and staff.
8.12 The guidelines provide a comprehensive overview of Royal Commissions and
Commissions of Inquiry in New Zealand. In relation to
the running of inquiries,
the guidelines describe the ‘planning phase’ pertaining to matters
of strategy, timetabling
and procedures. This phase requires input from
Commissioners, counsel assisting, the executive officer and the departmental
officer of the inquiry and any other supporting officials. Specific
guidance is also provided in relation to the following:
administration, personnel and finance;
information management and information technology;
media and communications strategy;
checklist for running hearings;
drafting the report;
presentation and distribution of the report;
review of processes at the conclusion of an inquiry; and
summary of responsibilities.
8.13 In its 2008 report,
Inquiries Act
, the NZLC noted that these guidelines were an
important resource for government, inquiry members and
participants.
The Commission
recognised that legislative changes could ‘only go so far in ensuring that
inquiries, once in operation, are
conducted in the most effective and efficient
8.14 Another model for providing administrative assistance to inquiries was
recommended by the Law Reform Commission of Ireland (LRCI)
Public Inquiries, Including Tribunals of Inquiry
. The LRCI recommended the
establishment of a Central Inquiries
The LRCI considered that
such a body
would provide those charged with establishing and running public inquiries easy
access to precedents and guidance on a wide variety
of matters pertinent to
their inquiry, including legislation, procedural issues, the drafting of terms
of reference and administrative
8.15 In the Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
the ALRC sought stakeholder views on the types of administrative assistance,
such as budgeting, technological or other guidance,
that may be required by
Royal Commissions and other public inquiries. The ALRC also asked how such
assistance should be provided,
including whether a permanent central body should
have a role in providing such
assistance.
Submissions and
consultations
8.16 Liberty Victoria submitted that the administrator of an inquiry should
be someone with administrative experience outside government
and, ideally, a
person who had been employed outside the public sector for 12 months before
their engagement by the inquiry. This
would help to ensure the independence of
the administrator. In addition, it recommended that such a person should be
appointed by
the inquiry chairperson and possess at least five years experience
in administrative management, of which at least two years should
government.
8.17 Liberty Victoria submitted that it would be more economical to have a
‘standing inquiry administrative service’,
but was concerned that
this may lead to bias and influence from government and other interested bodies.
It suggested that such a
body also was unlikely to stay commercially
competitive. It suggested that an independent inquiries body tasked with
providing retention
of institutional knowledge and cost savings, could be
modelled on a hybrid version of the Legal Representation Office in New South
Wales and the Central Inquiries Office proposed by the LRCI. Notwithstanding
this suggestion, Liberty Victoria was still of the view
that inquiries should
have the flexibility and independence to engage their own administrative support
8.18 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) submitted that in its
experience, when establishing a Royal Commission or public inquiry,
in a broad range of areas is required, such as:
obtaining premises, hearing room facilities and office equipment;
obtaining and installing information technology infrastructure;
obtaining document management systems;
security for premises, documents and staff;
engagement of staff;
securing access to library and research services; and
establishing media
AGS noted that there was often little, if any, lead time between the
announcement of an inquiry and the commencement of its
investigations. It noted
that the development and retention of a body of knowledge within the AGD
regarding the conduct and administration
of inquiries had contributed very
significantly to the effective establishment and conduct of recent inquiries. In
the view of the
AGS, it was important to preserve the ‘corporate
memory’ gained from the conduct of previous inquiries. It noted that
infrequent appointment of Royal Commissions and similar inquiries was likely to
be a relevant factor to consider when assessing
whether the establishment of a
permanent body to support such inquiries would be
8.20 The Victorian Society for Computers and the Law (VSCL) noted in its
submission that information technology infrastructure for
inquiries was often
rushed into being, custom built from the ground up, and, upon completion of the
inquiry, torn down and disposed
As a result, the Australian
Government repeatedly had to meet the costs of new infrastructure for each Royal
Commission or inquiry.
The skills and experience gained by those supporting the
inquiry were lost when the information management system was decommissioned.
8.21 The VSCL was of the view that these issues could be addressed by the
establishment of a permanent secretariat, identifying a
number of benefits:
it would be a repository for the knowledge required to conduct
inquiries efficiently;
it could develop and maintain guidelines and standards relating to
the effective collection, processing, submission and management
of information
for inquiries;
it would allow newly established inquiries to source existing
knowledge and apply the necessary management controls within a short
it could develop a benchmarked project management methodology that
could be applied to inquiries as
VSCL noted, however, that a permanent hearing facility dedicated to Royal
Commissions and public inquiries would become obsolete
and be costly to
maintain. Instead, the VSCL suggested that the necessary infrastructure be
shared with the courts. This would also
give inquiries access to experienced
information technology personnel who were familiar with the demands of
hearing-based systems.
Finally, the VSCL proposed that a panel of providers be
established to pre-qualify potential vendors and service providers of
inquiry-related
systems to speed up the process of engaging contractors to
support inquiries at short
8.23 Graham Millar, previously the Executive Officer of the Equine Influenza
Inquiry (2008) and the Deputy Secretary of the HIH Royal
Commission (2003),
observed that the nature of the administrative support required could vary with
each inquiry. Recent practice
has involved a mix of direct departmental support
and contracted support with the AGD remaining at arm’s length from the day
to day management of the inquiry. Millar submitted that the present arrangements
worked well. The AGD was a readily available source
of administrative support,
yet still allowed the inquiry to operate with the required level of
independence.
8.24 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) provided a
secretariat to two recent inquiries into immigration matters—the
into the Circumstances of the Vivian Alvarez Matter (2005) (Comrie Inquiry) and
the Inquiry into the Circumstances of the
Immigration Detention of Cornelia Rau
(2005) (Palmer Inquiry). The secretariat coordinated information flows and
dealings between
DIAC and the inquiries. DIAC had responsibility for many of the
administrative tasks, including negotiating the employment arrangements
that had been independently selected by the inquiries, selecting temporary
office space, managing information technology
issues, managing various contracts
which supported the function of the inquiries, and developing the rules and
procedures by which
DIAC and the inquiry secretariats would interact. DIAC
submitted that there would be a benefit in having resources and experience
readily available in a central agency, thereby negating the set-up costs and
time taken to establish
8.25 The Commonwealth Ombudsman suggested that options be considered to
enable inquiries to be supported through an existing agency.
Such an agency
could provide the expertise needed to deal with routine administration in a
consistent and predictable way, and to
deal with administrative matters arising
from the inquiry after it had
8.26 Before the HIH Royal Commission, established in 2001, there had not been
a Royal Commission since the Commission of Inquiry into
the Relations between
the CAA and Seaview Air (1996). After the HIH Royal Commission and the Building
Royal Commission concluded
in early 2003, a period of more than a year elapsed
before the establishment of the Royal Commission to Inquire into the Centenary
House Lease, which was conducted between June and December 2004. About one year
later, in November 2005, the Australian Government
announced the establishment
of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-For-Food Programme (AWB Inquiry).
No federal Royal Commissions have been
appointed since the AWB Inquiry. Ten months after the conclusion of the AWB
Inquiry, however,
the Australian Government announced another major public
inquiry—the Equine Influenza Inquiry—which possessed many of
powers of a Royal Commission.
8.27 While public inquiries other than Royal Commissions have been conducted
during this time, there are often significant periods
during which no Royal
Commission or other major public inquiry is taking place. The ALRC is of the
view, having regard to recent
trends, that there is unlikely to be a consistent
and continuing need for a permanent administrative body to support
8.28 While some stakeholders advocated the establishment of a permanent
administrative body, their concerns focused on the following:
there is a need to retain institutional knowledge in relation to the
administration of inquiries to ensure that inquiries can be
established rapidly
and conducted efficiently and effectively;
inquiries require access to appropriately skilled personnel to
provide administrative and technical assistance; and
inquiries should have flexibility and control over their own
administration to ensure their independent operation.
8.29 In the
ALRC’s view, these concerns can be addressed without establishing a
permanent administrative body for Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries.
Institutional knowledge about the administration of inquiries can be captured
through the development of
written guidance to be included in the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
if there are extended periods during which no inquiries are held, or if
personnel who have previous experience in the administration
of inquiries are
unavailable, the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
will provide a framework for
those conducting and administering inquiries that can be adapted to the
particular circumstances of
the inquiry.
8.30 It would be appropriate for the Australian Government to engage a person
who possesses substantial experience in the administration
of inquiries to
prepare guidance in consultation with relevant
stakeholders.
Such guidance
should be included in the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
and should address
matters pertaining to the administration of inquiries, for example:
recruitment;
accommodation;
budget and finance;
information and communications technology; and
records management.
8.31 In the ALRC’s view, the
current arrangement—namely, that an Australian Government department is
allocated responsibility
for providing administrative support to Royal
Commissions and certain other inquiries—appears to work satisfactorily. It
therefore proposed that the Australian Government should continue to allocate
responsibility for the administration of Royal Commissions
and Official
Inquiries to an Australian Government department. While that
department—presently the AGD—may change from
time to time,
administrative responsibility for Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
should be allocated to a single department
rather than be shared by multiple
departments. It is envisaged that this department, while retaining primary
responsibility, could
delegate particular administrative or technical tasks to
other departments or agencies in appropriate circumstances, having regard
subject matter and operational requirements of an individual inquiry.
8.32 An appropriate section within the AGD, or suitably experienced officers
within the department, should continue to be allocated
the task of providing
administrative, technical and other assistance to Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries established under
the proposed
Inquiries Act
. While this need
not be their sole task, the section or officers should have the capacity to
prioritise the provision of such assistance
at short notice to ensure the
efficient and expedited establishment and operation of Royal Commissions
Official Inquiries as they
are appointed. The ALRC notes that the tasks involved
in providing administrative assistance to inquiries are already well understood
within the AGD and may include the following:
assisting with matters preparatory to the formal establishment of
the inquiry;
providing assistance to inquiry members and staff to ensure an
efficient and expedited establishment process and the conduct of the
at the conclusion of the inquiry, facilitating the prompt transfer
of an archival copy of the records of the inquiry to the National
Archives of
8.33 In addition, the ALRC proposes that the role also include
responsibility for monitoring and updating the proposed
8.34 Further, streamlining administrative arrangements for inquiries under
the proposed
Inquiries Act
could also be achieved by ensuring that the
roles and responsibilities of those involved in the administrative aspects of an
inquiry—including
inquiry staff and departmental officers within the
responsible department—are clearly defined in the proposed
8.35 In particular, the ALRC notes the importance of the role of the
executive officer of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry in
ensuring the
efficient and effective conduct of an inquiry. Executive officers facilitate and
coordinate administrative or technical
assistance provided by the responsible
department. They administer the inquiry at the direction of the inquiry members
and at arms-length
from the Australian Government. In the ALRC’s view, the
selection criteria and responsibilities of the executive officer of
should be set out in the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
8.36 As discussed in Chapter 6, inquiries are to be independent in the
performance of their functions but accountable for their use
of public funds.
This has been, and should continue to be, reflected in the manner in which the
Australian Government delivers administrative,
technical and other assistance to
Inquiry members
should exercise overall control over inquiry administration and should be
capable of engaging their own staff and
contractors.
Proposal 8–1
The proposed
Inquiries Handbook
provide guidance on matters pertaining to the administration of inquiries, for
(a) recruitment;
(b) accommodation;
(c) budget and finance;
(d) information and communications technology; and
(e) records management.
Proposal 8–2
The Australian Government should allocate
responsibility for the administration of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries to a single
Australian Government department. The role of that
department should include responsibility for the following tasks:
(a) assisting with matters preparatory to the formal establishment of the
(b) providing assistance to inquiry members and staff to ensure an
efficient and expedited establishment process and the conduct
of the inquiry;
(c) at the conclusion of the inquiry, facilitating the prompt transfer of
an archival copy of the records of the inquiry to the
National Archives of
Australia; and
(d) monitoring and updating the proposed
Inquiries Handbook.
8.37 In this section, the ALRC considers issues relating to the records of
completed Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries including
custody, use,
public access and archiving. Inquiry records may fall into the following broad
categories:
administrative records concerning the setting up and operation of
the inquiry;
hearings records, such as transcripts;
investigative records, including written statements where the
inquiry is compiling evidence or taking evidence from witnesses;
documents either produced to, or seized by, an inquiry; and
working papers of the inquiry members and legal
and use of inquiry records
8.38 Provisions dealing with the custody and use of records of a Royal
Commission were inserted into the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Section 9(1)
‘Royal Commission record’ as a record that was produced by, given to
or obtained by a Royal Commission and is
no longer required for the purposes of
the Commission, including copies of such
Section 9(2)
regulations to be made in relation to the custody, use and transfer of, and
access to, records Royal Commissions.
8.39 Following the insertion of
Royal Commissions Act
reg 8 of the
Royal Commissions Regulations 2001
(Cth) was made to deal
specifically with the records of the AWB Inquiry (other than those relating to
the administration and financial
management of the inquiry and the report
itself). The regulation provided that the records were to be kept in the custody
Secretary of the Department of the PM&C. It set out the circumstances
in which PM&C, as custodian of the records, could provide
the records to
other persons or bodies, including for law enforcement purposes and to provide
advice on the administration of a law
of the Commonwealth, state or
8.40 The provisions in
Royal Commissions Act
were modelled
on earlier legislation that was specifically enacted to enable the transfer of
certain records of the HIH Royal Commission
to the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission.
obviates the need to provide procedural fairness to persons who
could be adversely affected if documents obtained by a Royal Commission
purposes were to be made available to other persons or agencies and used for
other purposes.
Archiving of inquiry
8.41 The records of Royal Commissions are Commonwealth records and as such
are subject to the provisions of the
Archives Act 1983
Archives Act
provides that:
(2) The Commonwealth is entitled to the possession of records kept by a Royal
Commission ... that are no longer required for the
purposes of the Commission,
and all such records shall be deemed to be Commonwealth records for the purposes
of this Act.
(3) Records referred to in subsection (2) shall be kept in such custody as the
responsible Minister directs and the Archives is
not entitled to the care of any
such records except in accordance with such a direction.
(4) A direction given by a Royal Commission ... prohibiting the publication of
any document or matter does not apply to the provision
of public access under
this Act to any records that are in the open access period or to the publication
by any person of any records
that are available for public access in accordance
with this Act.
8.42 As a result of s 22(3), there is no mechanism for the automatic transfer
at the conclusion of the inquiry of the records of Royal
Commissions to the
National Archives of Australia (National Archives)—which is the agency
responsible for maintaining the records
created by Australian Government
agencies. There must be a ministerial direction to effect a transfer.
8.43 As a matter of practice,
the records of recent Royal Commissions relating to their administration (such
as those relating to
organisation, staffing, financial matters and travel
arrangements) have been transferred to the AGD, while the substantive records
Royal Commissions (such as transcripts, exhibits, submissions, research papers
and interim and final reports) have been transferred
There is no timeframe
within which departments with custody of inquiry records must transfer the
records to the care of National
Archives, subject to the open access
requirements of the
Archives Act
, which generally provides for access
after 30 years.
8.44 There appears to be no consistent practice as to when the transfer of
Royal Commission records to National Archives takes place.
For example, the
records of the Royal Commission on Espionage in 1955 were not transferred to the
National Archives until 1984, shortly
before the open access period was due to
In contrast, some
digital records of the AWB Inquiry and the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the
Centenary House Lease were transferred
by PM&C to National Archives in
Other methods of
access to inquiry records
8.45 National Archives facilitates online access to selected Royal Commission
and inquiry records in the open access period including
reports, transcripts,
audio recordings and
8.46 Most Royal Commissions and other major inquiries conducted in recent
years have individual websites that contain the report of
the inquiry and other
material such as terms of reference, exhibits, witness statements, submissions
and background papers.
access to these websites is maintained following the completion of the inquiry
either by an Australian Government department,
such as PM&C or the AGD, or
through PANDORA, which is an Australian web archive hosted by the National
Library of Australia.
Submissions and
consultations
8.47 The ALRC received limited feedback from stakeholders regarding issues of
access and use of documents or things collected by completed
Royal Commissions
or other public inquiries.
8.48 The AGS noted that a myriad of issues could arise in the period
following the completion of an inquiry relating to the retention,
management and
use of records and information arising from an inquiry. The AGS observed that
the AGD, together with PM&C, had
experience in dealing with such issues and
it was important to maintain corporate memory regarding retention and use of
Royal Commission
records. Any lingering uncertainty or inefficiency regarding
the transfer, retention and use of records could limit the effectiveness
Royal Commissions and other
8.49 Issues relating to the retention and subsequent use of records of
concluded Royal Commissions and other inquiries are critically
important. They
may have a significant impact on the extent to which the findings and
recommendations of such bodies are able to
be acted upon for the purposes of law
enforcement, advising on the administration of laws and implementing inquiry
recommendations.
8.50 The ALRC has not identified any shortcomings in the existing
arrangements in the
Royal Commissions Act
Royal Commissions
Regulations
introduced in 2006. These arrangements have facilitated the
effective transfer of custody of the records of both the HIH Royal Commission
and the AWB Inquiry, and have provided necessary clarification of the purposes
for which those records may be used by other persons
and bodies. In the
ALRC’s view, it is appropriate that provisions equivalent to those in
Royal Commissions Act
including the power to make
regulations in relation to specific inquiries—be incorporated in the
Inquiries Act
to govern the transfer, custody and use of the
records of both Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries.
8.51 As it is envisaged that Official Inquiries and Royal Commissions
established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
will examine and inquire
into matters of ‘public importance’ and ‘significant public
importance’ respectively,
arrangements should be in place to ensure an
appropriate level of ongoing public access to the reports and records of
completed inquiries—for
example, by maintaining inquiry websites. It is
highly desirable to continue the practice of developing and maintaining a public
website for Royal Commissions and other inquiries, both during and after their
As the current arrangements for hosting and maintaining
inquiry websites are ad hoc, the responsible Australian Government department
should allocate responsibility for this task to an appropriate agency or service
provider and set out any such arrangements in the
Inquiries Handbook
8.52 The proposed
Inquiries Handbook
and the provisions of the
Inquiries Act
should include arrangements for the conservation
and preservation of records of completed inquiries. These records form part of
existing and future archival resources of the Commonwealth and should be
made available for public access in accordance with the
Archives Act
8.53 First, the ALRC proposes that the arrangements for the transfer of
inquiry records to National Archives be streamlined by amendment
Archives Act
to enable the prompt transfer of a copy of those records for
archiving purposes upon completion of the inquiry. There should be a
approach to the transfer of such records and there should be a presumption that
National Archives receive an archival
copy of those records at the completion of
the inquiry. This is not intended to prevent the original records being kept by
the department
or body nominated as custodian by regulation. It will, however,
preserve an archival copy of inquiry records and avoid the risk of
becoming interspersed with those of the department or body with custody of the
records. The presumption that an archival copy
of the records should be
transferred promptly to the National Archives should only be reversed if the
relevant minister directs otherwise.
8.54 Secondly, the ALRC proposes that the record-keeping and document
management systems used by inquiries should conform to guidance
and standards
issued by National Archives. This will ensure that inquiry records are
appropriately administered during their active
life and are eventually
transferred to the care of National Archives in a form that enables their
preservation and public access
as part of the archival resources of the
Commonwealth.
8.55 It is appropriate for Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries to seek
advice and assistance from National Archives—in
accordance with its
statutory functions under the
Archives Act
in relation to the
creation, keeping and management of inquiry records in an efficient and
economical manner and in a manner that
will facilitate their use as part of the
archival resources of the
Commonwealth.
also enables National Archives to provide, on request, training of staff
responsible for keeping current inquiry
Proposal 8–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
for the custody and use of records of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
in terms equivalent to those in
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Proposal 8–4
Archives Act 1983
should be amended to require the prompt transfer of an archival copy of the
records of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
to the National Archives of
Australia at the conclusion of the inquiry, unless directed otherwise by the
minister to whose ministerial
responsibilities the records most closely
Proposal 8–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries comply with the standards
determined, or record-keeping obligations
imposed, by the National Archives of
New Zealand Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Commonwealth of Australia,
Administrative Arrangements Order
, 25 January 2008 [as amended 1 May
2008, updated 1 July 2008].
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
(2003), vol 22,
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission
(2003), [2.1]; T Cole,
Final Report of the Royal
Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 22,
The Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet has portfolio responsibility for the
Royal Commissions
(Cth) pursuant to the Commonwealth of Australia,
Administrative
Arrangements Order
, 25 January 2008 [as amended 1 May 2008, updated 1 July
New Zealand Government Department
of Internal Affairs,
Services—Commissions of Inquiry
http://www.dia.govt.nz/diawebsite.nsf/wpg_URL/Services-Commissions-of-Inquiry-Index?OpenDocument & ExpandView
at 4 August 2009.
New Zealand Government
Department of Internal Affairs,
Setting Up and Running Commissions of
New Zealand Law
Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
73 (2005), [2.51].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 6–6.
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Ibid. Funding
for a legal representation office is discussed in Ch
Australian Government Solicitor,
Victorian Society for Computers
and the Law,
12 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
Department of
Immigration and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Commonwealth
The ALRC discusses the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
reports of previous Royal Commissions and inquiries are another useful source of
information relating to the administration
of inquiries: T Morling,
the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Leasing by the Commonwealth of
Accommodation in Centenary House
(1994); N Owen,
Report of the HIH Royal
(2003), [2.1]–[2.21]; T Cole,
Final Report of the Royal
Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 22; D
Report of the Inquiry into the Centenary House Lease
Appendix H; T Cole,
Report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies
in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), Appendix 10; M Clarke,
The Report of the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
(2008), Appendix B.
regarding the archiving of inquiry records are discussed later in this
The proposal regarding the
independence of inquiries under the proposed
Inquiries Act
is discussed
Royal Commissions
Amendment (Records) Act 2006
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Royal Commissions Regulations
(Cth) reg 8(5).
Commission (Transfer or Records) Act 2003
Explanatory Memorandum,
Commissions Amendment (Records) Bill 2006
(Cth). The ‘Cole Inquiry’
referred to in this Explanatory Memorandum is the AWB Inquiry. Issues relating
to procedural
fairness and inquiries are discussed in Ch
Department of the Prime Minister
& Cabinet and the Attorney-General’s Department,
Consultation
, 15 May 2009.
cases approval has been given for the special or accelerated release of Royal
Commission records before they are 30 years
old: P Nagle and R Summerrell,
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, The Royal Commission and its Records,
1987–91—Research Paper No 2
National Archives of
National Archives of
Series notes for series A6216—Original Signed Copy of the
‘Report of the Royal Commission on Espionage’
<www.naa.gov.au> at 9 July 2009.
National Archives of Australia and National Archives of Australia Advisory
Annual Reports 2006–07
Selected records of a number of
Royal Commissions are available electronically on the National Archives of
Australia website, including
records of the Royal Commission into British
Nuclear Tests in Australia (1985), the Royal Commission on Television (1954),
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody (1991) and the Royal
Commission on Espionage (1955): Australian Government,
National Archives of
Australia—Homepage
, <www.naa.gov.au> at 9 July
The HIH Royal
<www.pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/23212/20030418-0000/www.hihroyalcom.gov.au/index.html>
at 4 August 2009;
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
<www.pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/24143/20040427-0000/www.royalcombci.gov.au/index.html> at 4 August 2009;
Inquiry into the Centenary House
(2004) <www.ag.gov.au/agd/www/centenaryhome.nsf> at 4 August 2009;
Inquiry into Certain
Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme
<www.oilforfoodinquiry.gov.au/> at 4 August 2009;
Equine Influenza
(2008) <www.equineinfluenzainquiry.gov.au/> at 4 August 2009;
Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
<www.haneefcaseinquiry.gov.au/> at 4 August
PANDORA is an acronym for the
phrase ‘Preserving and Accessing Networked Documentary Resources of
Australia’. Titles
in the archive are selected according to selection
guidelines developed by the National Library of Australia and its partners and
the guidelines are published on the PANDORA website: National Library of
Australia and Partners,
PANDORA—Australia’s Web Archive
<Pandora.nla.gov.au> at 1 July 2009.
Australian Government Solicitor,
The use that can be made of
inquiry records during the currency of the inquiry, including the power of an
inquiry to make referrals
of information or evidence to other agencies, is
discussed in Ch 11.
Archives Act
9. Funding and Costs
Introduction
Costs of inquiry participants
Legal assistance
Costs of attendance or appearance
Costs of production
Other non-legal assistance
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Other inquiry costs
Inquiry legal costs
Inquiry members
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Method of funding inquiries
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
9. Funding and Costs
Introduction
9.1 In this chapter, the ALRC examines issues relating to the funding and
costs of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. It commences
by identifying
the types of costs and expenses that may be incurred in the conduct of
inquiries, such as legal costs and the costs
of providing legal and non-legal
assistance to inquiry participants. The engagement and remuneration of inquiry
members and legal
practitioners assisting Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries is also discussed. Various methods of funding Royal Commissions
Official Inquiries are then examined.
9.2 Various types of expenses and costs may be incurred in the conduct of
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. Some of the costs
associated with
inquiries include the following:
commissioners or inquiry members;
counsel and solicitors assisting the inquiry;
contractors and consultants;
other staff members;
business and residential accommodation;
information and communication technology; and
document management and
stationery.
Australian Government department responsible for the administration of
inquiries—presently the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s
Department (AGD)—may need to procure services from a range of suppliers
when establishing an inquiry.
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries also may
need to obtain such services throughout the life of the inquiry and may deal
with external suppliers, consultants and contractors. These activities
involve the expenditure of public money. As such, AGD officials
and inquiry
staff responsible for negotiating and acquiring services on behalf of an inquiry
must have regard to the
Commonwealth Procurement Guidelines
(CPGs). The
CPGs set out the Australian Government’s procurement policy framework and
are issued by the Minister for Finance
and Deregulation under the
Management and Accountability Regulations 1997
(Cth). Broadly speaking, the
CPGs set out procurement principles and mandatory procurement procedures to be
followed by government
9.4 As the CPGs do not cover statutory appointments, they may not apply to
the process of engaging and setting the remuneration of
inquiry members and any
legal practitioners or expert advisors appointed under the proposed
The CPGs would apply to the process of procuring other types of
services from contractors, consultants and information and communication
technology providers.
Costs of inquiry
participants
9.5 In this section, the ALRC examines the types of costs that may be
incurred by inquiry participants as a result of their involvement
Commission or Official Inquiry, and how these costs should be funded. Inquiry
participants may incur costs relating to:
legal representation for those required to give evidence or answer
legal representation for those authorised to participate as a party
to an inquiry;
attending or appearing for those required to give evidence or answer
producing documents or other things required by an inquiry; and
other types of non-legal assistance required by inquiry
participants, such as counselling or witness support.
Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
(IP 35), the ALRC
raised issues relating to the types of assistance required by inquiry
participants and how such assistance should
The ALRC also asked
whether the Australian Government should fund the costs of legal representation
and other non-legal expenses
Legal assistance
Royal Commissions Act 1902
does not make specific
provision for the payment of legal fees incurred by witnesses and other inquiry
participants. According to
the principles set out in the
Report of the Royal
Commission on Tribunals of Inquiry
(‘Salmon Principles’), the
legal expenses of any person involved in an inquiry and called as a witness
should normally
be met out of public
As noted by Stephen
Donaghue, however, procedural fairness does not require the provision of public
funding for legal representation
before Royal
Commissions.
9.8 At the federal level, no central body provides legal assistance to
individuals involved with Royal Commissions or other public
inquiries. In past
Royal Commissions, however, public funding has been provided for central
participants. The AGD has administered
ad hoc, non-statutory financial
assistance schemes for a number of recent Royal Commissions and public
The AGD produces
guidelines for each inquiry setting out the criteria for assistance, the
procedure for applications and the scope
of financial assistance available. For
example, a person who appeared before the Inquiry into Certain Australian
Companies in Relation
to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme (AWB Inquiry) was
eligible to apply to the AGD for the payment of reasonable legal costs and
Guidelines were produced
setting set out the criteria under which such assistance was awarded, including
the applicant’s personal interests could have been exposed to
prejudice as a result of appearing before the inquiry;
the applicant was, or was likely to be, a central figure in the
proceedings and thus likely to be involved to a major degree in those
proceedings; or
cross-examination of the applicant was likely to assist the
guidelines also prescribed the scale at which witnesses’ legal fees could
(a) a solicitor’s fees are payable at 80% of the Federal Court scale. The
solicitor’s professional fees are payable at
$195 per hour up to a maximum
of $1,560 per day
(b) junior counsel’s fees are payable in the range of $175–$250 per
hour up to a maximum of $1,400–$2,000 per day
depending on the experience
(c) senior counsel’s fees are payable in the range of $250–$400 per
hour up to a maximum of $2,000–$3,200 per day
depending on the experience
of counsel.
9.10 The Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(Building Royal Commission) adopted a similar procedure, with
assistance for legal costs associated with the Commission being made available
in certain circumstances through the AGD.
The Commission was not involved in the
administration of applications for financial assistance. To assist persons who
incurred costs
associated with summonses to appear or appearances before the
Commission, or the production of documents to the Commission, the Commission
included on its website a link to the AGD’s guidelines for financial
assistance. The Final Report noted that as the Commission
was drawing to a
conclusion, it became aware that some persons served with summonses or
directions which required responses within
short timeframes had found it
difficult to make applications for financial assistance before costs were
9.11 Public funding for legal representation before permanent commissions is
provided for in some Australian jurisdictions. For example,
legislation
establishing crime and corruption bodies such as the Australian Crime
Commission, the New South Wales Crime Commission,
the New South Wales
Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) and the Queensland Crime and
Misconduct Commission all confer
discretion on the relevant Attorney-General to
provide legal or financial assistance to any person in relation to an appearance
the commission.
provision of such assistance may be subject to conditions, and the discretion to
provide it will be exercised having regard to,
among other things, the hardship
that would be caused to the witness if assistance were declined, and the
significance of the evidence
to be given by the
9.12 It is also becoming more common for large or permanent commissions to
establish legal representation offices from which witnesses
can obtain legal
representation at government expense either directly or through referral to an
independent panel of counsel and
solicitors.
An example is the
New South Wales Legal Representation Office (LRO), which was originally
established by the state government to
provide independent legal advice and
representation in relation to the Royal Commission into the New South Wales
Police Service (1997).
Following the completion of the Royal Commission, the LRO
was retained to provide similar services in relation to the Police Integrity
Commission and ICAC. From time to time, the LRO has also provided legal
assistance to persons appearing before other Royal Commissions
and Special
Commissions of Inquiry in New South
Legal assistance is
provided by in-house lawyers within the LRO, or is assigned to private legal
practitioners selected from a panel
appointed following a competitive tendering
process. The cost of such legal representation is met by the LRO, which is a
centre within the New South Wales Attorney General’s
Department.
9.13 Some of the advantages of establishing a permanent legal representation
office were identified in the Final Report of the Royal
Commission into the New
South Wales Police Service:
Although in a sense appearing in an adversarial role to the Royal Commission,
and on occasions, taking a view in opposition to the
Commission on matters of
practice or policy in the interests of its clients, the Office provided a
substantial overall contribution.
Once guidelines were established, and a clear understanding of the respective
roles were worked out, initial difficulties were overcome,
and the two bodies
worked co-operatively. The Royal Commission in particular was able to be
confident that security was maintained,
and that conflicts of interest would be
solved. The Legal Representation Office (LRO) was able to provide quick and
effective legal
advice, and was also able to move expeditiously in procuring
independent advice for those persons who indicated an interest in assisting
Royal Commission.
... LRO and assigned Counsel, and solicitors conducted the necessary
cross-examination of witnesses, and representation of its clients
in a way that
was cost-effective, timely, and not otherwise possible had representation been
required to be provided either privately,
or at the expense of the Police
Associations.
9.14 Royal Commissions almost never have the power to order that legal
expenses be provided.
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
(Tas), however, expressly provides that a
Commission may order the payment by the Crown of the whole or any part of the
legal costs
of a person who appears before
The Act sets out a number of
matters to which the Commission may have regard in determining whether such an
order should be made,
(a) whether the person has shown that he or she had a valid reason to seek
legal representation;
(b) whether in all the circumstances, including the events which led to the
Governor directing the making of the Commission’s
inquiry, it would be a
hardship or injustice for the person to bear the costs;
(c) the nature and possible effect of any allegations made about the
(d) whether the person has been found to have been seriously at fault, to the
extent that criminal or other charges have been recommended
or instituted;
(e) whether a certificate has been issued to the person by the Commission under
s 23 [a witness certificate];
(f) any other relevant matter.
9.15 Legal assistance also may be available to employees of an Australian
Government department or agency and ministerial staff in
accordance with
Appendix E of the
Legal Services Directions 2005
(Cth) issued by the
Attorney-General.
Paragraph 16
of Appendix E enables the Australian Government to cover the costs of an
employee’s legal representation at an
inquiry ‘if it is in the
interests of the Commonwealth’ and the matter ‘relates to their
employment’. In
contrast, paragraph 5 of Appendix E—which applies to
public servants who are named as defendants in court proceedings—provides
that the costs of assistance ‘should normally be approved’ if they
arose out of an incident that relates to their employment.
The provision of
assistance to an employee who has acted, or is alleged to have acted,
negligently is not precluded.
Overseas jurisdictions
9.16 Under s 40 of the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK), the chairman of an
inquiry may award reasonable amounts to a person in respect of expenses incurred
in relation to the inquiry,
including the costs of legal representation. This
power is expressed as being subject to any qualifications placed upon it by the
minister. As noted in the Explanatory Notes to the
Inquiries Act
was envisaged that the minister would generally set out any broad conditions
under which payment may be granted, and the
chairman will then take the
individual decisions.
addition, the
Inquiries Rules 2006
(UK) set out detailed provisions for
the determination, assessment and payment of awards for legal
representation.
9.17 Section 23 of the
Commissions of Investigation Act 2004
provides that the responsible minister must prepare guidelines for the payment
to witnesses of legal costs necessarily
incurred by them in connection with an
investigation. These guidelines may restrict the types of legal services or fees
payment may be made and otherwise limit (including by specifying
maximum amounts) the extent to which legal costs may be
9.18 In its 2005 report, the Law Reform Commission of Ireland (LRCI)
recommended that such a restriction of an individual’s
discretion to have
present, at all relevant times, the legal representation of their choice, ought
be removed.
Under proposed Part
9 of the Tribunals of Inquiry Bill 2005 (Ireland), the chairperson of a tribunal
of inquiry has wide-ranging
powers to determine an application for costs
following the publication of the report or at the conclusion of the tribunal
proceedings.
Any award of costs, however, must not exceed the relevant maximum
amounts applicable to various categories of costs specified by
regulation.
9.19 In its recent report,
A New Inquiries Act
, the New Zealand Law
Commission (NZLC) considered that a ‘balance needs to be found between
containing costs, adequately protecting
rights and ensuring equality before
inquiries, and maximising their potential to fully serve their
To this end, it
was recommended that inquiries should be given express power to recommend to
their overseeing department that a person’s
representation be funded in
part or in whole, and either on a representative group or individual basis
depending on the circumstances.
Clause 19 of the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) provides that an inquiry may make a
recommendation for legal assistance at any time having
regard to certain
statutory criteria, namely:
the likelihood of hardship to a person if legal assistance is
the nature and significance of the contribution that the person
will, or is likely to, make to the inquiry;
the extent to which legal assistance is, or is likely to be,
required to enable the inquiry to fulfil its purpose; and
any other matters relating to the public
9.20 Following
a recommendation, the relevant department may grant funding for legal assistance
(with or without conditions) to a
person appearing before the inquiry or with an
interest in the inquiry.
assistance encompasses both legal representation and legal advice or help (for
example, help with drafting submissions to an
Costs of attendance
or appearance
Royal Commissions Act
makes provision for the payment of some
non-legal expenses. Under
, any witness appearing before a Royal Commission
is to be paid ‘a reasonable sum for the expenses of his or her attendance
in accordance with the prescribed scale’. Section 8 of the Act
(1) The Governor-General may make regulations prescribing a scale of
allowances to be paid to any witness summoned under this Act
for his or her
travelling expenses and maintenance while absent from his or usual place of
(2) The claim to allowance of any such witness, certified by the President or
Chair of the Commission or by the sole Commissioner
as the case may be, shall be
paid by the Minister for Finance out of moneys to be provided by the Parliament
for the purposes of
the Commission.
9.22 Regulation 7 of the
Royal Commissions Regulations 2001
provides that a witness who appears before a Commission in answer to a summons
Royal Commissions Act
may be paid expenses in
accordance with the
A witness who appears
before a Commission, but not in answer to a summons under s 2 of the Act,
may be paid equivalent expenses if
so ordered by the
Commission.
For the purposes of
the regulation, a Commission includes a Commissioner authorised in writing by
the Commission.
9.23 In the Building Royal Commission, the statement of rights and
obligations that was provided to witnesses who were summoned to
appear made
reference to witness allowances and expenses. Claims from witnesses were
approved by the Secretary to the Royal Commission,
with cheques for the approved
amounts being forwarded by the AGD. No distinction was made between claims from
witnesses who had been
summonsed and those who appeared
voluntarily.
9.24 It is not clear whether the provisions in
Commissions Act
contemplate an allowance to a witness for the time occupied
in searching out and collating documents, or the expense of copying documents
required to be produced pursuant to a summons or notice to produce issued by a
Royal Commission. In the Final Report of the Building
Royal Commission, it was
recommended that those provisions be amended to allow persons, companies and
organisations to be paid a
reasonable sum for their expenses in complying with
notices to produce documents or summonses to produce
Other non-legal
9.25 There may be costs associated with providing other types of assistance
to witnesses or participants in an inquiry, such as counselling,
witness support
and interpreting services.
example, the
Commission of Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on
APY Lands) Act 2004
(SA) made provision for the responsible minister, after
consultation with the Commissioner, to ‘engage or appoint a suitably
qualified person or persons to provide support or assistance to any person who
may wish to place evidence before the
A full-time
witness support manager was appointed and over the period of the inquiry
provided support, counselling and referral services
for 448 people involved in
the Inquiry.
Submissions and
consultations
9.26 The ALRC heard a range of stakeholder views regarding whether legal and
non-legal assistance should be provided to inquiry participants
Australian Government and, if so, whether such assistance should be contracted
on an ad hoc
basis or provided by a government department or some other
permanent body.
9.27 Dr Ian Turnbull suggested that the use of government departments or
other quasi-government bodies or authorities for the provision
assistance to witnesses may have an impact on the independence or the appearance
of independence of an
9.28 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) submitted that it was not
aware of policy reasons which would mean that the Australian
Government should
be involved in providing (as opposed to meeting the expenses of) legal or other
assistance.
9.29 While the Law Council of Australia (Law Council) noted that the
provision of legal assistance afforded a necessary balance between
the powers of
inquiry members and the protections of the rights and liberties of persons
interested in or affected by such inquiries,
it did not suggest that such
assistance should be provided by a permanent government
9.30 In relation to funding the costs of inquiry participants, Turnbull was
of the opinion that legal representation for witnesses
should not be allowed
except in exceptional circumstances and that such costs should not be publicly
In contrast, Liberty
Victoria submitted that funding of public inquiries, including funds for legal
advice and the reasonable expenses
of witnesses, should be provided for in
legislation.
9.31 Graham Millar noted that under current arrangements, the Australian
Government funded the bulk of the costs of Royal Commissions;
however, it was
likely that many parties and witnesses covered some proportion of their own
costs. In part, this was due to limits
on the extent of legal assistance for
parties under the financial assistance schemes administered by the AGD and the
prescribed limits
on daily rates payable to certain witnesses. Royal Commissions
generally met the reasonable travel and related expenses claimed by
for their attendance at hearings or meetings with the
Commission.
9.32 The AGS submitted that the practice in past inquiries was for the
Australian Government to fund legal representation of witnesses.
Sections 6G
Royal Commissions Act
made provision for reimbursement of
expenses of witnesses required to appear. The AGS understood the policy
rationale for this to
be that the establishment of Royal Commissions and other
public inquiries was motivated by broad public purposes and represented
extraordinary imposition on those caught up in the investigation. As such, the
costs of such involvement should be met from the
public purse. The AGS noted
that there are presently legal assistance schemes for Royal Commissions
administered by the AGD and there
are guidelines in place which address
applications for legal
assistance.
9.33 The Law Council noted that adverse findings by a Royal Commission or
public inquiry could have significant negative impacts on
an individual. An
individual may need legal assistance but may not be able to afford to do so. The
Law Council submitted that the
Royal Commissions Act
should be amended to
allow Royal Commissions to recommend that legal assistance be provided to
certain persons appearing before an
inquiry. The need for the provision of legal
assistance to witnesses and interested persons in other public inquiries was
also noted.
9.34 The Law Council observed that government-funded legal representation may
not necessarily be required in all public inquiries,
or for all individuals
involved in public inquiries, but it was crucial if a person was the subject of
adverse allegations or the
inquiry concerned the conduct of any person. On this
issue, the Law Council agreed with the findings of the NZLC that:
Denial of funds to pay for counsel for a person who is subject to adverse
comment and cannot afford a lawyer is essentially the denial
of a right to
counsel. An issue of equity also arises since government officials will tend to
have representation paid for by their
department, and others may have the
backing of employers or unions.
9.35 The Law Council submitted that funding for legal representation of
witnesses who are not necessarily under investigation also
may be required in
certain circumstances. The Law Council endorsed the criteria of the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
(Tas) as an effective way to determine
whether a witness should be entitled to government-funded legal representation.
Such an approach
would afford the Commission an element of discretion in
deciding which persons interested in or affected by a public inquiry may
for legal assistance. The Law Council therefore considered that Royal
Commissions should be given express power to recommend
that legal assistance be
provided (similar to the recommendation made by the NZLC) and that the factors
to be considered by the Commission
should be based upon similar principles to
the approach adopted in Tasmania.
9.36 The Law Council submitted that grants of legal assistance could be
funded from the budget of the Royal Commission, in the same
witnesses’ travel expenses are presently funded under the
Commissions Act
. Alternatively, the Law Council submitted that persons
participating in Royal Commissions could apply for legal assistance from schemes
established by the Commonwealth specifically for the purposes of providing legal
assistance in public
9.37 The Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) submitted that it was
appropriate for the Australian Government to meet the legal
and non-legal
expenses incurred by witnesses required to appear before inquiries. The CPSU
noted that public servants frequently
appeared before Royal Commissions and
other public inquiries in their work capacity. Moreover, they were usually
required to give
evidence of activities or duties undertaken in the usual course
of their employment. It followed, therefore, that the legal and other
incurred by such witnesses should be
reimbursed.
9.38 The CPSU submitted that, in certain circumstances, the individual
interests of a particular public servant and the employing
agency may differ and
gave various examples from previous inquiries. In these circumstances, the CPSU
maintained that the Australian
Government should meet the legal and non-legal
expenses of public servants, including the provision of independent legal
representation
if requested.
9.39 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) noted that in
previous inquiries involving matters within its portfolio,
it had facilitated
access to legal advice for participating officers and made them aware of other
support services that were available,
such as staff counselling. In the Clarke
Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef (Clarke Inquiry), DIAC engaged
lawyers to assist
in the preparation of statements for its officers and attend
interviews with the Inquiry. DIAC acknowledged, however, that there
be a tension where legal representation is provided by the Department for a
witness acting in their official capacity
and where legal representation is
required for a witness in their private capacity’. DIAC recommended that
representation could
be provided by the same lawyers who represent the relevant
department ‘unless and until a conflict of interest arises or is
9.40 DIAC also noted that prior to the commencement of the Clarke Inquiry,
relevant departmental officers were advised of the assistance
available to them
under Appendix E (Assistance to Commonwealth employees for legal
proceedings) of the
Legal Services Directions
. DIAC recommended, as a
general position, that legal and non-legal advice and representation should be
readily available to junior
and inexperienced officers, especially if witness
protections were not to be made available. DIAC recommended that the assistance
provisions in Appendix E of the
Legal Services Directions
continue to
apply to Commonwealth officers appearing before any
9.41 In the ALRC’s view, it is appropriate that provision be made for
the Australian Government to fund certain costs incurred
by witnesses and other
inquiry participants in Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. The ALRC has
considered various options
based on its examination of current practice at the
federal level and in other jurisdictions, together with the views expressed by
stakeholders in consultations and submissions. The ALRC notes that the majority
of stakeholders were in favour of the Australian
Government funding legal and
related costs of witnesses and other inquiry participants.
9.42 As the ALRC has not identified a need for a permanent government body to
provide legal and other assistance to inquiry participants,
it does not propose
the establishment of such a body. Public inquiries have been appointed
sporadically in the past, indicating that
the workload of a permanent body may
be variable and may not be a cost-effective method of delivering legal and other
participants.
9.43 In particular, the ALRC does not envisage that Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries at the federal level will be appointed
frequently enough to
provide a workload for a permanent body comparable to that of the LRO, which
provides assistance in relation
to two permanent commissions in NSW. If a
permanent body were to be established, one option would be for it to deliver
assistance,
not only in the context of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries,
but also in relation to inquiries conducted by other federal
investigatory and
regulatory bodies, such as the Australian Crime Commission, the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
and the Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity.
9.44 A variant of the legal representation office model, would be for the
Australian Government to maintain and fund a panel of private
practitioners to whom witnesses and inquiry participants could be referred for
independent legal advice and representation.
There was no widespread support
amongst stakeholders for such an approach. While there was no widespread support
amongst stakeholders
for such an approach, there was overall support for the
current arrangements, whereby the responsible department (presently the AGD)
establishes and administers ad hoc financial assistance schemes for individual
Royal Commissions and certain other inquiries. Some
stakeholders were of the
view, however, that such schemes should have statutory force.
9.45 In the ALRC’s view, it is appropriate that issues relating to a
person’s participation in an inquiry should be determined
members, while issues relating to a person’s entitlement to
government-funded legal assistance should be determined
by the Australian
Government. It is desirable to maintain a separation between the determination
of payments to inquiry participants—which
should be overseen by the AGD as
the responsible department—and substantive matters related to the conduct
of the inquiry—which
are the responsibility of the inquiry members. This
approach may also reduce the possibility that a funding decision made by an
member will be subject to legal challenge—for example, on the
basis that it amounts to bias or apprehended bias.
9.46 The ALRC proposes that provisions modelled on the non-statutory
financial assistance schemes that have been administered by the
AGD in past
inquiries be incorporated into the proposed
Inquiries Act
. Specifically,
the proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower the Attorney-General to
determine that the costs of legal and related assistance of witnesses and other
inquiry participants
should, or should not, be met by the Australian Government
in whole or in part. Applications for such assistance and determinations
be made at any stage of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry. The proposed
Inquiries Act
should set out factors to be considered by the
Attorney-General in making such a recommendation, including:
whether the person has a valid reason to seek legal
representation;
whether it would cause hardship or injustice for the person to bear
the costs of legal representation or appear without legal representation;
the nature and possible effect of any allegations made about the
whether the person could be the subject of adverse findings;
the nature and significance of the contribution that the person
will, or is likely to, make to the inquiry.
9.47 The ALRC notes
that assistance is currently available to public officials and ministerial staff
in accordance with Appendix E
Legal Services Directions
ALRC’s view, it is appropriate that legal assistance normally be approved
for employees in relation to their involvement
in Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries if it relates to their employment. If the employing agency determines,
however, that
it is not ‘in the interests of the Commonwealth’ to
approve such expenditure, it would still be open to the employee
to apply to the
Attorney-General for financial assistance in accordance with the statutory
scheme proposed above.
9.48 The ALRC notes that payments under financial assistance schemes are
currently subject to prescribed limits and may only cover
a proportion of the
costs of an individual’s legal representation. Under the proposed
statutory scheme, it would be open to
the Attorney-General to publish guidelines
relating to the manner in which applications will be determined and the amounts
and conditions
of any such financial assistance.
9.49 In relation to the costs of production, the proposed
should provide that any person, company or other organisation required
to produce documents or other things in compliance with a
notice issued by a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry, be paid a sum sufficient to meet their
reasonable expenses. As the scale
of costs in the
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth) does not presently prescribe any amount for expenses of this nature,
appropriate amounts should be fixed at the commencement
of an inquiry by the
Attorney-General. This proposal differs slightly from the equivalent provision
Royal Commissions Act
in that it vests the
Attorney-General, rather than the inquiry, with the power to decide the amounts
to be paid. Again, in the ALRC’s
view, this maintains a desirable
separation between the determination and payment of the costs of inquiry
participants, and substantive
matters related to the conduct of the inquiry.
9.50 In relation to the costs of attendance and appearance before an inquiry,
such as travel and accommodation expenses and other
allowances, the proposed
Inquiries Act
should incorporate provisions equivalent to those in the
Royal Commissions Act
, which provide for witnesses to be paid expenses in
accordance with the scale of costs in the
High Court Rules
. The AGD could
administer claims for such expenses as part of its administrative support role;
however, if such claims are to be
processed and paid by the inquiry itself, this
should be reflected in its budget allocation.
9.51 The ALRC recognises that in some circumstances witnesses and inquiry
participants in Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
may require other types
of assistance, such as counselling or referrals to other government or social
The ALRC has not
identified any need for the funding of such assistance by the Australian
Government to be legislatively mandated.
Under the proposed
, it would be open to inquiry members to determine that specialist
assistance, such as counselling or witness support, is required
and for the
costs of that assistance to be met from the inquiry’s own budget.
Proposal 9–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
the Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department to determine, at
any stage of a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry, that the costs of legal and
related assistance to witnesses and other inquiry participants should, or should
be met by the Australian Government in whole or in part. The factors to be
considered by the Attorney-General’s Department
in making such a
recommendation should include:
(a) whether the person has a valid reason to seek legal representation;
(b) whether it would cause hardship or injustice for the person to bear the
costs of legal representation or appear without legal
representation;
(c) the nature and possible effect of any allegations made about the
(d) whether the person could be the subject of adverse findings; and
(e) the nature and significance of the contribution that the person will,
or is likely to, make to the inquiry.
Proposal 9–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that individuals and organisations are to be paid a sum sufficient to meet their
reasonable expenses for complying
with notices to produce documents or other
things. The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department may, at
of the inquiry, determine the amount to be paid.
Proposal 9–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that individuals required to attend or appear before Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries are to be paid expenses
in accordance with the
Other inquiry
9.52 The costs of inquiry members, legal practitioners assisting and inquiry
staff, constitute a significant proportion of the overall
costs of an inquiry.
In this section, the ALRC examines inquiry legal costs, including those incurred
by legal counsel (counsel assisting
the inquiry) and solicitors (solicitors
assisting the inquiry), and the costs of inquiry members.
9.53 The section also examines the various ways in which inquiry members,
legal practitioners assisting and inquiry staff may be engaged
and remunerated.
Generally, the terms of engagement are negotiated by the AGD at the outset of
the inquiry, while the actual payment
of those costs is allocated from the
inquiry’s own budget.
inquiry may then be responsible for recruiting and engaging other inquiry staff.
Inquiry legal
9.54 An inquiry’s legal costs can be a significant expense. For
example, in the Building Royal Commission, the costs for ‘legal
auditing’ were about $23.33 million of the approximate final amount of
$76.68 million.
figure does not include travel and accommodation costs for the inquiry’s
legal team.
9.55 Currently, legal practitioners assisting an inquiry may be appointed
formally by the Attorney-General under
Royal Commissions
. The definition of ‘legal practitioner’ is not confined to
counsel, as the definition in the Act includes a barrister,
a solicitor, a
barrister and solicitor, or a legal practitioner, of the High Court or of the
Supreme Court of a state or
As a matter of
practice, however, it is usual for counsel assisting to be formally appointed
Royal Commissions Act
and for a firm of solicitors
then to be engaged to instruct counsel and assist the
Counsel assisting
9.56 In most Royal Commissions and some Official Inquiries it may be
necessary for inquiry members to secure the assistance of suitably
competent and expert counsel—especially if the subject matter of the
inquiry is likely to require examination of witnesses
at formal hearings. The
engagement of counsel needs to be balanced, however, against the considerable
costs of retaining members
of the private bar to assist inquiries, often for
extended periods of time.
9.57 The Australian Government policy relating to the engagement of counsel
is set out in Appendix D of the
Legal Services Directions.
In this context, ‘litigation’ is defined to include
‘proceedings before courts, tribunals, inquiries ... and the
preparation
for such proceedings’.
Appendix D is also expressed as applying to ‘briefs to appear before
courts, tribunals and inquiries’. While it is not
entirely clear whether
‘inquiries’ in this context extends to Royal Commissions and other
public inquiries, it would
be surprising if that were not the case, especially
in the absence of an express statement to that effect in the
Legal Services
9.58 In engaging counsel, the Australian Government relies on its position as
a major purchaser of legal services in agreeing on the
level of fees payable to
While there is no
generally applicable fee scale, counsel must have an approved rate for
performing Commonwealth legal work, which
is determined by the Office of Legal
Services Coordination in the AGD. There are caps on daily rates for senior
counsel (at the time
of writing $2,400 inclusive of GST) and for junior counsel
(at the time of writing $1,600 inclusive of GST), which cannot be exceeded
without the approval of the Attorney-General.
9.59 As noted above, in the
case of Royal Commissions and other public inquiries, counsel assisting are
engaged by the Commonwealth
and daily rates are ordinarily negotiated between
individual counsel and the AGD. There is no fee scale for Royal Commissions or
public inquiries such as those that apply to legal practitioners undertaking
legal aid work in New South
9.60 In the Building Royal Commission, rates were paid ‘in accordance
with the policy on counsel fees approved by the Attorney-General
engagement of counsel by the
Commonwealth’.
in the AWB Inquiry, terms of engagement for counsel assisting were negotiated
between counsel and the AGD, in accordance
with the Australian Government fee
structure for the engagement of
These rates were
subject to a daily cap.
rates and the daily cap have not been made public.
9.61 The Australian Government has had a longstanding practice of not
disclosing details of the daily fees paid to
A number of reasons for
this approach have been suggested. First, it is said that Commonwealth rates are
moderate compared to the
commercial fees that barristers might otherwise be paid
and there is some commercial sensitivity about that information being made
Secondly, it is thought
that publishing daily fees may disadvantage the Commonwealth when negotiating
rates with individual
Solicitors assisting
9.62 As noted above, solicitors assisting can be appointed by the
Attorney-General under
Royal Commissions Act
The practice,
however, has been for a firm to be contracted by the Australian Government to
provide legal services to Royal Commissions
and inquiries, including instructing
counsel assisting.
9.63 The manner in which solicitors assisting are engaged and remunerated
varies. In some Royal Commissions, the provision of solicitors’
has been reserved for, or ‘tied’ to, the AGS. For example, at the
outset of the AWB Inquiry, the Attorney-General
issued a legal services
direction that provided that legal work for solicitors assisting the inquiry was
to be provided by the AGS.
terms of engagement, which included hourly rates (subject to a daily cap) and,
where necessary, conditions for reunion travel
and accommodation in Sydney, were
negotiated between the Executive Officer of the Inquiry and the AGS. The
occasional need to engage
interstate lawyers added to the overall cost. Once
agreed, rates and conditions remained constant for the duration of the
9.64 In the Building Royal Commission, arrangements were negotiated with the
AGS and recorded in a Memorandum of Terms, which was
not disclosed publicly for
commercial-in-confidence
As part of this
agreement, the AGS dedicated legal staff to provide ‘collateral legal
services’—which generally
related to the provision of specialist
legal advice—and ‘related legal services’—which
generally involved
the receipt of Commission property in those states and
territories where the Commission did not have an office. The remuneration
for these services was based on hourly rates. Disbursements for carrying out
such services were charged at cost and there was
no charge for access to the AGS
library. The remuneration payable to legal staff was negotiated by the Secretary
to the Commission
after consulting the AGD, having regard to the skills and
experience of the solicitors in question and the amounts payable to counsel
assisting. Hourly rates of payment were determined for each category, with daily
fee caps for each. For staff required to operate
temporarily interstate, the
Commission met the costs of reunion
9.65 In relation to inquiries other than Royal Commissions, the practice of
engaging and remunerating solicitors has also varied.
For example, in the Clarke
Inquiry, there was no formal ‘tender process’, but a number of firms
were approached by the
AGD on behalf of the
A private law firm was
appointed to assist the inquiry, and the terms of the engagement were negotiated
by the Secretary to the inquiry,
at arms-length from the
Another example is the
Equine Influenza Inquiry. The AGS was appointed as solicitors assisting while
another private law firm was
engaged to represent the Commonwealth as a party to
the inquiry.
No information is
publicly available regarding the terms and conditions of engagement or whether
the appointments were subject to
a competitive tendering process.
Other jurisdictions
9.66 In New Zealand, the engagement of counsel assisting has varied from
inquiry to inquiry. Counsel assisting may be seconded from
the Crown Law Office,
but if in private practice, they are contracted on standard commercial
9.67 In its recent report,
A New Inquiries Act
, the NZLC noted the
significant impact of the legal team on the costs of the inquiry. To control
costs, the NZLC recommended that
the Solicitor-General be responsible for
setting terms and conditions of the appointment of counsel assisting and to
approve invoices,
within an overall budget and in consultation with the
responsible department.
recommendation, together with a requirement that the Solicitor-General consult
with the inquiry beforehand, is reflected in
cl 13(2)(c) of the Inquiries Bill
9.68 Methods for remunerating the legal team of a public inquiry were
discussed by the LRCI in its
Report on Public Inquiries,
Including Tribunals of Inquiry
The LRCI recommended
flexible arrangements in order to attract the most experienced applicants at
competitive prices.
Further, the
LRCI recommended that a tribunal of inquiry should be able to engage a
particular lawyer for remuneration agreed upon
9.69 Under the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK), the responsible minister has a
discretion to pay the expenses of counsel or solicitors assisting an inquiry and
there are no
legislative provisions prescribing the manner of their engagement
and remuneration.
9.70 As noted in Chapter 6, the selection of inquiry members is usually
undertaken relatively quickly, and often before the inquiry
is publicly
announced. The Australian Government currently has a broad discretion to appoint
inquiry members and the ALRC is not
proposing that criteria be prescribed in the
Inquiries Act
Equally, there is a measure of flexibility in the negotiation of terms of
engagement and remuneration of inquiry members. These terms
are usually the
subject of negotiations between the AGD and potential inquiry members when an
inquiry is being established.
9.71 There are no fixed rates for the remuneration and allowances that are to
be paid to Royal Commissioners and other inquiry members,
either in existing
government policies or in legislation. In contrast, many other statutory office
holders, including judicial officers,
are paid remuneration and allowances as
determined by the Remuneration
Submissions and
consultations
9.72 In its consultations, the ALRC heard a range of views about how legal
practitioners assisting an inquiry should be engaged and
remunerated.
Some noted the need
to retain flexibility in the arrangements so that those with the appropriate
skill and levels of experience could
be retained on relatively short notice. An
alternative view was that the government could simply set the fees and leave it
to individual
lawyers to decide whether or not to accept the appointment. It was
thought that there would always be counsel, even senior counsel,
accept such appointments if the subject matter of the inquiry raised interesting
issues or there was opportunity to enhance
one’s reputation.
9.73 Millar submitted that the existing arrangements worked well and seemed
to take account of prevailing market factors for the engagement
of lawyers. He
also noted that the fees paid to individual counsel were invariably published in
accordance with parliamentary and
other established
9.74 In contrast, Turnbull was in favour of a scale of fees being included in
legislation and queried whether negotiated fees could
be justified from the
public purse when effectively only ‘routine lawyering and advocacy’
were involved.
9.75 In relation to disclosure, the AGS submitted that it was not aware of
any clear case for greater disclosure than that which presently
occurs with the
government's spending on legal fees in the course of its ordinary business.
9.76 It is the ALRC’s view that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should not provide that the remuneration and allowances paid to inquiry members
be determined by the Remuneration Tribunal. The ALRC
has emphasised in its
proposals in Chapter 6, that the Australian Government requires a degree of
flexibility in appointing inquiry
members. If it cannot negotiate the engagement
and remuneration of inquiry members on a case-by-case basis, this may limit
and flexibility in the appointment of inquiry members that have the
requisite skills, knowledge or experience necessary to conduct
the particular
9.77 In order to obtain a determination from the Remuneration Tribunal, the
relevant government department must prepare a submission.
This would add another
step to the process of appointing inquiry members. It may not be practical for
the Tribunal to make a determination
on the remuneration and allowances that
should be paid to individual inquiry members within a short timeframe as the
Tribunal generally
meets once every two months (although there is capacity to
arrange out of session hearings). The ALRC considers that involving the
Remuneration Tribunal in the appointment process may result in unavoidable
delays and other practical difficulties that may impact
on the expeditious
establishment of the inquiry.
9.78 The ALRC has considered whether a scale of costs should be prescribed,
for example, in the
Royal Commissions Regulations 2001
(Cth) or other
inquiries legislation to fix the amount of legal costs payable to counsel and
solicitors assisting an inquiry. In
the ALRC’s view, such a scale would
not be workable, because the nature, length and subject matter of inquiries vary
It would be very difficult to formulate a scale of fees that could be
applied easily to the circumstances of different inquiries.
9.79 It would not be feasible simply to model a scale of fees for Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries on those used by courts,
because there may be
substantial differences between conducting litigation and the tasks undertaken
by legal practitioners assisting
an inquiry. In some inquiries, counsel
assisting may undertake tasks not usually performed by advocates in court
litigation—for
example, they may investigate matters relevant to the
inquiry and undertake research and analysis of documents well before hearings
9.80 It would also take considerable effort and resources to formulate and
update a fees scale for Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries. The frequency
with which inquiries are likely to occur would not appear to warrant such an
undertaking.
9.81 In the ALRC’s view, the current arrangements for negotiating legal
fees in Royal Commissions and inquiries are appropriate
and efficient. The AGD
(or other responsible department) should continue to take the lead role in
negotiating the terms of engagement
and remuneration for the legal team on a
commercially competitive basis. It is appropriate that the terms of engagement
reflect Australian
Government policy on the procurement of legal services and
the engagement of counsel, for example, Appendix D of the
Legal Services
9.82 In order to promote consistency and transparency, encourage competition
and ensure the efficient, effective and ethical use of
the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
should provide guidance on issues relating to the
engagement and remuneration of legal practitioners appointed to assist inquiries
established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
. For example, the fee
structure should take into account the nature of the work to be performed by
counsel and solicitors assisting
and the skills and level of experience of
individual lawyers. In some inquiries, especially where the subject matter is
scope, it may be appropriate for the fee structure to incorporate
daily rates, although these should ordinarily be subject to caps.
Alternatively,
if an inquiry is likely to be broad-ranging and involve extensive investigatory
work, it may be more appropriate for
caps to apply to particular stages or
events in the individual inquiry rather than a uniform cap on legal
9.83 It is appropriate for existing approved Commonwealth rates for
individual counsel to be used as a reference point in determining
the fees to be
paid to counsel assisting.
relevant factors may include the normal market rates of counsel, the volume of
guaranteed work provided during the inquiry,
and any long-term impact that the
engagement may have on an individual counsel’s private practice.
9.84 In Chapter 10, the ALRC proposes that summary information about the
costs of inquiries be made publicly available. This information
should include
details of legal costs, including fees and allowances, as separate items, paid
to legal practitioners assisting the
inquiry. These figures should include the
total amount paid to counsel assisting for the whole of the inquiry but need not
commercially sensitive information such as the daily rates or fee
structures of individual counsel or solicitors.
Proposal 9–4
The proposed
Inquiries Handbook
include guidance on the engagement and remuneration of legal practitioners
assisting an inquiry. These terms of engagement
and remuneration should, as far
as practicable, be negotiated on a commercially competitive basis. The
guidelines should set out
the factors that may be relevant in negotiating these
terms, for example:
(a) the nature of the work to be performed, having regard to the subject
matter and scope of the inquiry;
(b) the skills and level of experience of individual legal
practitioners;
(c) having regard to the subject matter and scope of the inquiry, the
appropriateness of applying:
(i) daily rates subject to fee caps; or
(ii) fee caps by reference to particular stages or events in the conduct of
an inquiry;
(d) the commercial rates of legal practitioners;
(e) the volume of guaranteed work provided during the inquiry;
(f) the impact that the engagement may have on a legal practitioner’s
usual practice; and
(g) any existing Australian Government policy on the procurement of legal
services and the engagement of counsel, for example, Appendix
Services Directions 2005
Method of funding
9.85 There is no permanent or standing appropriation to cover the costs of
Royal Commissions and public inquiries. Rather, funding
is allocated from the
Attorney-General’s portfolio budget. The AGD has responsibility for
administrative support for Royal
Commissions and certain other inquiries under
the current
Administrative Arrangements
9.86 As noted by Millar, Royal Commissions are usually appointed shortly
after the need arises with an expectation of early
commencement.
Unless the timing
is such that specific provision can be made in the annual
Appropriation
, either as part of the Budget or after Additional Estimates—which
occur in November of each year—the funding arrangements
are handled
through the standard budgetary process for urgent and unforeseen expenditure,
namely, an additional appropriation issued
under an Advance to the Finance
Minister (AFM).
This involves the Royal Commission and ... the Attorney-General’s
Department, preparing an initial budget. This budget is submitted
Department of Finance and Deregulation for assessment and to arrange approval by
the Finance Minister for funds to be available
from the AFM appropriation,
either as a final charge on the AFM or pending recovery from a subsequent
appropriation made in the Annual
Appropriation Acts. There is often a need to
seek approval to modify the budget once the Royal Commission has commenced
and the size of its task becomes clearer. The Commission’s
budget then appears in the Budget or Additional Estimates
documentation.
9.87 Generally, the majority of the budget allocation is administered by the
inquiry itself although some funds are administered by
the AGD. For example, the
Clarke Inquiry was funded under the budget appropriation of the AGD: $4.19
million was allocated to it
and of that amount, the inquiry itself administered
$3.84 million.
The balance of
the budget, which was administered by the AGD directly, was allocated to provide
financial assistance to members of
the public who were asked to provide
submissions or statements to the
All other costs
directly related to the inquiry were met from the inquiry’s own
9.88 In the United Kingdom, the minister responsible for an inquiry is
obliged to fund certain costs (witness costs and expenses incurred
the inquiry such as publication costs) and has a discretion to fund other types
of costs (legal costs of the
The minister is also
able to withdraw funding if he or she considers the inquiry is acting, or is
likely to act, outside its terms
9.89 Another method of funding inquiries is through a ‘standing
appropriation’ or ‘special appropriation’
in the proposed
Inquiries Act
. These terms refer to funds appropriated for a specified
purpose, for example to finance a particular project or programme. According
the Department of Finance and Deregulation, around 75% of government expenditure
is currently covered by special
appropriation.
appropriation bills often do not specify an amount or duration. Those providing
funds for an indefinite period are said to
give standing
appropriation.
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
(Tas) contains a
‘standing appropriation’, which means that some costs and expenses
of Commissions are payable out of
the Tasmanian Consolidated Fund without the
need for further appropriation. These are:
costs and expenses incurred in, or in connection with, the conduct
of an inquiry under the Act;
certain legal costs of witnesses;
certain allowances for witnesses; and
certain compensation to witnesses for loss of
option would be to introduce a standing appropriation to cover certain types of
inquiry costs. Professor Enid Campbell has
suggested the introduction of a
permanent appropriation to cover the expenses of witnesses in Royal
Commissions.
9.92 The use of standing appropriations and their significance from the
perspective of parliamentary accountability was examined by
the Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills (Senate Committee) in its
Report of 2005
Committee noted an earlier Audit Report prepared by the Australian National
Audit Office, which found that widespread shortcomings
existed in the financial
management and disclosure of special
appropriations.
Committee concluded that the use of standing appropriations limited
accountability and scrutiny by denying Parliament
the opportunity to approve
expenditure through the annual appropriations
To that end, the
Senate Committee determined that it would look at explanatory memorandums for an
explanation of the reasons for
the inclusion of standing appropriations in bills
and, where appropriate, seek an explanation from the responsible minister to
‘the exclusion of the appropriation from subsequent parliamentary
scrutiny and renewal through the ordinary appropriations
Submissions and
consultations
9.93 In IP 35, the ALRC sought stakeholder views on how Royal Commissions and
other inquiries should be funded—for example,
whether a standing
appropriation was a feasible
9.94 Liberty Victoria observed that the funding and administration of public
inquiries was absolutely critical to their success and
suggested that it should
be legislatively supported. In relation to the funding, it submitted that:
One method of limiting the effectiveness of a public inquiry is to restrict its
access to funds. An inquiry which doesn’t have
the funds to attend or
interview witnesses may be unable to obtain the information it needs. In extreme
cases, an inquiry may be
unable to afford even basic office equipment and
services. Unfortunately this can be exploited by governments to ‘close
politically unpopular inquiries. The use of a standing appropriation
is on the face of it tempting, but not without its own pitfalls.
Not only does
it run the risk of wasting taxpayer dollars by sitting idle, but its
administration (in particular, the allocation
of funds) would be subject to the
same political pressures.
9.95 Liberty Victoria suggested a number of alternatives for the funding of
public inquiries such as:
a standing appropriation, which was administered independently or
which had its funds allocated to a particular inquiry by Parliament;
Parliament allocating the funds directly at the time of the
allocating funding based upon an independent auditor’s
estimate of the funds required for an inquiry.
9.96 In his
submission, Millar doubted that the budget of a Royal Commission or other public
inquiry would meet the normal criteria
for a standing appropriation and it would
not seem to improve the transparency of the current budget
arrangements.
9.97 The ALRC is not persuaded that any changes are required to the current
methods of appropriating funds for inquiries. Clearly,
inquiries require
adequate funding to carry out their terms of reference, however the ALRC has not
identified any particular problems
in the current arrangements. Inquiries can be
adequately funded through the standard annual appropriations process.
Alternatively,
if an inquiry is not foreseen at the time of the annual
Appropriation Acts,
there is an established process in place for the
Minister for Finance and Deregulation to approve an AFM appropriation.
9.98 In the ALRC’s view, it is not appropriate for Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries to be funded under a special appropriation
Inquiries Act.
While a special appropriation may be suitable
where the Government requires a detailed legislative scheme relating to funds,
important from the perspective of independence that an inquiry maintains
control over the administration of its budget and not be
subject to detailed
conditions attached to the expenditure of funds.
9.99 On the other hand, it is the ALRC’s view that the funding of
inquiries cannot remain open-ended and must be financially
accountable.
Accordingly, the ALRC does not propose that the
Inquiries Act
incorporate
a standing appropriation as this would diminish the scope for parliamentary
control over public expenditure on inquiries.
9.100 For the above reasons, the ALRC does not propose that Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries be funded through a standing
or special appropriation. It
is appropriate that funding continue to be allocated from the budget of the
Attorney-General’s
portfolio, consistent with the AGD’s existing
administrative responsibility for Royal Commissions and certain other public
Final Report of the Royal
Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 22,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Ibid, Questions 6–3(b)
and 6–3(c).
the Royal Commission on Tribunals of Inquiry
(1966), 16. The Salmon
Principles are discussed in more detail in Ch
S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions and
Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
(2001), 192. The requirements of procedural
fairness in the context of inquiries is discussed in Ch
For example, the Australian
Government,
Financial Assistance for Legal and Related Costs before the
Clarke Inquiry—Guidelines
Australian Government,
Guidelines for Financial Assistance for Legal and Related Costs before the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to
the UN Oil-for-Food
guidelines also set out the circumstances in which legal costs would not be
paid, for example, where the applicant may
recover these costs under an
insurance policy or similar indemnity
arrangement.
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
Australian Crime Commission Act
New South Wales Crime Commission Act 1985
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
Crime and Misconduct Act 2001
S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions
and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
New South Wales Government,
Legal Representation Office
http://www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lro
at 4 August 2009.
Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service—Final
(1997), vol 3, A–9.
Royal Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Legal Services
are a set of binding rules that apply to Australian Government
agencies in relation to the provision of legal services and the conduct
litigation.
Explanatory Notes,
Inquiries Act 2005 (UK).
(UK) rr 19-34.
Commissions of Investigation Act
(Ireland) s
Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
73 (2005), 12–13.
Tribunals of
Inquiry Bill 2005 (Ireland) cl 50(1) (as amended by the Select Committee on
Justice, Equality, Defence and Women’s
Rights). The Committee completed
its consideration of the Bill on 2 April 2009 and it is presently awaiting
the Fourth (Report) Stage
in the House of Deputies (Dáil
New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) cl
Royal Commissions
Regulations 2001
Ibid reg 7(4). The
regulation also provides that, in the application of the
High Court Scale
to a witness, the Commission has, and may exercise, all the powers and functions
of the taxing officer under that scale: ibid
Final Report
of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
Ibid, vol 2,
The provision of information and
assistance concerning inquiry procedures and issues relating to Indigenous
peoples, are discussed
Commission of Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act
(SA) s 8(3).
E Mullighan,
Children in State Care Commission of Inquiry—Allegations of Sexual
Abuse and Death from Criminal Conduct
I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
6 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Department of Immigration and
Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
The ALRC discusses issues
relating to a permanent inquiry body in Ch 5.
Legal representation and other
assistance for participants appearing before these bodies, however, are outside
the Terms of Reference
of this Inquiry.
The assistance that may be required by Indigenous witnesses is discussed in Ch
The respective roles and criteria
for appointment of inquiry members and staff, including legal practitioners
assisting, are addressed
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
(2003), vol 22, 45. These figures have been adjusted to
reflect 2008 values.
vol 22, 45.
Royal Commissions
Government Solicitor,
Legal Services Directions
(Cth) [15].
Ibid, Appendix
For example, Legal Aid New
South Wales publishes fee scales for state and Commonwealth matters on its
website <www.legalaid.nsw.gov.au>
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
vol 22, [23].
of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), Appendix 10, 127.
Ibid, Appendix 10, 129.
Commonwealth,
Official Committee
Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, 27
May 2008, 91
92. As noted in Ch 10, however, information about the
total fees paid to individual barristers often comes to light through Senate
Estimates hearings or in response to written questions on notice in
Parliament.
The role of solicitors
assisting and the procedure for their appointment is discussed in Ch
Report of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), Appendix 10, 125. Legal services directions are
issued by the Australian Government Attorney-General under the
Judiciary Act
s 55ZF(1)(b).
Report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to
the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), Appendix 10,
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
Appendix 22, 8
Commonwealth,
Committee Hansard,
Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs, 27 May 2008, 92, 131.
94; M Clarke,
The Report of the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed
(2008), 289.
I Callinan,
Equine Influenza: The August 2007 Outbreak in Australia—Report of the
Equine Influenza Inquiry
New Zealand Government Department of Internal Affairs,
Setting Up and
Running Commissions of Inquiry
New Zealand Law Commission,
New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
73 (2005), Ch 7.
Ibid, [7.50],
[7.58]–[7.59].
The appointment of inquiry
members is discussed in Ch 6.
Tribunal is established under the
Remuneration Tribunal Act 1973
and its role is to determine, report on and provide advice about remuneration,
including allowances and entitlements, for certain
public office holders within
its jurisdiction.
See Appendix 2 for a
List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
17 May 2009.
I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
resources in an ‘efficient, effective and ethical’ manner is
consistent with
Financial Management and Accountability Act
(Cth), which applies to Australian Government departments and their
In Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice
, ALRC 89 (2000), the ALRC recommended that, with respect to
assistance provided by legal aid commissions in legally aided, family
the federal Attorney-General’s Department, in consultation with legal aid
commissions, should develop new procedures
for assessing and imposing funding
limits. These should include ‘capping procedures directed at particular
stages or events
in the individual case’ rather than a uniform cap on
legal fees: Rec 45.
principle is consistent with the
Legal Services Directions 2005
Appendix D, [12].
Issues relating to
the administration of inquiries are discussed in Ch
17 May 2009
The Advance to the Finance Minister (AFM) is a provision in the annual
Appropriation Acts
which enables the Minister for Finance and
Deregulation (Finance Minister) to provide additional appropriation funding to
in the current year in which the AFM is issued. The Finance Minister
will only consider issuing an AFM if satisfied that there is
an urgent need for
expenditure that is either not provided for or has been insufficiently provided
for in the existing appropriations
of the agency: Department of Finance and
Deregulation,
Advance to the Finance Minister (AFM)
<www.finance.gov.au> at 2 June 2009.
17 May 2009.
The Report of the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
(2008), 292.
Australian Government,
Financial Assistance for Legal and Related Costs before the Clarke
Inquiry—Guidelines
These costs included salary and associated expenses, premises, office services
(including information technology), transcription
services, advertising, report
production and printing, hearings, interviews and the public forum: M Clarke,
The Report of the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
Inquiries Act
Ibid s 39(4),
Department of Finance and
Deregulation,
Appropriation Bills
<www.finance.gov.au> at 2 June
Commissions of Inquiry
H Coombs and others,
Commission on Australian Government Administration
(1976), Appendix 4K,
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Fourteenth Report of 2005—Accountability and Standing
Appropriations
(2005), 271.
Australian National Audit Office,
Financial Management of Special
Appropriations
, Audit Report No 15 2004–05 (2004),
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Fourteenth Report of 2005—Accountability and Standing
Appropriations
(2005), 271.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 6–4.
6 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
As discussed
in Ch 8, the ALRC is proposing that administrative responsibility for Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries be allocated
to a single Australian
Government department, presently the AGD. Issues relating to the jurisdiction of
inquiry members to award
costs are discussed in Ch 10.
10. Minimising Costs
Introduction
Sources of information about costs
Reports of Royal Commissions and public inquiries
Departmental resources
Parliamentary materials
Other jurisdictions
United Kingdom
New Zealand
Costs of public inquiries
Costs of Royal Commissions
Costs of other ad hoc public inquiries
Publication of budgets or expenses
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Role of inquiry members
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Other methods of minimising costs
10. Minimising Costs
Introduction
10.1 In this chapter, the ALRC examines the costs of previous Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries and discusses some of the
key sources of
information about these costs.
10.2 The costs of Royal Commissions and other public inquiries must be
balanced against the benefits of conducting such inquiries.
As noted in
Chapter 2, public inquiries have several functions, and their effectiveness
may be measured in many ways. In its
Report on Public Inquiries Including
Tribunals of Inquiry
, the Law Reform Commission of Ireland (LRCI) observed
that public inquiries have intangible benefits such as ‘assuaging public
disquiet’ and deterring ‘future negative
activities’.
10.3 As discussed in Chapter 5, in the submissions received in response to
the Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
(IP 35), the
majority of stakeholders expressed the view that Royal Commissions and other
public inquiries play an important role
in the Australian system of
government.
Stakeholders also
recognised, however, that such inquiries can be
10.4 Concern about the high costs of public inquiries, and public criticism
Government in considering
whether to establish such an inquiry. There are ways, however, to reduce the
costs of Royal Commissions
and other public inquiries. In this chapter, the ALRC
examines various methods for minimising the costs under the proposed new
framework for Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries.
of information about costs
10.5 In this section, the ALRC identifies some sources of information about
the costs of Royal Commissions and other public inquiries.
There is no
requirement in the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) for the Australian
Government to disclose information in relation to the costs associated with
individual Royal Commissions.
It is possible, however, to obtain information
relating to the costs of individual inquiries from a range of public
Reports of Royal Commissions and public
10.6 In recent times, it has been customary for Royal Commission reports to
include some, albeit limited, information about the budget
and costs of the
inquiry. For example, information relating to the budget and expenditure of the
Inquiry into Certain Australian
Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food
Programme (2006) (AWB Inquiry) was set out in the final
This included information
allocation following the extension
of the reporting date. A lump sum figure,
reflecting total expenditure as at the reporting date, was also included in the
This figure would not have
been ‘final’ in the sense that it may not have included publication
and wind-up costs incurred
after the reporting date.
Report of the HIH Royal Commission
also contained information
Commission.
Initial funding was
provided from the resources of the then Department of Finance and Administration
(which was later reimbursed
from the Commission’s budget). Subsequently,
the Commission was allocated its own budget, which was increased when the
date was extended. No increase was sought for a later extension of the
reporting date. The report noted that the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) received separate funding to
administer financial assistance for the legal and related
costs of people
appearing before the Royal Commission and applications for assistance were dealt
with by the department, not the
Commission.
Report of the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed
(Clarke Inquiry) contained a brief statement outlining the budget of
the Inquiry.
The Clarke Inquiry was
funded under the budget appropriation of the AGD. The inquiry administered most
of the budget and met all
costs directly related to the inquiry such as salary
and associated expenses, premises, office services, information technology,
transcription services, advertising, report production and printing, hearings,
interviews and a public forum. The balance of the
inquiry’s budget was
administered by the AGD, primarily for the provision of financial assistance to
members of the public
who were asked to provide submissions or statements to the
10.9 In contrast, neither the
Report of the Inquiry into the Centenary
House Lease
Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the
Leasing by the Commonwealth of Accommodation in Centenary House,
any information regarding the budget or expenditure of the
Further, no mention was
made of budget or costs in the reports of the Equine Influenza Inquiry (2008) or
the Inquiry into the Circumstances
of the Immigration Detention of Cornelia Rau
10.10 As can be seen from the above examples, whether information about the
budget of Royal Commissions and public inquiries is published
in the final
report appears to be a matter left to the discretion of the chairperson of the
inquiry with practice varying from inquiry
to inquiry. With the exception of the
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
only general
information about the overall budget and expenditure has been made available in
reports and the ALRC has not identified
any examples of a breakdown of costs
being provided in the report.
Departmental resources
10.11 The AGD, which is responsible for administrative support for Royal
Commissions and certain other inquiries under the Commonwealth
Administrative
Arrangements Order
, may publish information relating to the amounts
allocated to individual Royal Commissions and other inquiries in its Portfolio
Statements, Additional Estimates Statements and Annual Reports. The
figures are estimates only and show the total amount appropriated
inquiry without any breakdown of costs.
10.12 Lists of contracts published by Australian Government departments are
another source of information about amounts paid to contractors
provide legal and other services to Royal Commissions and inquiries. Departments
and agencies are required, under the
Senate Order on Departmental and Agency
Contracts (Senate Order), to publish a list of contracts entered into, which
provide for
payment of $100,000 or
The list must indicate,
among other things, the: name of the contractor; amount to be paid under the
contract; subject matter of
the contract; and commencement and duration of the
contract. The Senate Order also requires the list of contracts to be placed on
the internet with access provided through the department or agency’s
10.13 As the Senate Order only requires that access be provided to lists for
the previous 12-month reporting period, historical lists
of contracts may not be
accessible on departmental websites. Further, the description of the subject
matter of the contract may be
insufficient to identify the services as having
been provided to a particular Royal Commission or other inquiry.
Parliamentary materials
10.14 More specific information about the costs of individual Royal
Commissions and other inquiries may become public through evidence
estimates hearings before the
and in answers to
questions in Parliament. This has occurred in relation to most Royal Commissions
and some public inquiries in recent
times, as discussed below.
10.15 The costs incurred by the Australian Government in relation to the
appointment and conduct of the Commission of Inquiry into
the Relations between
the CAA and Seaview Air (1996) were the subject of questions in the House of
Representatives. The responsible
minster provided a detailed breakdown of the
total cost of the inquiry, the legal costs met by the Commonwealth in respect of
of the parties involved, sums paid to each of the participating legal firms
and costs of a non-legal
10.16 The expenditure of the Royal Commission into the Building and
Construction Industry (2003) (Building Royal Commission) was subject
and close scrutiny in the Senate estimates process. The executive officers from
the Royal Commission and officials from
the AGD were called to answer questions
at estimates hearings on numerous occasions. At the conclusion of the
Commission, a detailed
breakdown of expenditure was provided on behalf of the
Attorney-General in answer to a question in Parliament. The information included
a breakdown of amounts paid in fees and allowances to each of the thirteen
counsel engaged to assist the Commission and the total
expenditure on the
Commissioner’s accommodation, Comcar and travel
allowances.
10.17 Similarly, information relating to the total budgeted costs of the
Royal Commission to Inquire into the Centenary House Lease
(2004) was provided
in answer to a parliamentary question shortly before the Commissioner presented
his report. This included specific
amounts for the costs of advertisements,
office accommodation, information technology, media liaison services, printing,
assistance and legal
Likewise, the
Attorney-General provided information in answer to a question in Parliament,
regarding the total expenditure on the
AWB Inquiry—including total salary
and other remuneration paid to the Commissioner and counsel
10.18 More recently, officers from the AGD were called to give evidence
during estimates hearings before the Senate Standing Committee
on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs in relation to the appropriation for the Clarke
At the time of the
hearing, the inquiry had not yet concluded. Further information regarding the
final breakdown and total expenditure
has come to light through parliamentary
(and, as noted above,
limited information was included in the report of the Inquiry).
10.19 Inquiries legislation in other Australian jurisdictions does not
contain provisions for the formal disclosure of costs associated
inquiry. The requirements in comparable overseas jurisdictions are discussed
United Kingdom
10.20 Prior to the enactment of the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK), there was
no statutory obligation to publish information about the costs of an inquiry,
although it had become the practice
In its examination of the
use of investigatory inquiries by government, the House of Commons Public
Administration Select Committee
recommended that the responsible minister should
announce a broad budget figure fairly early on at the start of an inquiry. Any
over the announced limits would then need to be explained publicly at
the end of the inquiry when final costs were
10.21 There is now a legislative requirement in s 39(6) of the
(UK) that the responsible minister must, within a reasonable time after
the end of an inquiry, publish the total amount of what has
been paid (or
remains liable to be paid) for inquiry expenses.
10.22 The first inquiry established wholly under the
Inquiries Act
(UK)—the Public Inquiry into the September 2005 Outbreak of E.coli O157 in
South Wales
did not include any information about the budget or
costs of the inquiry in the final
At the conclusion of the
inquiry, however, information about legal fees, travel, hotel accommodation and
expenses of counsel assisting
was set out in an ‘Expenditure
Statement’ published on the inquiry’s
10.23 The Alberta Law Reform Institute recommended in 1992 that detailed
estimates of the cost of a public inquiry should be prepared
when the inquiry is
established or as soon thereafter as is practicable. The Institute recommended
that estimates be tabled and published
in the government gazette at the time of
approval and that the same procedures apply to any changes in the estimates that
were needed
from time to time.
This recommendation has not been adopted in the
Public Inquiries Act 2000
RSA c P-39 (Alberta). Nor does its federal equivalent—the
RS c I-11 (Canada)—contain any formal requirements for the
disclosure of the costs of public inquiries.
New Zealand
10.24 There is no requirement under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
(NZ) for the disclosure of the costs of public inquiries either at the
time of their establishment or following their conclusion.
The Department of
Internal Affairs, which administers most public inquiries in New Zealand,
receives an approved budgeted amount
Accordingly,
information about the costs of a specific inquiry could be ascertained through
an examination of the budget documentation
for that Department. The Inquiries
Bill 2008 (NZ), which is currently before the New Zealand Parliament, does not
presently contain
any requirements for the disclosure of inquiry budgets or
10.25 Under the
Commissions of Investigation Act 2004
(Ireland), the
minister responsible for the operation of the commission must ensure that as
soon as possible after the terms of reference
are set, an accompanying statement
is prepared containing an estimate of the costs of the commission and the length
of time it will
take. This must be published, as soon as possible after the
terms of reference are set, in the official Irish gazette and such other
publications as the minister considers
appropriate.
Following the
establishment of the first Commission under the
Commissions of Investigation
in April 2005—which examined the Garda investigation into the
Dublin and Monaghan bombings of 1974—a notice published
in the gazette
estimated legal fees, salaries and other administrative costs would total
€604,880 for a six month
10.26 In its present form, the Tribunals of Inquiry Bill 2005 (Ireland)
requires a tribunal, in consultation with the responsible
minister, to prepare a
statement containing, among other things, an estimate of all the costs
(including third party legal costs)
likely to be incurred by the inquiry. The
statement must be prepared within a specified timeframe following the
appointment of the
tribunal and laid before Parliament by the responsible
minister ‘as soon as may be after it has been
Further, when a
tribunal of inquiry submits a final or interim report to the responsible
minister, it must also provide a financial
statement, which is then laid before
Parliament.
The financial
statement must specify ‘all known costs incurred in consequence of the
inquiry’ including, as separate
the tribunal’s legal costs (excluding third party legal
the tribunal’s administrative costs; and
third party legal
of public inquiries
10.27 In this section, the ALRC provides details about the costs incurred by
previous Royal Commissions and inquiries. The ALRC has
undertaken further
research and analysis of the costs of previous Royal Commissions and public
inquiries, building on the estimates
provided in IP
As noted above, there are a
number of publicly available sources of information, including budget
documentation, annual reports and
parliamentary materials. Where possible,
actual figures have been used but in some instances only estimates are publicly
The figures presented in Tables 10.1 and 10.2 have been adjusted to
2008 dollars using the Reserve Bank of Australia’s Annual
Calculator.
Costs of Royal
Commissions
10.28 Justice Ronald Sackville describes the factors that contribute to the
high costs of Royal Commissions:
Investigations into factual matters, especially alleged impropriety or
misconduct, tend to be time-consuming and to require the services
of highly paid
professionals. The investigative techniques utilised are often elaborate,
especially where the conduct under investigation
is clandestine in nature. The
cost of hearings at which practising lawyers appear to assist the Commissions
and to represent interested
parties can be very substantial indeed. Moreover, a
Royal Commission incurs start-up costs that an existing agency can usually
10.29 The following table provides an indication of the estimated costs of
recent Royal Commissions.
Table 10.1: Estimated Cost of Selected Recent Royal Commissions
Name of Royal Commission
Estimated cost (adjusted for inflation)
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-For-Food Programme
10 November 2005– 24 November 2006
$10,539,635
Royal Commission to Inquire into the Centenary House Lease
24 June 2004– 6 December 2004
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
29 August 2001– 24 February 2003
$76,693,726
HIH Royal Commission
29 August 2001– 4 April 2003
$45,331,958
Commission of Inquiry into the Relations between the CAA and Seaview Air
25 October 1994– 9 October 1996
$11,224,677
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
16 October 1987– 9 May 1991
$50,298,709
of other ad hoc public inquiries
10.30 Other forms of
inquiry are generally less costly than most Royal Commissions. This may be
because most forms of inquiry other
than Royal Commissions conducted in
Australia do not have the same coercive information-gathering powers as Royal
Commissions, and
often do not hold their hearings in public. This may reduce the
duration of the inquiry and the legal costs associated with an inquiry.
other hand, the lack of information-gathering powers arguably may make inquiry
findings less comprehensive.
10.31 The following table provides an indication of the estimated costs of
recent non-Royal Commission public inquiries.
Table 10.2: Estimated Cost of Selected Recent non-Royal
Commissions
Name of Public Inquiry
Estimated cost (adjusted for inflation)
Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
13 March 2008– 21 November 2008
Equine Influenza Inquiry
25 September 2007– 12 June 2008
Fuel Tax Inquiry
8 July 2001– 15 March 2002
Independent Review of Energy Market Directions
September 2001– November 2002
Commission of Inquiry into the Lemonthyme and Southern Forests
8 May 1987– 6 May 1988
Publication
of budgets or expenses
10.32 There is no requirement in the
Royal Commissions Act
Australian Government, Royal Commission or other public inquiry to produce
information or reports on the predicted, ongoing
or final cost of an inquiry.
Some Royal Commissions, as outlined above, have made available some information
released as a result of the
Some estimates of costs
are also available in budgets prepared by Australian Government
departments.
To date, however,
much of the information in the public domain about actual ongoing or final costs
of Royal Commissions and other
public inquiries has been made available in
Senate Budget Estimates Committee hearings or upon questioning in Parliament of
members. In contrast, Australian Government agencies, or permanent
bodies established by statute, generally are required to provide
detailed annual
reports with information about actual revenue and
10.33 A requirement for Royal Commissions or other public inquiries to
publish budgets or information about costs would provide greater
transparency
and focus attention on the costs associated with the inquiry and the need to
ensure efficiency.
requirement also would be in line with public accountability mechanisms. On the
other hand, it has been suggested by the LRCI
that the requirement to publish
ongoing budget figures may detract from the work of public
10.34 Professor Enid Campbell has criticised the suggested imposition of a
requirement for a detailed breakdown of expenses for a
Royal Commission, arguing
[t]his mode of financial administration is more appropriate to an on-going
organisation which is better able, in the light of experience,
to estimate its
expenditure fairly precisely. It is not appropriate to organisations whose life
rarely extends beyond two years.
10.35 An important question for the ALRC in this Inquiry is whether, in the
interests of openness, transparency and accountability
in the expenditure of
public funds, as well as promoting greater efficiency, the Australian Government
should be subject to more
formal reporting requirements with respect to Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries. In IP 35, the ALRC sought stakeholder
views on a number of issues relating to the costs of inquiries, including
whether the Australian Government should be required to
make publicly
more detailed information about legal fees of counsel and solicitors
at the outset of the Royal Commission or other public inquiry, the
proposed budget for the
during the Royal Commission or other public inquiry, interim reports
on costs associated with the
upon the completion of a Royal Commission or other public inquiry, a
breakdown of the costs of the
Submissions
and consultations
10.36 In consultations, stakeholders generally recognised that there was a
need for transparency in the expenditure of public funds
by inquiries. The
majority of stakeholders supported greater disclosure of the costs of individual
Royal Commissions and inquiries.
Some expressed the view, however, that it would
not be practical to require the Australian Government to publish details of the
of an inquiry at the time of establishment. This was because it was often
difficult for the government and inquiry members to predict
the total costs that
might be incurred until the inquiry was underway. It was suggested, therefore,
that any requirement relating
to the publication of budgets and expenses be
imposed at the conclusion of an
10.37 In relation to the financial accountability of inquiries, Liberty
Victoria submitted:
Like government, inquiries should be accountable for the funds they spend. In
practice this means that inquiries should have a budget
and be required to
provide a financial report at the end of the inquiry; including summaries for
funds spent on legal advice, administration,
witnesses, travel, etc. Although
Liberty does not oppose the disclosure of all costs, summary information should
suffice ...
Such financial accountability would not only increase public confidence, but
would also encourage inquiries to reduce costs and reflect
upon the expertise of
the inquiry administrator. The use of summary reporting would also avoid privacy
concerns except where a summary
category was specific to a single
10.38 The Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) supported
the introduction of requirements for the Australian Government
information about the proposed budget of an inquiry, interim reports on costs
and a breakdown of the costs upon completion
10.39 In contrast, Graham Millar observed that there are already
‘established parliamentary and other protocols for the publication
total payments to contractors, and the total of fees paid to individual lawyers
and law firms assisting Royal Commissions
are invariably published in accordance
with these protocols’.
10.40 Similarly, the Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) stated that it was
not aware of any clear case for greater disclosure than
that which presently
occurs with the government’s spending on legal fees in the course of its
ordinary business.
10.41 There are a number of existing sources of information about the costs
of individual Royal Commissions and public inquiries.
In the ALRC’s view,
however, these sources are not readily accessible to the general public.
Moreover, information often comes
to light in a piecemeal fashion. There is no
formal procedure for the disclosure of information about costs of completed
Royal Commissions
and inquiries. The extent of the information that is made
public often depends upon the political process—namely, whether
politicians
ask questions about the costs of individual inquiries in Parliament
or during estimates hearings. Although a substantial amount of
information has
come to light through these processes, practice has varied from inquiry to
inquiry and has been driven, to some degree,
by political factors.
10.42 It can be difficult to predict accurately how much a Royal Commission
or inquiry will cost at the outset, and factors that
can contribute
significantly to the costs—for example, the complexity of the issues, the
number of inquiry participants, the
need for public hearings and the
administrative and technological requirements of the inquiry—may not be
known until the inquiry
is underway. Experience has also shown that inquiries
frequently require extensions of their reporting date and, therefore, additional
budget allocations. For this reason, a requirement that the Australian
Government publish information about the budget of an inquiry
and provide
interim reports on costs may not be particularly helpful. Further, if the costs
of the inquiry are constantly in the
public eye, this could negatively affect
the conduct of the inquiry and the impact of its findings and
recommendations.
10.43 Given the concern about the high costs of inquiries, and the difficulty
in accessing existing sources of information about those
costs, the ALRC is of
the view that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should require the Australian
Government to publish summary information about the costs of completed Royal
Commissions and Official
Inquiries within a reasonable time of the receipt of
the final report. Ideally, this could be done in an expenditure statement
on the inquiry’s website. The statement should include a
breakdown of the budget and expenditure of the inquiry. At a minimum,
information should be provided for the following, as separate amounts:
fees and allowances paid to the head of the inquiry;
fees and allowances paid to counsel assisting;
fees and allowances paid to solicitors assisting;
financial assistance provided to witnesses and other participants
for legal and non-legal costs;
staff costs;
information technology and communication costs;
office accommodation; and
other administrative and operational
expenditure.
10.44 It would be appropriate for information on the
above matters, and an appropriate timeframe for disclosure, to be included in
the proposed
Inquiries Handbook.
Proposal 10–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that the Australian Government publish summary information about the costs of
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
within a reasonable time of the receipt
of the final report.
Role of inquiry
10.45 One way to minimise inquiry costs may be to require inquiry members to
monitor or control costs associated with the inquiry.
Commission of
Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
for example, the Commissioner was required to ‘seek to adopt procedures
that will facilitate a prompt, cost-effective
and thorough investigation of any
matter relevant to the
In the Interim
Report, Commissioner Mullighan stated that he had attempted to comply with this
requirement.
10.46 In the United Kingdom, the
Inquiries Act
(UK) provides that the
chair of an inquiry must have regard to the need to avoid unnecessary cost
(whether to public funds or to witnesses
or others) in making decisions as to
the procedure or conduct of an
Statutory rules made
Inquiries Act
include evidentiary and procedural rules that
further ‘assist the chairman in controlling oral procedures and prevent
and costly cross-examination
procedures’.
10.47 Similarly, under the Tribunals of Inquiry Bill 2005 (Ireland),
tribunals of inquiry would be required to perform their functions
in a manner
that is ‘efficient, effective and
expeditious’.
further provides that a ‘tribunal shall not inquire into a relevant matter
unless it is satisfied that the cost and
duration of the inquiry into the
relevant matter are likely to be justified by the importance of the facts that
are likely to be
established in consequence of such
10.48 The Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) also requires that inquiry members, in
making a decision as to the procedure or conduct of an inquiry,
regard to the need to avoid unnecessary delay or cost in relation to public
funds, witnesses, or other persons participating
Submissions and
consultations
10.49 In IP 35, the ALRC sought views on the role inquiry members should play
in monitoring and controlling inquiry expenditure, including
whether such an
obligation should be required by legislation, and the nature and scope of such a
requirement.
10.50 In consultations, some stakeholders observed that inquiry members were
not always closely involved in matters pertaining to
the budget and day-to-day
expenditure of the inquiry. As their primary role was to investigate and report
on the terms of reference
of the inquiry, inquiry members may not possess skills
and experience in financial management and administration. As such, the practice
had been for the budget and expenditure of inquiries to be overseen by the
executive officer or secretary of the inquiry, with input
from inquiry members
as necessary.
10.51 Millar stated that past Royal Commissioners have taken an ‘active
interest in the budget and expenditure to the extent
that the budget is adequate
to fulfil the terms of reference and that expenditure represents value for
money’. As Commissioners
were responsible for the strategic management of
the inquiry process, Millar submitted that the day-to-day management of the
budget and expenditure was best left to the senior support
10.52 In the ALRC’s view, imposing a statutory obligation on inquiry
members to monitor and control expenditure would be of
limited use. Inquiries
are conducted within the confines of the budget allocated to them by the
executive government. Inquiries are
financially accountable in their expenditure
of public money through a variety of mechanisms. As discussed above, the ALRC
that the Australian Government be required to publish summary
information about the costs of individual
Such a requirement is
sufficient to improve transparency and public access to accurate information
It is not clear how imposing an additional
statutory obligation upon inquiry members personally to monitor expenditure
to any substantial benefit in terms of minimising the costs of
10.53 In any event, it would be difficult to measure an individual inquiry
member’s compliance with a statutory obligation of
this nature. It is also
difficult to see how such an obligation could be enforced, other than on
application for judicial review.
As the conduct of an inquiry involves the
expenditure of public funds, there may be a large number of people who may have
a sufficient
interest to seek judicial review remedies. In the past, however,
the courts have displayed some reluctance to allow individuals and
organisations
to challenge these types of spending
Challenges would also
result in substantial delays to the conduct of an inquiry.
award costs
10.54 In Australia, Royal Commissions and other public inquiries do not have
the power to order a person to pay costs. In some overseas
however, public inquiries have the power to order that a person pay the costs of
an inquiry or a witness appearing
before the inquiry. For example, in New
Zealand, a Commission of Inquiry:
may order that the whole or any portion of the costs of the inquiry or of any
party thereto shall be paid by any of the parties to
the inquiry, or by all or
any of the persons who have procured the inquiry to be
10.55 In its 2008 report,
A New Inquiries Act
, the New Zealand Law
Commission (NZLC) noted that the power to order the payment of costs rarely had
The NZLC was of the
view that individuals required to participate in inquiries should not bear
potential liability for costs related
to actions that took place before the
start of the inquiry. It also noted that, unlike in civil cases, cost orders in
inquiries ‘do
not serve the purposes of indemnifying successful litigants;
deterring frivolous actions; or encouraging
settlement’.
10.56 The NZLC, however, supported the retention of the power to order costs
in certain circumstances. It recommended that an inquiry
should be able to make
an order for the payment of costs if it is satisfied that the conduct of a
person has unduly lengthened, obstructed
or added undue cost to an
In such circumstances,
the inquiry member may order that costs be paid at a reasonable rate. Further,
some or all of the costs may
be paid to another participant in the
Such an order may be
made regardless of whether hearings have been held in the
These recommendations
are reflected in cl 29 of the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ), which empowers an
inquiry to make an award of costs.
Once filed in the appropriate court, an award
of costs becomes enforceable as a judgment of that
Submissions and
consultations
10.57 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether Royal Commissions or other public
inquiries should have the power to make an order for costs
incurred by the
inquiry or a witness appearing before the inquiry and, if so, in what
circumstances.
10.58 In Liberty Victoria’s view, a non‐judicial inquiry should
not have the power to make a costs order against a person,
but should be able to
make certain recommendations, or be able to apply to a court to have such an
order made.
Liberty Victoria
noted, however, that it may be appropriate for an inquiry to have the power to
order a government body or agency
to pay certain expenses—for example
witness expenses—but only where the power is clearly defined and there is
10.59 Millar submitted that empowering an inquiry to make costs orders could
have the effect that, in some circumstances, those who
are required to appear
before, or otherwise assist, an inquiry may alter their behaviour in a way that
is detrimental to the outcome
On the other hand,
Millar submitted that there may be advantages in a limited power to make an
order for costs against a person or
organisation who is obstructing an inquiry,
or adding to its costs, or the costs of a party before the
10.60 Similarly, Dr Ian Turnbull submitted that inquiries must be able to
make costs orders against participants who deliberately
delay or otherwise
hinder or interfere with the inquiry and such a power must be
reviewable.
10.61 The AGS submitted that as Royal Commissions and other ad hoc inquiries
impose an unusual burden on those participating in them,
any additional burden
by way of a costs penalty could be difficult to justify on public policy
10.62 The ALRC is not presently persuaded that empowering inquiry members to
make costs orders will enhance the efficiency or cost-effectiveness
Commissions and Official Inquiries. The ALRC does not, therefore, propose that a
power to award costs against an inquiry
participant be incorporated into the
Inquiries Act.
10.63 The primary function of inquiries is to investigate issues and provide
reports and recommendations to government. They do not
determine rights and
liabilities and their recommendations are not legally binding. In the
ALRC’s view, this does not sit comfortably
with the purposes of the costs
indemnity rule—namely, that an unsuccessful party will usually be ordered
to pay the legal costs
of the successful party. The purposes served by this rule
in civil litigation are not applicable in the context of
10.64 Another concern is that conferring a power to award costs upon an ad
hoc executive body, appointed for the purpose of reporting
and recommending
action to government, could be open to question on constitutional grounds. If a
power to award costs were incorporated
into the proposed
Inquiries Act,
provision would have to be made for the enforcement of costs orders by a
court in the exercise of its judicial
In the ALRC’s view,
this would be necessary to limit the possibility of constitutional challenge on
the ground that the proposed
Act purports to confer the judicial power of the
Commonwealth on inquiry members. Assuming the power could be drafted in a way
was constitutionally valid, any decision by an inquiry member to award
costs against an inquiry participant would entail separate
enforcement
proceedings in a court and could also be quashed upon judicial review.
10.65 In Chapters 18 and 19, the ALRC proposes the inclusion of several
criminal offences relating to non-compliance with the requirements
Commissions or Official Inquiries, and to the disruption of the proceedings of
an inquiry. In the ALRC’s view, these
proposals, if adopted, would be
sufficient to deter inquiry participants from engaging in conduct aimed at
delaying, obstructing
or increasing the cost of inquiries. The ALRC also notes
that, in the jurisdictions in which the power to award costs is available,
power has been exercised rarely.
Other methods of
minimising costs
10.66 In addition to the proposals made in this chapter, the ALRC proposes
measures throughout this Discussion Paper that are intended
to encourage greater
flexibility, less formality and greater cost-effectiveness in the conduct of
inquiries. In particular, the ALRC’s
proposed new statutory framework for
public inquiries would introduce a second tier of inquiry which would provide a
more flexible,
expeditious and cost-effective form of inquiry.
10.67 In Chapter 6, the ALRC considers issues relating to an inquiry’s
terms of reference. It is observed that terms that are
too wide can lead to
unnecessary cost, complexity and delay, and can leave an inquiry
‘floundering in a wilderness of possible
investigation’.
considerations should be taken into account when determining whether or not it
is appropriate to establish an ad hoc inquiry
under the proposed
and, if so, the appropriate tier of inquiry.
10.68 An alternative to establishing an inquiry is for the Australian
Government to make greater use of the various existing permanent
bodies that
possess the necessary powers and already have existing infrastructure to carry
out certain types of inquiries. In some
circumstances, it may be more efficient
and cost-effective to refer some inquiries to these existing bodies rather than
establishing
a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry. For example, the direct
costs to the Office of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security (IGIS)
of the Inquiry into the actions taken by ASIO in 2003 in respect of Mr Izhar
Ul-Haque and related matters in 2007–2008
This is substantially
less than the costs of Royal Commissions and other ad hoc
inquiries. While some IGIS inquiries may be more focused in scope than ad hoc
inquiries, they deal with complex
10.69 A further option for minimising costs discussed in Chapter 5 is for
existing bodies, such as the IGIS and the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
temporary expansion of powers, functions and resources to conduct some executive
10.70 An important aspect of ensuring the cost-effectiveness of inquiries is
their administration.
sees merit in formalising arrangements for providing set-up and other
administrative support to Royal Commissions and other
ad hoc public inquiries.
This may streamline processes and reduce costs. In particular, this may be
achieved through measures to
preserve institutional knowledge acquired from
previous Royal Commissions and other inquiries to limit any ‘reinvention
the wheel’ each time an inquiry is established. In this regard the ALRC
notes, in Chapter 8, that it would be appropriate for
the Australian Government
to engage a person who possesses substantial experience in the administration of
inquiries to prepare guidance
on matters pertaining to their administration for
inclusion in the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
10.71 In Chapter 9, the ALRC proposes a number of measures for the funding of
certain expenses incurred by inquiries and inquiry participants.
It is important
that the funding of legal representation and other assistance for inquiry
participants is monitored carefully throughout
the inquiry to ensure that it is
provided at an appropriate level and is delivered in the most cost-effective
manner. For example,
inquiry participants who share a common interest may not
require independent legal representation and could be represented by the
lawyers. Further, in determining the required level of skill and expertise of
legal practitioners appointed to assist an inquiry,
it is appropriate to
consider whether the issues in the inquiry require the expertise of Senior
Counsel in the role of counsel assisting.
An experienced junior counsel may
10.72 In Chapter 11, the ALRC examines issues relating to the exercise of
coercive and other investigatory powers by Royal Commissions
and Official
Inquiries. The ALRC proposes that inquiry members be able to require information
from a person in a form approved by
the inquiry. This may facilitate greater
emphasis on the use of written statements in inquiries, make proceedings more
and reduce the cost of witness examinations. The ALRC also proposes
greater flexibility for inquiries to determine the form in which
documents and
other things are produced, including in electronic format. This may avoid the
significant costs associated with converting
material from hard copy to digital
form (or vice versa).
10.73 In Chapter 14, the ALRC considers issues relating to inquiries and
courts. In particular, measures are proposed to enable an
inquiry member to
refer a question of law to the Federal Court. This mechanism may provide a
convenient alternative to judicial review
proceedings that are often costly and
time-consuming. It may also be a more cost-effective way to resolve issues
relating to privilege
and public interest immunity without imposing the costs of
judicial review proceedings on inquiry participants.
10.74 In Chapter 15, the ALRC examines the types of procedures an inquiry
member chooses to employ in conducting an inquiry. The ALRC
proposes measures to
facilitate a more informal and inquisitorial inquiry process. It is envisaged
that inquiry members will take
account of the cost-effectiveness of particular
methods of investigation and inquiry and thereby avoid unnecessary expenditure
public resources and the resources of inquiry participants.
Law Reform Commission of Ireland,
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
, LRC 73 (2005),
See Appendix 1 for a List of
Submissions and Appendix 2 for a List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
For example, Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009;
17 May 2009; I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), 135–136.
At the end of October 2006 expenditure
was $9,124,361.00.
the HIH Royal Commission
The Report of the
Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
Report of the Inquiry
into the Centenary House Lease
(2004); T Morling,
Report of the Royal
Commission of Inquiry into the Leasing by the Commonwealth of Accommodation in
Centenary House
Equine Influenza: The August 2007 Outbreak in
Australia—Report of the Equine Influenza Inquiry
(2008); M Palmer,
Inquiry into the Circumstances of the Immigration Detention of Cornelia
Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 22, 43–45.
Departmental and agency contracts in Commonwealth,
Standing Orders and Other
Orders of the Senate
Twice each year estimates of
proposed annual expenditure of government departments and authorities are
referred by the Senate to
eight legislation committees for examination and
report. These estimates are contained in the main appropriation bills introduced
into Parliament as part of the budget (usually in May) and in the additional
appropriation bills introduced later in the financial
year (usually in
February): Parliament of Australia—Department of the Senate,
Brief No 5—Consideration of Estimates by the Senate’s Legislation
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 13 May
1997, 3408-3410 (J Sharp—Minister for Transport and Regional
Development).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 14 May 2003, 11154-11156 (C
Ellison—Minister for Justice and
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 16 November 2004, 101 (C
Ellison—Minister for Justice and
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 26 March 2007, 180 (P
Ruddock—Attorney-General).
Commonwealth,
Official Committee Hansard,
Senate Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, 27 May 2008,
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Senate Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs—Answer to Question No 114
February 2009).
United Kingdom
Department of Constitutional Affairs,
Consultation Paper—Effective
(2004), [115].
Commons Public Administration Select Committee (UK),
Government by
, First Report of Session 2004–05 (2005),
H Pennington,
Inquiry into the September 2005 Outbreak of E.coli O157 in South Wales
The Public Inquiry into the
September 2005 Outbreak of E.coli O157 in South Wales,
Expenditure Statement,
http://wales.gov.uk/ecoliinquiry/?lang=en
Alberta Law Reform Institute,
Proposals for the Reform of the Public Inquiries Act
, Report No 62
New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Commissions of
Investigation Act
(Ireland) s 5(2)(b); Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
73 (2005), [1.17].
Oifigiúil, (Commission of Investigation, Dublin and Monaghan Bombings of
1974—Statement of Costs and Timeframe for
Investigation),
13 May 2005,
Tribunals of Inquiry Bill 2005
(Ireland) cl 8 (as amended in the Select Committee on Justice, Equality, Defence
and Women’s
Rights). The Committee completed its consideration of the Bill
on 2 April 2009 and it is presently awaiting the Fourth (Report) Stage
House of Deputies (Dáil
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Tables 6.1 and 6.2.
Reserve Bank
of Australia,
Inflation Calculator
http://www.rba.gov.au/calculator/calc.go
at 4 August 2009. Where
possible, annual expenditure on individual inquiries has been adjusted for
inflation according to the
year of expenditure, and then combined to reach the
total approximate cost of the inquiry in 2008 dollars. Where it is not possible
to ascertain annual expenditure on individual inquiries, the total approximate
cost of the inquiry has been adjusted for inflation
from the year of completion
of the inquiry to arrive at the total approximate cost of the inquiry in 2008
R Sackville, ‘Law
Reform Agencies and Royal Commissions: Toiling in the Same Field’ in
B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law Reform
(2005) 274, 286.
The listed dates
refer to the date on which the terms of reference for the inquiry were issued
and the date on which the inquiry
This represents total expenditure to
28 February 2007, not including legal assistance to witnesses: Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 26 March 2007, 180 (P
Ruddock—Attorney-General). See also, Australian Government,
Budget Statements 2006–2007—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
(2006), 36; Australian Government,
Portfolio Budget Statements
2007–2008—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
(2007), 44. Note
that budget statements often reflect estimated, rather than actual,
This figure comprises the total
budgeted costs for the inquiry, including: Attorney-General’s Department
staff; financial
assistance for persons assisting the inquiry; the Royal
Commissioner; senior and junior counsel assisting; solicitors assisting;
staff; advertisements; office accommodation; information technology; media
liaison services; printing and other services:
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 16 November 2004, 101 (C Ellison—Minister for Justice
and Customs); Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 9 December
2004, 118 (C Evans—Leader of the Opposition in the Senate); Australian
Government,
Portfolio Additional Estimates Statements
2004–2005—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
This figure represents the costs
of the Royal Commission to 31 October 2003. In addition future budgeted costs
were estimated to
be $750,000 (unadjusted for inflation) comprising lease make
good costs, lease arrears, fringe benefits tax liability, outstanding
costs and other minor costs: Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
of Representatives, 24 May 2003, 28913 (P Ruddock–Attorney-General). See
also, Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 4
December 2003, 23896 (J Hall); Australian Government,
Additional Estimates Statements 2001–2002—Finance and Administration
(2002), 14; Australian Government,
Portfolio Budget
2002–2003—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
(2002), 32;
Australian Government,
Portfolio Budget
2003–2004—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
This figure represents the costs
of the Royal Commission to 31 October 2003. In addition future budgeted costs
were estimated to
be $80,000 (unadjusted for inflation) comprising fringe
benefits tax liability, outstanding litigation costs, building and motor
lease arrears, records storage costs and other minor costs: Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 24 May 2003, 28913
(P Ruddock–Attorney-General). See also, Australian Government,
Portfolio Additional Estimates Statements 2001–2002—Finance and
Administration Portfolio
(2002), 13; Australian Government,
Budget 2002–2003—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
(2002), 32;
Australian Government,
Portfolio Budget
2003–2004—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
This figure represents the total
cost incurred by the Australian Government in relation to the appointment and
conduct of the Commission,
including an allocation for the instructing
solicitors. In addition, $5,585,660 was spent in providing legal assistance for
appearing before the Commission. The Department of Transport and
Regional Development incurred legal costs totalling $392,070. A
$10,713,424 was paid to the participating legal firms, and costs of a non-legal
nature totalled $918,309.93: Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
of Representatives, 13 May 1997, 3408
This figure includes
running costs, financial assistance and the costs of instructing solicitors
incurred by the then Department
of Administrative Services. This figure does not
include costs incurred as a result of the Royal Commission in other government
portfolios:
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 11 April 1991,
2317 (N Bolkus).
This figure
represents the most recent estimate of the costs of the inquiry provided by the
Australian Government: Australian Government
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs—Answer to Question No 114
(23 February 2009). The total budget
allocated to, and administered by, the inquiry was $3,840,000: Australian
Government,
Portfolio Budget Statements
2008–2009—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
(2008), 28. An
additional $350,000 was administered by the Attorney-General’s Department
for the provision of financial assistance:
The Report of the Clarke
Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
Australian Government,
Portfolio Budget Statements 2008–2009—Attorney-General’s
, 28. The initial budget allocation for the inquiry was
$11,490,000: Australian Government,
Portfolio Additional Estimates Statements
2007–2008—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
, 14. Unspent funds
were subsequently reappropriated to the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr
Mohamed Haneef: Commonwealth,
Official Committee Hansard,
Senate Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, 27 May 2008, 62. Note that the
Equine Influenza Inquiry had many of
the same powers as commissions established
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), but was established under the
Quarantine Act 1908
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 6 March
2003, 12413 (B McMullan).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 21 March 2002, 1269 (N
Minchin—Minister for Finance and Administration). This figure represents
the total budget allocated
to the inquiry rather than actual
expenditure.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 1 November 1988, 2176 (G
Punch). This figure includes costs incurred by the Commission itself as well
expenditure in relation to grants, administrative, legal and publication costs
by the Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment,
Tourism and Territories
from within departmental
appropriations.
See, eg, T Cole,
Report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), Appendix 10; T Cole,
Final Report of
the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
See, eg, Australian
Government,
Portfolio Budget Statements
2006–2007—Attorney-General’s Portfolio
See, eg, Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Annual Report 2007–08
, 91–117; Commonwealth
Annual Report 2007–08
, Appendix 5; Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission,
Annual Report 2007–08
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
Annual Report
Reform Commission of Ireland,
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals
, LRC 73 (2005), [7.35].
H Coombs and others,
Commission on Australian Government Administration
(1976), Appendix 4K,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Ibid, Question
Ibid, Question
Ibid, Question
See Appendix 2 for a List of
Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union,
17 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Commission of Inquiry
(Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
E Mullighan,
Children in
State Care Commission of Inquiry—Interim Report
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 17(3).
Explanatory
Memorandum, Inquiry Rules 2006 (UK),
Tribunals of Inquiry Bill 2005
(Ireland) cl 21(1).
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) cl
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 6–8.
See Appendix 2 for
a List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
17 May 2009.
See Proposal
Pape v Commissioner of
[2009] HCA 23
Commissions of Inquiry Act
(NZ) s 11. See also the
Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Amendment Act 1997
(Ireland) s 6(1).
New Zealand Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Ibid, Rec 35.
Ibid, Rec 36. The NZLC
also recommended that such costs orders should be enforceable in any court of
competent jurisdiction: Rec
37. For a detailed explanation of the
recommendations, see New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
Report No 102 (2008), Ch 7.
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) cl 29(4).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009. The costs of inquiry
participants are discussed in
17 May 2009.
I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Those purposes are: to assist
parties to finance their litigation; aid the settlement process; help minimise
the potential for damages
awards to be eroded by the costs of litigation; and
deter people from pursuing claims and defences: Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice
, ALRC 89 (2000), [4.1].
Attorney-General (Cth) v Alinta Limited
[2008] HCA 2
, [2] (per Gleeson
Royal Commissions
and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural Aspects
Inspector-General of Intelligence
and Security,
12 May 2009.
See Question
The ALRC’s proposals
relating to the administration of inquiries are discussed in Ch 8.
Introduction
Overview of powers of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Coercive information-gathering powers
Production of documents and attendance to answer questions
Powers of arrest
Disclosing an existing summons or notice
Power to require information or written statement
Authority to inquire granted under foreign law
Inspect and copy documents and other things
Other investigatory powers
Entry, search and seizure powers
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Dealing with intercepted information
Other issues
Communication of information regarding contraventions of the law
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Concurrent functions and powers under state laws
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Introduction
11.1 As discussed in Chapter 5, the ALRC is proposing that one of the key
distinctions between Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
under the proposed
Inquiries Act
will be the powers conferred on each tier of inquiry.
Broadly speaking, Royal Commissions, as the highest tier, will be conferred
a wider range of coercive powers than Official Inquiries. The approach proposed
by the ALRC is that the proposed
Inquiries Act
set out the powers
available to each tier of inquiry rather than the Australian Government
selecting the powers that may be exercised
by individual inquiries at the time
they are established.
11.2 In this chapter, the ALRC discusses the specific powers that should be
conferred on each tier of inquiry under the proposed
Inquiries Act.
proposals in this chapter seek to ensure that both types of inquiry have
sufficient powers to obtain the information required
to conduct their
investigations and report on the terms of reference. Proposals regarding the
necessary protections of the rights
of persons involved in, or affected by,
inquiries exercising such powers are discussed in Chapters 12, 15 and
11.3 The chapter commences with an overview of the powers of Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries. It then considers specific
information-gathering powers, such as the power to require a person to appear or
to produce documents or provide information
in other forms. Intrusive
investigatory powers, such as entry, search and seizure powers and interception
powers, are also considered.
The chapter then considers other issues related to
the powers of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries’ including:
and information obtained in a foreign country; the exercise of
concurrent functions and powers under Commonwealth and state or territory
and the power to communicate information and evidence in relation to
contraventions of the law to other government bodies.
Overview of powers of
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
11.4 One of the key differences between Royal Commissions and other types of
inquiries and reviews, is that Royal Commissions have
coercive powers to summon
witnesses and gather other
As discussed in Chapter
4, governments can create a multitude of other types of boards or inquiries, but
these will generally lack
the coercive powers of a Royal
Commission.
11.5 By their very nature, Royal Commissions are a ‘fishing
expedition’.
It is argued
that they require broad powers to ensure that the issues and facts are fully
It would be hard to envisage that the Fitzgerald Commission of Inquiry in
Queensland would have uncovered such deep seated corruption
in the Police Force
and government if Commissioner Fitzgerald did not possess coercive powers. The
witnesses he summoned would simply
have refused to attend, refused to answer
questions that were incriminating or have claimed
11.6 The extent to which Royal Commissions can call witnesses and require the
production of documents is controversial, however, given
that they are forms of
executive inquiry and not courts. As stated by Janet Ransley:
These powers enable Commissions to unearth hidden evidence, but also have
significant and sometimes intrusive impact on the affairs
of governments and
individuals.
11.7 A key consideration for the ALRC is whether both tiers of inquiry under
the proposed
Inquiries Act
require similar powers to undertake their
investigations. Other law reform bodies also have considered the issue of what
appropriate for different forms of executive inquiry. The New Zealand
Law Commission (NZLC), in a recent review of the equivalent
legislation of New Zealand, noted that coercive powers can mean that not only
those being investigated, but also those
asked to appear before a commission,
can face significant costs in time and money and risk reputational
Nonetheless, it found that
the availability of general powers to call witnesses and require the production
of documents are an important
feature of most major inquiries.
We have encountered no dispute that there is a place for inquiries with coercive
powers: in a modern complex society the power to
constitute an inquiry with
coercive powers is essential.
11.8 The coercive information-gathering and other investigatory powers of
various Commonwealth bodies were considered by the Administrative
Review Council
(ARC) in its 2008 report,
The Coercive Information-Gathering Powers of
Government Agencies.
noted that such powers were important administrative and regulatory devices for
government and many agencies used them to
compel the provision of information,
the production of documents and the answering of
The ARC put forward a
number of best practice principles to be used as a guide to government agencies,
to ensure fair, efficient
and effective use of coercive information-gathering
Submissions and
consultations
11.9 In the Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
the ALRC asked whether Royal Commissions and other public inquiries required
coercive powers and whether this should depend
on the nature of the
As noted in
Chapter 5, there was strong support amongst stakeholders for retaining
Royal Commissions, which are the highest statutory
form of public executive
inquiry and already have a broad range of coercive powers under the
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth). In addition, there was support for introducing a
statutory basis for non-Royal Commission forms of public inquiry.
11.10 Liberty Victoria pointed out that the use of coercive powers by
government (including by public inquiries) often raised civil
It acknowledged,
however, that unless an inquiry could obtain the information it needed, it could
not achieve the purpose for which
it was created. Liberty Victoria considered it
essential that to achieve their purposes inquiries have sufficient powers,
coercive powers to require information. It recommended that public
inquiries have broad powers, which may only be exercised as necessary
reasonable.
11.11 The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) recognised the need for
Royal Commissions to have strong, and generally coercive,
information-gathering
powers but was concerned that in certain areas the
Royal Commissions Act
did not achieve ‘the appropriate balance between robust public
scrutiny and protecting the rights of participating
individuals’.
Council expressed the view that information-gathering powers must be seen as
exceptional, particularly when used in executive
rather than judicial processes,
given their intrusive impact on individual rights. Its view was that the use of
such powers was justified
only when necessary to achieve a legitimate purpose
and only when accompanied by sufficient protection against their overuse or
and by provisions to mitigate their adverse impact on individual
It submitted that, in
future, public inquiries such as the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed
Haneef (Clarke Inquiry), should
not be conducted in the absence of suitable
powers and protections.
11.12 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) supported
retaining Royal Commissions with all the powers and protections
Commissions Act
. DIAC submitted that coercive powers should only be used in
investigatory inquiries that involved major matters of public interest
there was a strong requirement for public disclosure. This was particularly the
case where there was concern that the inquiry
would not otherwise be able to
access information.
11.13 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) observed that, in many
instances, the absence of coercive powers would inhibit the
ability of an
inquiry to fulfil its terms of reference. The AGS considered that it would only
be in those inquiries which did not
involve controversial or contentious
matters, or were of a policy nature, that the absence of coercive powers would
not unduly affect
the ability of the Royal Commission or inquiry to pursue all
relevant lines of inquiry. The AGS did not see any significant shortcomings
the present approach, which allows for Royal Commissions and other ad hoc
inquiries to be conducted by reference to the powers
and procedures in the
Royal Commissions Act
and for permanent inquiries to be conducted by
reference to specific statutory powers.
11.14 According to the Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU), the
significance of Royal Commissions justified their powers to compel
production of documents and the attendance of
The CPSU submitted
that the granting of coercive powers was very significant and restricted the
rights of witnesses and others. As
such, it would be inappropriate for such
powers to be conferred on other forms of public inquiry in any wholesale
11.15 Graham Millar submitted that coercive powers were an essential feature
of Royal Commissions and, except in special circumstances,
an inquiry not
requiring coercive powers—such as an inquiry restricted to policy
issues—did not need to be a Royal
Commission.
11.16 In the ALRC’s view, both tiers of inquiry under the proposed
Inquiries Act
may require coercive powers to investigate effectively and
efficiently and report on a particular issue or event. Conferring coercive
powers ensures that inquiry members have access to all the information necessary
to make informed findings and recommendations.
11.17 The ALRC’s proposals are designed to confer powers under the
Inquiries Act
in a manner that is proportionate to the functions
performed by Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. Moreover, the ALRC
that it is essential that such powers only be exercised if it is
justified by the particular circumstances of the inquiry. The exercise
powers should only impinge on the rights of individuals in a proportionate and
justifiable way.
As with other
executive bodies that possess coercive powers, powers conferred on Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries should
be complemented by appropriate rights
and protections.
11.18 As noted above, the ALRC proposes that the powers available to each
tier of inquiry be set out in the proposed
Inquiries Act
approach ensures an appropriate level of transparency in the inquiry’s
process and procedure. It may also improve
the perception of independence of the
inquiry that may not be achieved if the Australian Government is able to select
when the inquiry is appointed. The ALRC notes that a similar approach
has been adopted in inquiries legislation in most Australian
territories, existing alongside legislation enabling the appointment of Royal
Commissions.
11.19 Official Inquiries, as the second tier of inquiry, may not require the
same level of coercive information-gathering and other
investigatory powers as
Royal Commissions. This reflects the fact that, under the ALRC’s proposed
statutory model, Royal Commissions
would be more likely to investigate major
events or problems, while Official Inquiries would be established to inquire
significant events and be conducted in a more informal setting.
11.20 The next section of this chapter discusses the specific powers that the
ALRC proposes should be conferred on each tier of inquiry.
The distinctions
between the proposed powers of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, and the
application of client legal privilege,
the privilege against self-incrimination
and direct use immunity, are depicted in Table 11.1.
Table 11.1: Powers of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries and
associated privileges and immunities
Description
Royal Commissions
Official Inquiries
Require production of documents and other things
Require attendance or appearance to answer questions
Require information in an approved form
Require evidence on oath or affirmation
Administer oath or affirmation
Prohibit disclosure of the existence of a notice
Inspect, retain and copy any documents or other things
Apply to a judge for a warrant to exercise entry, search and seizure
Receive intercepted information
Communicate information relating to contravention of a law
Exercise concurrent functions and powers under Commonwealth and state or
territory laws
Take evidence and make inquiries overseas
Apply to a judge for a warrant for the apprehension of a person who fails
to appear or attend
Privileges and
Client legal privilege can be abrogated
Privilege against self-incrimination can be abrogated
Direct use immunity applies
* This Discussion Paper asks questions about these powers
but does not make any proposals.
information-gathering powers
11.21 Royal Commissions and other inquiries need to obtain information in
order to report on the matters falling within their terms
of reference. For the
purpose of performing their investigatory and associated functions, Royal
Commissions and other inquiries may
obtain information on a voluntary basis.
Royal Commissions also have the ability to obtain information by using a range
of coercive
powers. These information-gathering powers can be exercised in
relation to persons who are directly the target of a Commission’s
or persons who happen to have information or documents relevant to the
11.22 A Royal Commission’s general powers to obtain information are
similar to those of courts.
also are consistent with the statutory powers conferred on many government
agencies to enable them to obtain information in
order to fulfil their
Such powers typically
allow officers of the agency to compel the provision of information, the
production of documents and the answering
11.23 It is envisaged that both tiers of inquiry under the proposed
Inquiries Act
will require some form of coercive information-gathering
powers. There are two main types: the power to require a person to give
evidence or to provide information in some other way; and the power to require a
person to produce documents or other physical
Production of
documents and attendance to answer questions
11.24 Under the
Royal Commissions Act
, a member of a Royal Commission
may summon a person to appear before the Commission at a hearing or to produce
documents or other
A person who fails to attend a hearing or produce the requested documents or
things, without reasonable excuse, commits an offence
punishable by a maximum
penalty of $1,100 or imprisonment for six
11.25 In 2001, the
Royal Commissions Act
was amended to enable, among
other things, a Commissioner or member of a Commission to require persons to
produce documents or things
by notice. Previously, persons could be required to
produce documents to a Commissioner only at a formal hearing. This proved
impractical
in Commissions which required the collection of large numbers of
documents, such as the HIH Royal Commission (2003), the proceedings
prompted the 2001 amendments.
Final Report of the Royal
Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
Building Royal
Commission Report
), Commissioner Cole praised these powers for allowing the
Commission to compel the production of documents well in advance of hearings,
assisting both in the preparation for hearings and identifying avenues for
further investigation. That Commission issued 1,692 notices
11.26 The 2001 amendments also clarified that a Commissioner can summon a
person to produce documents or things without requiring
them to give oral
This was achieved by
to allow that a person may be summoned to appear before the
Commission either to give evidence or produce documents or things (or
11.27 A Royal Commission may also take sworn evidence and may require a
person appearing before it to take an oath or affirmation
Submissions and consultations
11.28 In IP 35, the ALRC asked for stakeholder views on whether the current
powers of a Royal Commission to summon a person to appear
before it or to
produce documents or things, including by way of notice, were operating
effectively in practice and whether other
forms of public inquiry should have
similar powers.
11.29 Liberty Victoria believed that all levels of inquiry ‘should have
a broad discretion (power) in how and what they obtain
The power to
require a person or organisation to attend an oral hearing or produce documents
or information was, in Liberty Victoria’s
view, a necessary power.
11.30 The AGS noted that the power of a Royal Commission to summon a person
to appear before it, or to produce documents, generally
appeared to be
11.31 The Law Council noted that non-statutory inquiries were often unable to
generate the same level of support as their statutory
equivalents.
In the case of the
Clarke Inquiry, this related primarily to the lack of information-gathering
powers, which in turn raised concerns
that non-statutory inquiries may not have
all the information necessary to make the best recommendations. The Law Council
that further consideration should be given to investing Commonwealth
public inquiries with statutory powers. For example, it recommended
inquiries be provided with coercive information-gathering powers including the
power to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of documents. It
also proposed that inquiries have the power to issue warrants for the
apprehension of witnesses
to bring them before the
ALRC’s view
11.32 The availability of information-gathering powers is the fundamental and
characteristic feature of Royal
Commissions.
Having regard to
the experience of Royal Commissions and other inquiries, it is necessary for
them to possess the power to obtain
information relevant to their terms of
reference, by requiring the production of documents and other things or by
requiring a person
to attend an oral examination or hearing to answer
Section 2(3A)
Royal Commissions Act
—which empowers
the production of documents by written notice—enables an inquiry to gather
evidence before the commencement
of hearings. Under the proposed new statutory
framework, not all inquiries may require formal hearings. In particular, it is
that Official Inquiries, as the second tier of inquiry, will be
conducted more informally and perhaps primarily ‘on the papers’
a limited number of face to face interviews or examinations. To ensure
flexibility in the inquiry process, it is appropriate
that coercive
information-gathering powers may be exercised by way of written notice rather
than under summons, which ordinarily
requires a person to appear at a particular
place at a particular time to give evidence or produce documents.
11.34 Under the current Act, a Royal Commission can also obtain documentary
material by summoning a person to appear at a hearing
to produce documents or
other things specified in the
These powers require
production only at hearings. and not before. There appears to be no reason to
retain the existing distinction
between a Royal Commission’s power to
issue a summons for the production of documents at a hearing and to issue a
production of documents by other means. In order to streamline the
current procedures, coercive information-gathering powers should
be exercisable
by written notice. Further, the inquiry member issuing the notice should be able
to specify the manner in which documents
or other things are to be produced. The
notice could require the person to produce the documents covered by the notice
at a specified
place, on or before a specified date, or require the person to
attend in person to produce the documents at a
11.35 Documents and other materials are often a valuable source of
information to an inquiry. As such, it is desirable that both Royal
Commissions
and Official Inquiries possess the power to issue a notice for the production of
documents or other things. It is also
desirable that the power be framed in such
a way that allows the information-gathering process to commence at the earliest
opportunity
and prior to any hearings that may be held.
11.36 Taken together, the definition of ‘document’ in
Royal Commissions Act
and ‘record’ in s 25 of the
Interpretation Act 1901
includes information
stored or recorded by means of a computer. It is appropriate that similar
definitional provisions are incorporated
in the proposed
Inquiries Act
and that an inquiry member issuing a notice for production is able to
specify how the person is to produce documents or other things,
for example, an
electronic form of a document that is reliable and readily accessible.
Oral evidence
11.37 In the context of Royal Commissions and other inquiries, oral
examinations perform a number of functions, including:
the identification of relevant facts;
the disclosure of the existence of documents so that they can be
seized or their production required; and
assisting with the interpretation of documents already
evidence can be a major source of information for Royal Commissions and other
investigatory inquiries. It is proposed,
therefore, that both Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries be empowered to require the appearance of a person at a
give oral evidence or require a person’s attendance at an
examination to answer questions. The ALRC’s proposals with
respect to the
privilege against self-incrimination and direct use immunity are discussed in
Chapter 16.
11.39 It is desirable that witnesses cooperate with inquiries and provide
truthful evidence. It is inevitable, however, that this
will not occur in every
case. In the ALRC’s view, it is necessary to retain the power of a Royal
Commission to take oral evidence
at a hearing or examination on oath or
affirmation and that this power be conferred on Official
11.40 The ALRC has considered whether persons other than inquiry members, for
example inquiry staff or counsel or solicitors assisting,
should be authorised
to exercise coercive information-gathering powers in some circumstances. The
ALRC has reached the view that
this would not be appropriate because the
exercise of coercive powers may give rise to penalties for non-compliance and
exercised by a person who is sufficiently senior, experienced and has
ultimate responsibility for the conduct of the inquiry.
Proposal 11–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries to issue notices requiring a person
(a) attend or appear before the inquiry; and
(b) produce documents or other things.
Proposal 11–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries to require a person appearing before
the inquiry to give evidence or answer
questions to swear an oath or make an
affirmation. An inquiry member, or a person authorised by an inquiry member,
should be empowered
to administer an oath or an affirmation to that person.
Royal Commissions Act
, originally inserted in
empowers the president or
chair of a Royal Commission to issue a warrant for the apprehension of a person
who has failed to attend
in answer to a summons. Such a warrant authorises the
apprehension of a person so that they can be brought before the Royal Commission
and detained in custody for that purpose until they are released by order of the
president or chair.
apprehension of a person under s 6B of the Act does not relieve that person of
any liability for offences or penalties relating
to non-compliance with a Royal
Commission.
11.42 In New South Wales, Western Australia and the Australian Capital
Territory, Royal Commissions and some public inquiries are
empowered to issue
arrest warrants on their own
In South Australia, the
chair of a Royal Commission may issue an arrest warrant or may apply to a
magistrate for such a warrant.
In Queensland, the chairperson may make an ex parte application to a magistrate
for the issue of a warrant for the apprehension of
a person who has failed to
comply with a summons.
chairperson of an inquiry may also issue a warrant on his or her own motion for
the apprehension of a person who has failed,
or probably will fail, to attend
before the inquiry.
11.43 In contrast to other state and territory jurisdictions, a Commission of
Inquiry in Tasmania cannot, on its own motion, issue
an arrest warrant and must
apply to a magistrate for a warrant to have a person apprehended and brought
before the Commission.
11.44 The powers of a federal Royal Commission in relation to arrest are
somewhat different from those of permanent investigatory
bodies such as the
Australian Crime Commission (ACC). The ACC can only obtain an arrest warrant on
application to a judge of the
Federal Court of Australia or of the Supreme Court
of a state or territory.
person apprehended pursuant to such a warrant must be brought before a judge who
may make orders as to whether they should be admitted
to bail, continue in
detention or be released.
11.45 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) does not
have the power to issue or apply for an arrest warrant.
If a person fails to
comply with its requirements, however, ASIC may certify the failure to the
Federal Court of Australia, which
may then inquire into the case and make orders
for compliance by that person.
This procedure allows the court to use its contempt powers to coerce compliance
with ASIC requirements, as any failure to comply
with a court order would be
punishable as a contempt.
permanent inquiry bodies, such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman and the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security, do not
have any powers to obtain
an arrest warrant, although their enabling legislation establishes a number of
non-compliance offences
for those who refuse or fail to provide information,
produce documents or answer a question when
11.46 A modern approach to arrest powers in Commonwealth legislation is
outlined in the Australian Government Attorney-General’s
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
speaking, it is considered inappropriate to confer such powers on officers of a
regulatory agency unless there is a clearly
demonstrated need. Legislation
conferring such powers should require that an apprehended person be delivered to
a police officer
or judicial
ALRC’s view
11.47 The ALRC notes that there is an inconsistency between the power of a
Royal Commission to issue an arrest warrant on its own
motion and the entry,
under a warrant issued by a
Further, Commonwealth
investigatory bodies, including those that investigate serious crime, are
generally not empowered to issue
arrest warrants and must instead obtain such a
warrant from a judge.
11.48 Given the potential for the rights and liberties of individuals to be
adversely affected, it is appropriate that arrest powers
be subject to certain
limits and safeguards. The ALRC proposes, therefore, that the power in
Royal Commissions Act
, which enables Royal Commissions to issue
warrants for the apprehension of a person who fails to appear, be amended in the
Inquiries Act.
Royal Commissions should be required to apply to
a judge to issue a warrant for the apprehension and immediate delivery of a
to a police officer or judicial officer.
11.49 It is envisaged that Official Inquiries will inquire into less
significant events or problems. It is less likely that arrest
powers would be
required to elicit the cooperation of those required by notice to appear before
an Official Inquiry to give evidence
or answer questions. The preliminary view
of the ALRC is that the arrest powers proposed for Royal Commissions should not
be extended
to Official Inquiries under the proposed
Inquiries Act
ALRC notes that comparable bodies, such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman and the
IGIS, appear able to perform their inquiry functions
in the absence of arrest
powers. Other sanctions for non-attendance, which are the subject of proposals
in Chapters 18 and 19, will
be available to Official Inquiries under the
Inquiries Act.
The ALRC, however, is interested in stakeholder
views on this issue.
Proposal 11–3
The power in
Royal Commissions Act
(Cth), which enables a Royal Commission to issue a warrant for the
apprehension of a person who fails to appear before it, should
be redrafted in
the proposed
Inquiries Act
. Royal Commissions should be required to apply
to a judge to issue a warrant for the apprehension and immediate delivery of a
to a police officer or judicial officer.
Disclosing an
existing summons or notice
11.50 In the
Building Royal Commission Report
, Commissioner Cole
recommended that the
Royal Commissions Act
be amended to empower a
Commission:
by appropriate notice attached to a summons or notice to produce, to prohibit a
person from disclosing the fact that he, she or it
had received a summons or
notice or had spoken with a Royal Commission investigator, subject only to the
right to disclose this information
for the purpose of obtaining legal advice,
with contravention of such a prohibition to be a criminal offence punishable by
of $2000 or imprisonment for one
11.51 Commissioner Cole drew those provisions from ss 29A and 29B of the
National Crime Authority Act 1984
(Cth), which have been retained in the
corresponding sections of the
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Section 29A
provides that an examiner issuing a summons or notice may
include a notation prohibiting or restricting disclosure of information
the summons or notice, or any official matter connected with it. The notation
can only be included if the examiner is satisfied
that failure to do so would
reasonably be expected to, or might, prejudice the safety or reputation of a
person; the fair trial of
a person; the effectiveness of an operation or
investigation; or if failure to do so might otherwise be contrary to the public
The notation must be accompanied by a written statement setting out
the rights and obligations conferred or imposed by
The notations are
cancelled if, after the conclusion of the operation or investigation, there is
no evidence of an offence; a decision
has been taken not to prosecute; or
criminal proceedings have begun. In that case, the Chief Executive Officer must
serve a written
notice of the fact of the cancellation.
Section 29B
then provides that a person served with a summons or notice
containing such a notation must not disclose the existence of, or any
information about, the summons or notice or any official matter connected with
it. The section does not apply if the notation has
been cancelled, or after five
years from the issue of the summons or notice. The maximum penalty is 20 penalty
units (currently $2,200)
or imprisonment for one year.
11.54 The person may, however, disclose information about a summons or notice
in accordance with any circumstances specified in the
notation, to a legal
practitioner for the purpose of obtaining legal advice or representation, or to
a legal aid officer for the
purpose of obtaining
assistance.
11.55 If the person is a body corporate, the person may disclose to an
officer or agent of the body corporate for the purpose of ensuring
with the summons or notice.
the person is a legal practitioner, and they are required to answer a question
or produce a document at an examination that is
protected from disclosure by
client legal privilege, they may disclose it to the person who communicated the
information or document
in order to obtain his or her agreement that the legal
practitioner may comply with the
requirement.
Those to whom such
disclosures have been made are also subject to the same criminal sanctions in
case of a subsequent disclosure,
with similar provisions allowing disclosure for
the purposes of ensuring compliance or obtaining legal advice or representation,
or legal aid.
11.56 These provisions were first introduced in 1991, and were explained as
The major reform contained in the Bill will prevent the disclosure of the
existence of process issued by the [National Crime Authority]
in the course of
its investigations. It will also prevent disclosure of any information about the
reference, the investigation or
any hearings or proceedings to which the process
relates. Previously some recipients of [National Crime Authority] summonses or
such as financial institutions, felt obliged to inform their clients of
the receipt of these documents. This has resulted in suspects
being alerted to
[National Crime Authority] investigations and concealing or destroying evidence
or going into hiding. The amendment
will help to prevent this happening again,
and will clarify the legal position of these institutions.
In addition to this, the amendment will serve to protect the reputation of
suspects at a time when the allegations have not been
properly investigated. The
recipients of the summons or notice have to be given sufficient details about
the suspects so that they
can determine what information is required. The
potential for damage to the reputation of these people through disclosure of the
existence of the summons or notice could be
significant.
Building Royal Commission Report
does not specify the
circumstances that led to its recommendation regarding the disclosure of the
existence of a summons or notice.
Such a power is uncommon even in the context
of anti-corruption or standing crime commissions. The ALRC notes that the power
Australian Crime Commission Act
is conferred on
a standing agency specifically charged with investigating serious crime for the
purposes of subsequent legal proceedings.
That agency is held accountable in a
number of ways, such as through the usual processes of supervision, as well as
monitoring by
its own Board, Inter-Governmental Committee and Parliamentary
11.58 In the absence of any demonstrated need for such a power, the ALRC is
not presently inclined to propose that it be conferred
upon Royal Commissions,
particularly since investigations of serious crime and corruption can be
undertaken at the federal level
by the Australian Crime Commission and the
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity. The ALRC is interested in
stakeholder
views on the question, however, as it was not specifically raised in
Should the proposed
Inquiries Act
include a power
comparable to that found in
Australian Crime Commission
(Cth), which would allow an inquiry member to prohibit the
disclosure of the existence of a notice, or a matter connected with
Power to require
information or written statement
11.59 In 2003, the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
Industry (Building Royal Commission) recommended that the
Royal Commissions
be amended to empower a Commission to require a person to provide a
written statement about a specified
In Commissioner
Cole’s view, the power would have enabled the Commission to avoid the time
and expense of using oral hearings
to obtain evidence that could have been
presented in written form.
On one occasion, for example, the Commission sought information from a person
who refused to speak to the Commission investigators
or provide a statement. The
Commission issued a summons to that witness, convened a hearing in Melbourne,
and flew the witness to
Melbourne from Perth for the hearing, only to have the
witness state in the witness box that he didn’t know anything about
matter under investigation. The waste of public time and resources is obvious,
and would have been avoided if the witness could
have been required to provide a
11.60 This was not the first time that the use of written statements in the
context of Royal Commissions had arisen. In 1976, Professor
Enid Campbell raised
questions about whether express provision should be made to permit a person
appearing as a witness to give evidence
by a sworn written statement or by
sending a written statement, verified in such manner as allowed by the Royal
Commission.
11.61 A number of Commonwealth statutes empower regulators to require a
person to provide information in answer to a
Legislation governing
the operation of inquiries in overseas jurisdictions also allows a witness to
give evidence by way of a written
statement. For example, under the
Commissions of Investigation Act 2004
(Hong Kong), Commissions have the
power—to the extent that the Commission considers proper—to examine
or cross-examine
a witness on oath or affirmation or by use of statutory
declaration or written
interrogatories.
Section 19 of
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) provides that the chairperson may direct a
person by notice to provide evidence in the form of a written statement. The
Explanatory
Notes to s 19 state that it was intended that potential witnesses
normally would be first asked to give information voluntarily and
the power of
compulsion only used where a person was unwilling to comply with an informal
request for information, or a person was
willing to comply, but concerned about
the consequences of disclosure if they were not compelled to do
11.62 Greater emphasis on the use of written statements in Royal Commissions
may make proceedings more efficient and reduce the cost
of witness examinations.
Dr Scott Prasser notes that the emphasis on taking evidence from witnesses in
hearings is part of the reason
why Royal Commissions ‘take so long and
cost so much’.
11.63 The use of written statements, however, raises the concern that counsel
will be unable to cross-examine witnesses and test evidence.
This could be
overcome by a Royal Commission making witness statements available early in
proceedings where possible. Evidence in
the Federal Court is often provided in
written witness statements, particularly in trade practices and intellectual
property cases.
In these cases, the court may make orders for the filing and
exchange of witness statements between the parties. When proceedings
the witness is sworn, handed a copy of his or her witness statement, asked to
identify it and verify that the contents
are correct. The document is then
tendered as the witness’s evidence in chief, subject to any objections
made on the basis
of admissibility. A witness may then be cross-examined on the
contents of the statement.
Submissions and consultations
11.64 The ALRC heard a broad range of views from stakeholders as to whether
Royal Commissions and other public inquiries should have
the power to require a
person to provide information by way of a written statement. Some thought it was
a sensible requirement. It
was noted that under the recently enacted
(Vic), a person can be required to prepare a statement for the
purposes of a coronial investigation addressing matters specified
11.65 Other stakeholders expressed reservations about whether such a
requirement would operate effectively in practice. Some described
the power as
‘exceptional’ noting that it went beyond the powers conferred on
courts. As such, it would require more
justification than simply saving the
expense of calling a witness to give evidence at a
11.66 In its submission, the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(CFMEU) strongly opposed the proposition that an inquiry
have the power to
direct a person to provide a written statement. First, it submitted that the
requirement to provide a written statement
would represent a further erosion of
the principle against self-incrimination. Secondly, the requirement went well
beyond the coercive
powers traditionally available to any investigatory bodies.
It was argued that there was no justification for imposing such a requirement
when a person could already be compelled to answer questions and produce
11.67 On balance, the AGS had some doubts that Royal Commissions or other
public inquiries should have the power to compel individual
witnesses to provide
written statements of their proposed evidence. First, the AGS doubted that it
would achieve the desired purpose
because some potential witnesses would
‘comply’ by providing only a very brief statement which gave no real
of the evidence they would give if subjected to reasonably rigorous
cross-examination. Further, depending on the circumstances, such
a task could be
extremely onerous and beyond the capabilities of many witnesses.
11.68 The AGS considered that a Royal Commission or inquiry should be
prepared to receive written statements from witnesses who wish,
or are prepared,
to provide them. Such a course could assist the Royal Commission or inquiry to
receive and deal with evidence in
an efficient way. Also, such a course could
assist a witness to address relevant issues in an efficient and comprehensive
AGS also suggested that consideration be given to amending the
protections in
Royal Commissions Act
to extend them to
written witness statements provided to a Royal
Commission.
11.69 In contrast, Dr Ian Turnbull stated that written statements were
appropriate for most witnesses and far more efficient than
examination.
11.70 Similarly, the CPSU submitted that where coercive powers were available
to inquiries, those powers should also include the power
to direct a person to
provide a written statement. The CPSU described this as a sensible proposal,
which was likely to save time
and money in the conduct of Royal Commission
proceedings.
ALRC’s view
11.71 It is the ALRC’s preliminary view that inquiry members should be
empowered under the proposed
Inquiries Act
to issue a notice requiring a
person to provide information in a form approved by the inquiry, failing which
the person must attend
the inquiry as if he or she had been issued with a notice
to attend or appear before the inquiry.
11.72 The ALRC notes the position in New Zealand where Commissions of Inquiry
are empowered to require a person to provide any ‘information
particulars’ in any form it
The NZLC has recently
reviewed this power and recommended that it remain largely
11.73 Written statements have been used extensively in previous inquiries. In
the HIH Royal Commission, for example, a large number
of witnesses provided
written statements but were not requested by counsel assisting or any of the
parties’ counsel to give
Similarly, the
majority of those who provided statements and statutory declarations to the
Equine Influenza Inquiry did not present
The Inquiry into
Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme (2006)
(AWB Inquiry) heard oral evidence
from 75 witnesses, but received statements
from a further 130
11.74 It is unlikely that these inquiries would have been able to accommodate
such a large number of witnesses providing oral evidence
at hearings, which are
costly and time consuming. Notwithstanding the reservations of the kind
expressed by the AGS, the power to
require information in the form of a written
statement may contribute significantly to the evidence-gathering process and to
rigorous and comprehensive factual findings. Obtaining information other
than by way of oral evidence may reduce the need for hearings
and examinations
and enable more flexible, less formal and more cost-effective inquiry
procedures.
11.75 While it is desirable that information be provided to an inquiry
willingly—and past experience indicates that this will
often be the
case—it is the ALRC’s view that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should also confer a power on inquiry members to compel the provision of
information if that is justified in the circumstances. It
is envisaged that,
where appropriate, an inquiry member could require any person to provide
information to the inquiry in a form
approved by the inquiry. This enables the
flexibility to require information to be provided in the form of a written
statement or
answers to a list of questions or free-form responses to certain
matters of interest to the inquiry. In exercising such a power,
member should take into account relevant considerations such as whether
providing information in the form requested would
be overly burdensome or beyond
a person’s capabilities, or proportionate and justified for the
performance of the inquiry’s
11.76 Information provided in compliance with a notice could be circulated to
counsel assisting and other inquiry participants in
order to determine whether
the person providing it should be required to give further evidence orally. If
further examination is
not required, the information could be accepted as
evidence in the inquiry without the necessity of calling the person. If further
examination is to take place, the inquiry member should call the witness and
follow a procedure similar to that used in the Federal
Court with respect to
witness statements, as outlined
This could provide an
incentive for those from whom information is sought to use their best endeavours
to comply—as an alternative
to being required to give oral evidence. It is
proposed that corresponding protections for a person providing information in
manner be incorporated into the proposed
11.77 If a person refuses to provide the information required by the inquiry,
or does not provide it within the period specified,
the proposed
should provide for that person to attend the inquiry as if he or she had
been issued with a notice to appear. If a person does not
attend, that person
would be liable for offences and penalties imposed for non-compliance with the
requirements of the inquiry.
11.78 In the ALRC’s view, the power to require information in an
approved form does not represent a significant extension of
the existing powers
Royal Commissions Act
to summon a person to appear or produce
documents or other things. Analogous powers are available to investigatory
bodies under other
Commonwealth legislation and to overseas inquiries. The ALRC
considers that the power to require information in an approved form
available to both Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries under the proposed
Inquiries Act
Proposal 11–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower a
member of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry to issue a notice requiring a
person to provide information in
a form approved by the inquiry, failing which
the person must attend the inquiry as if he or she had been issued with a notice
attend or appear before the inquiry.
Authority to inquire
granted under foreign law
Royal Commissions Act
provides that where the
Australian Government has entered into appropriate arrangements with a foreign
country for a Royal Commission
to be granted an authority under the law of that
country to take evidence and conduct inquiries in relation to the subject matter
of the Commission, the information and evidence so obtained may be dealt with as
if it had been obtained in Australia. This includes
use of that evidence for the
purpose of the Royal Commission’s report to the
Governor-General.
Royal Commissions Act
enables a Royal
Commission to take evidence on oath or affirmation outside Australia where
arrangements have been made with a foreign
country. Evidence so obtained may be
dealt with as if it had been taken in Australia. Any statement or disclosure
made by a witness
in the course of giving evidence under the above provisions is
not admissible against them in civil or criminal proceedings in
Sections 16(2)
and (3) of the
Royal Commissions Act
certificates to be issued by appropriate ministers in relation to any legal
proceedings that may arise concerning activities
undertaken by a Royal
Commission pursuant to ss 7A and 7B of the
Submissions and consultations
11.82 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether the framework for making inquiries and
obtaining evidence overseas in
Royal Commissions
is operating effectively and should be extended to public inquiries
other than Royal
Commissions.
11.83 The AGS queried the extent to which any mutual assistance
arrangements
between Australian
and a foreign country would be available to a Royal Commission that was pursuing
a term of reference relating
to a law enforcement matter, given that it would
not involve a prosecution and probably would not amount to a criminal
investigation.
ALRC’s view
11.84 In past Royal Commissions, the practice of obtaining information and
evidence from overseas sources has differed from the procedures
set out in the
Royal Commissions Act
11.85 In the AWB Inquiry, one source of information was the United Nations,
which had established procedures for certain overseas
bodies seeking access to
information and documents from the Independent Inquiry Committee into the United
Nations Oil-for-Food Programme
The AWB Inquiry was
granted access, subject to certain conditions, to documents held by the United
In addition, the United
Nations authorised the giving of a formal statement and evidence by one of the
staff members of the ICC.
11.86 In the HIH Royal Commission evidence was sought, unsuccessfully, from
overseas sources. The Commission encountered difficulties
when it sought
production of HIH-related documents from parties in the United Kingdom and the
United States, but those parties did
A Hong Kong firm
said it could not comply with any of the Commission’s requests for
documents because of the impact of local
ordinances.
In his Report,
Commissioner Owen noted that, since he could not exercise powers of compulsion
outside Australia, the lack of cooperation
from these overseas sources
significantly curtailed the Commission’s ability to investigate thoroughly
matters related to HIH
11.87 It appears that neither Royal Commission sought to use the powers and
procedures in
Royal Commissions Act
, which provide
for inquiries to be made and evidence to be taken in foreign countries. This may
indicate that the provisions—which
require the Australian Government to
enter into appropriate arrangements with foreign countries—are too
cumbersome to be used
routinely in the conduct of Royal Commissions, which are
subject to reporting deadlines and cost constraints. It may be time-consuming
and require significant departmental resources for the Australian Government to
make formal requests on behalf of a Royal Commission
to overseas
governments.
11.88 There are constraints on Royal Commissions and other government
agencies exercising investigatory powers outside Australia.
There is limited
scope to address these constraints in legislation other than to introduce
provisions that apply extraterritorially,
the legitimacy of which is open to
question. The ALRC has not otherwise identified any legislative means to improve
the current procedures
that enable Royal Commissions to make inquiries and
gather evidence overseas. The ALRC therefore proposes that the existing
for Royal Commissions be retained under the proposed
, and their application extended to Official Inquiries.
11.89 The Australian Government could give consideration to streamlining the
current procedures—through the development of protocols
and expedited
processes for making arrangements with foreign countries—to ensure that
the powers can be exercised more effectively
in practice. The ALRC recognises
that such arrangements may depend, in part, upon Australia’s foreign
policy and relations.
Moreover, issues relating to foreign evidence and mutual
assistance are of significance to courts, law enforcement bodies and other
agencies, and are not unique to Royal Commissions and inquiries. Given the broad
ranging significance of these issues, the ALRC does
not make any proposals for
government action in this area.
11.90 The ALRC notes the comments of the AGS in relation to mutual assistance
in the context of inquiries. For the reasons expressed
above, the ALRC does not
make any specific proposals on this matter. Due to its limitation to
‘criminal matters’, the
ALRC notes, however, that the
Assistance in Criminal Matters Act 1987
(Cth) would appear not to facilitate
a request for international assistance on behalf of a Royal
Commission.
That Act would
not, however, preclude the Australian Government from invoking the existing
procedures under the
Royal Commissions Act
in matters involving
potentially criminal conduct.
Proposal 11–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should contain
provisions, applicable to both Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries,
equivalent to those in
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), which concern the making of inquiries and taking
of evidence outside Australia.
Inspect and copy
documents and other things
Royal Commissions Act
allows a Commission, member of a
Commission, or other authorised person to inspect, retain and copy any documents
or other things
produced to the Commission. A person may request that a document
or other thing be returned to them, where retention ceases to be
necessary for
the purposes of the
Submissions and consultations
11.92 In IP 35, the ALRC sought the views of stakeholders as to whether the
power under the
Royal Commissions Act
to inspect, retain and copy
documents was operating
effectively.
The ALRC did not
receive any feedback on this issue other than from the Victorian Society for
Computers and the Law
11.93 The VSCL observed that the short timeframes in which inquiries are
established could create inefficiencies in the way information
is handled. The
VSCL cited the example of ‘hundreds of boxes of hard copy documents
arriving on the doorstep of the Commission’,
many of which had ‘in
fact been printed out of the source organisation’s computer
noted the costs incurred by the inquiry of scanning this material back into
digital form, in an attempt to deal with the
large volumes of information
delivered. It also noted that due to the short timeframes involved, inquiries
often needed to pay higher
than market costs to ensure documents were processed
in time to meet the inquiry’s deadlines.
11.94 The VSCL suggested that in order to overcome these problems, guidelines
or other explanatory material could be created to assist
future inquiries and
agencies and parties required to produce information to them.
ALRC’s views
11.95 The powers of Royal Commissions to inspect, retain and copy documents
produced to it are generally operating effectively and
should be extended to
both tiers of inquiry under the proposed
Inquiries Act.
Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries require flexibility in how they deal with and manage
documents and other things produced
to them, including powers of inspection,
retention and reproduction.
11.96 These powers should, however, be clarified to enable Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries to require that documents be produced
in a format
approved by the inquiry. This may include production by electronic means. These
matters are addressed in the ALRC’s
proposal regarding the production of
documents and other things. It would be appropriate for guidance on these issues
to be included
Inquiries Handbook
Proposal 11–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries are empowered to inspect, retain
and copy any documents or other things
produced to an inquiry.
Other investigatory
Entry, search and
seizure powers
11.97 Historically, Royal
Commissions have taken evidence primarily through the use of oral
The numerous state
and federal Royal Commissions in the 1980s that dealt with organised crime,
corruption and financial scandals,
however, created a need for powers that
allowed Royal Commissions access to new forms of evidence such as computer
records, audio
and visual surveillance, and telephone
11.98 In the Royal Commission into the Activities of the Federated Ship
Painters and Dockers Union (1984) (Costigan Royal Commission),
for example, the
traditional methods of collecting and testing evidence by public hearing were
ineffective in countering the ‘culture
of silence’ that surrounded
the allegations of corruption under consideration in that
In an interim report, Commissioner Costigan recommended that a Royal
Commissioner should have the power to issue a search
11.99 The Australian Government accepted this recommendation and amended the
Commissions Act
in 1982, subject to the qualification that
the warrant must be granted by an independent judicial
It also limited the
power to apply for warrants to ‘relevant Commissions’ designated as
such in the Letters Patent.
In 2001, the Act was amended further to allow the Commission to authorise a
police officer, who is assisting the Commission, to apply
to a judge for a
11.100 Under
Royal Commissions Act
Commission may authorise a member of the Commission, a member of the Australian
Federal Police (AFP), or a member of the
police force of a state or territory to
apply for search warrants in relation to matters into which it is inquiring. A
relevant Commission
or authorised person may apply for a search warrant where
(a) …reasonable grounds for suspecting that there may be, at that time or
within the next following 24 hours, upon any land
or upon or in any premises,
vessel, aircraft or vehicle, a thing or things of a particular kind connected
with a matter into which
the relevant Commission is inquiring … ; and
(b) the relevant Commission, or the person, believes on reasonable grounds that,
if a summons was issued for the production of the
thing or things, the thing or
things might be concealed, lost, mutilated or destroyed; …
11.101 Where a judge is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to issue
the warrant, he or she may authorise police officers
or other persons named in
the warrant to use such assistance or force as is deemed necessary to enter the
premises, vessel, aircraft
or vehicle and seize anything
11.102 Royal Commissions may also obtain search warrants under
Crimes Act 1914
provisions, however,
require that there be a suspicion that an offence has occurred before a warrant
can be issued. A suspicion that
evidence may be destroyed or tampered with may
not satisfy this
requirement.
11.103 Most state legislation governing public inquiries contains similar
provisions to the
Royal Commissions
In New South Wales,
Royal Commissioners do not have a specific power to apply for a search warrant,
but may use police officers seconded
to a Commission to make an application
11.104 Under the
Inquiries Act 1945
(NT), no warrant is required.
of that Act provides that a member of a Commission, or any
authorised person, may have access to
all buildings, places, goods, books, documents and other papers for the purposes
of the inquiry in respect of which the Board or
Commissioner is appointed, and
for that purpose may make extracts from or copies of any such books, documents
Section 19A
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
(Qld) grants
a Royal Commissioner, rather than a court, the power to issue a search
Under that section,
a chairperson can issue a search warrant if he or she is satisfied on reasonable
grounds that the premises may
contain things relevant to the inquiry, or that
there may be evidence of an
11.106 The Tasmania Law Reform Institute (TLRI) considered the issue of
It noted that the
need for a magistrate’s authority to issue a warrant operated as a check
on the investigatory powers of a
commission of inquiry to ensure the power of
It concluded that
there should not be an extension of the existing powers of search and seizure to
enable a commission of inquiry
in Tasmania to enter, search and seize documents
or things without the need for a warrant.
11.107 There is nothing to prevent a federal Royal Commissioner from being
given the power to issue a warrant on his or her own
The inclusion of such
a power, however, may be contrary to the established policy of the Australian
Government. The
Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that the power to issue a warrant to
enter and search premises should be conferred on magistrates acting in their
capacity, and not ministers or departmental officers. It also states
that ‘the greater independence of magistrates and the
fact they are not
responsible for enforcement outcomes ensures appropriate rigour in the warrant
issuing process’.
11.108 While the role of a Royal Commissioner is quite different from that of
a departmental officer, it may still be preferable to
have a person independent
from the inquiry determining that the requirements to issue a warrant have been
11.109 A number of overseas law reform bodies have considered whether the
powers to search premises and seize documents or things
are required by
executive inquiries. The NZLC recommended that search and seizure powers should
not be conferred on inquiries under
its proposed new
In its view, public
inquiries in New Zealand should not have a role in investigating the sort of
criminal or regulatory activity
that would require such powers. The NZLC noted,
however, the historical differences between Australia and New Zealand in this
and in particular, the role that Australian Royal Commissions have
played in investigating corruption, and the subsequent creation
of permanent
anti-corruption bodies.
Law Reform Commission of Ireland also did not recommend the inclusion of a
11.110 In its report on public inquiries in 1992, the Ontario Law Reform
Commission recommended enacting a stronger set of criteria
for determining
whether a search could be authorised. It recommended that a search warrant
should be authorised in an inquiry only
the documents or things are material to the subject matter of the
the public interest in obtaining access to the documents or things
outweighs the privacy interests of the individual who holds them;
there are reasonable grounds to believe the documents or things
would not be produced to the inquiry under a normal
11.111 Justice
Ronald Sackville has argued that the granting of such extensive powers to Royal
Commissions has unduly impacted on
the rights of citizens without necessarily
being effective in exposing the types of criminal behaviour under
investigation.
Prasser suggests that it was not those additional
powers that produced clear
evidence of tax evasion and corruption, but rather the Commission’s focus
on broader research methods
and the adoption of a computer information system
that allowed disparate data to be
11.112 In the Building Royal Commission, search warrants were used but they
were not a major source of information. According to the
Report, six search
warrants were issued pursuant to the
Royal Commissions Act
information obtained advanced the investigations of the
Commission.
Submissions and
consultations
11.113 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether an inquiry member should have the
power to apply for a warrant to search for and seize a document
or other thing,
or issue such a warrant on his or her own motion, and if so, in what
circumstances.
11.114 Liberty Victoria submitted that invasive coercive powers such as
balanced against
civil liberties. Further, any such powers should be subject to judicial review.
Liberty Victoria endorsed the current
provisions of
Commissions Act
, which require an application for a search warrant to be
made to a judge, and did not support inquiries having inherent search and
seizure powers.
11.115 The AGS observed that it appeared out of step with existing policy for
a Royal Commissioner to have search and seizure powers
and endorsed the position
that he or she must seek the issue of a warrant from a judicial
11.116 The AGS also raised the possibility of extending the grounds upon
which a search warrant could be issued, beyond instances
in which documents
might be concealed, lost, mutilated or destroyed. The AGS had reservations about
such an extension. In particular,
it noted that the privilege against
self-incrimination did not apply to documents seized under warrant and would not
be covered by
the direct use immunity under
Commissions Act
would mean that documents seized under warrant would be treated differently to
documents produced under a summons or
Under the Act as
presently framed, where documents are seized under warrant, there is no
constraint on the availability of those
documents for use in evidence against
the person from whom they were seized.
11.117 Should entry, search and seizure powers equivalent to those in
Royal Commissions Act
be incorporated in the proposed
Inquiries Act
? Although these powers have been used relatively
infrequently in past Royal Commissions, such powers have been described as
necessary complement’ to the coercive information-gathering
powers of Royal Commissions—in particular because documents
or things may
be at risk of destruction if a notice or summons is issued requiring their
production.
11.118 Under the current regime, a Royal Commission cannot enter or search
premises or seize documents or things without a search
warrant having been
issued by a judge. Similarly, the power to issue a search warrant under
is reserved for
magistrates.
This serves as
an important check on a Royal Commission’s entry, search and seizure
11.119 Stakeholders did not
express support for a Royal Commissioner having power to issue a search warrant
on his or her own motion.
As noted above, the
Guide to Commonwealth Framing
states that the power to issue warrants to enter and search
premises should normally be conferred on magistrates, acting in their
Similarly, the
exercise of seizure powers is said to require authorisation under
The approach taken
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
to the issue of warrants
for entry, search and seizure, is broadly consistent with the recommendations
made by the Senate Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills in its 2000 and 2006
reports on entry, search and seizure provisions in Commonwealth
legislation.
11.120 The ALRC is not currently persuaded that a Royal Commissioner should
be empowered to issue search warrants on his or her own
motion. The ALRC
proposes that the entry, search and seizure powers of Royal Commissions remain
exercisable only under warrant issued
by a judge.
11.121 The ALRC notes that
Royal Commissions Act
presently drafted, do not provide that the power to issue search
warrants—which is generally regarded as involving the
exercise of
non-judicial power—is conferred on judges in their personal and voluntary
capacity. It is desirable that this be
made clear in the proposed
for constitutional
11.122 A further issue that the ALRC has considered is whether the proposed
Inquiries Act
should confer entry, search and seizure powers on Official
Inquiries as well as Royal Commissions. In the ALRC’s view, such
should not be conferred on Official Inquiries. Official Inquiries are less
likely to require search and seizure powers to
complete their investigations.
The use of such powers by Royal Commissions has been relatively infrequent.
Secondly, entry, search
and seizure powers are to be regarded as exceptional.
Their exercise can be highly intrusive. It is appropriate that they be reserved
for Royal Commissions as the highest tier of public inquiry.
11.123 Finally, the
Royal Commissions Act
does not presently extend the use immunity in
to material seized under a search warrant. The ALRC proposes, in Chapter 16,
that the use immunity in 6DD of the
Royal Commissions Act
should clarify
that the immunity protects the same material as would be protected by the
privilege against self-incrimination. For
this reason, the ALRC does not propose
the extension of the use immunity to material obtained in exercise of search and
seizure powers
by a Royal Commission.
Proposal 11–7
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should contain
provisions for a Royal Commission to apply to a judge for a warrant to exercise
entry, search and seizure powers equivalent
to those in
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth). The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that, if an application for a warrant is made to a judge of a
federal court, the judge issues the warrant in his or
her personal capacity.
Dealing with
intercepted information
11.124 Royal Commissions have no power to initiate the interception of
telecommunications. The
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
was amended in
2001, however, to enable a declared Commonwealth Royal Commission to receive
information which has been lawfully intercepted
by other agencies, and to use
that information in the performance of its
A number of
Commonwealth and state law enforcement and investigatory agencies are permitted
to receive and use such information.
The Royal Commission into the New South
Wales Police Service was likewise permitted to receive and use such information
11.125 In order to receive intercepted information under the provisions of
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
a Royal Commission
must first be declared eligible by the relevant minister. In making such a
declaration, the minister must be satisfied
that a Royal Commission is likely to
inquire into matters that may involve the commission of a prescribed
11.126 In Queensland, the chairperson of a commission of inquiry may apply to
a Supreme Court judge for an approval to use a listening
The judge must
consider a number of factors relating to privacy and public interest before
granting approval.
11.127 The use of listening devices by commissions of inquiry was considered
by the TLRI in its 2003 report. It was noted that, while
such devices may assist
the investigations of some commissions, their use was
a clear invasion of privacy that can constitute a criminal offence. If a person
or body is to be granted the power to use such devices
then that grant of power
must be strictly monitored.
11.128 Notwithstanding this view, the TLRI recommended that a commission of
inquiry be able to apply to a magistrate for a warrant
to use listening devices,
subject to the magistrate being satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for
the belief that the use
of such a device is necessary and appropriate to obtain
evidence in relation to a matter relevant to the inquiry. The TLRI also
recommended
that a magistrate have regard to other factors in granting the
warrant, including the extent to which the privacy of any person is
likely to be
affected, any alternative means of obtaining the evidence sought and the
evidentiary value of that
11.129 The use of intercepted information by Royal Commissions appears to be
infrequent. In the Building Royal Commission, for which
the 2001 amendments were
introduced, information was received from another agency in relation to one
investigation, which had been
acquired as a result of telecommunications
interceptions conducted by and for the purposes of that
11.130 The ALRC does not propose that Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries
should possess the power to initiate the interception
of telecommunications. The
ALRC does propose, however, that the existing provisions in the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
that allow the
communication of intercepted information to Royal Commissions, be retained in
relation to Royal Commissions established
under the proposed
. Further, the ALRC welcomes stakeholder views in relation to any issues
that arise from the receipt of intercepted information by
Royal Commissions, and
whether relevant provisions in the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act
should be extended to Official Inquiries.
Should the provisions in the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979
(Cth), that allow the communication of intercepted
information to Royal Commissions in certain circumstances, also apply to
Communication of
information regarding contraventions of the law
11.131 Under
Royal Commissions Act
, a Royal Commission may
communicate information or evidence it obtains relating to a contravention of a
law of the Commonwealth,
or of a state or territory, to certain specified people
and bodies—such as the Australian Crime
Commission,
Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner,
the Director of
Public Prosecutions
‘the authority or person responsible for the administration or enforcement
of that law’.
was first amended in 1983 to permit a Commission to
communicate information or furnish evidence or a document acquired by it to
Royal Commission, where such evidence is considered
Further amendments
added the Director of Public Prosecutions to the
These amendments, which
followed the Costigan Royal Commission and the Royal Commission of Inquiry into
Drug Trafficking (1983) (Stewart
Royal Commission), were intended to assist the
prosecution process at the conclusion of a Commission investigating criminal
11.133 In 2001, the breadth of the discretion to refer information was
widened to include information relating to contraventions of
a law rather than
information relating only to the commission of an offence. Thus, the amendment
captured conduct which was unlawful
and not only conduct which constituted an
offence under Commonwealth, state or territory
The Act was also amended
to extend the provision to a contravention of a law that may attract a civil or
administrative penalty,
rather than only criminal
These amendments
were made to facilitate the exchange of information between the HIH Royal
Commission and the concurrent investigation
by ASIC into HIH’s market
disclosure.
The HIH Royal
Commission exercised the referral power on several occasions. Before any such
referral, the individuals or entities
affected by it were given the opportunity
to make submissions.
11.134 In addition to the referral power in
Royal Commissions
, the terms of reference may indicate that contraventions of the law
should be considered by the Royal Commission and referred to
the appropriate
authorities. For example, in the HIH Royal Commission the terms of reference
directed inquiry into:
(b) whether those decisions or actions might have constituted a breach of any
law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory and,
if so, whether the question
of criminal or other legal proceedings should be referred to the relevant
Commonwealth, State or Territory
11.135 In the
Report of the HIH Royal Commission
, Commissioner Owen
indicated that he had approached this aspect of the terms of reference by first
looking at whether there might
have been a breach of the law and, if so, by
going on to consider whether the matter should be referred to an agency. In
Commissioner Owen took into account a number of factors including:
the relative seriousness of the conduct in the context of the
failure of HIH;
the role and involvement of the person concerned in the management
and failure of HIH;
what factors—including the availability of admissible
evidence—might impinge on the likelihood (without determining the
question) of the agency being able to establish the referred matter to the
criminal or civil standard, as the case may be;
whether any personal or peculiar factors called for special
consideration; and
the public interest in, and regulatory effect of, a successful
11.136 This aspect of the terms of reference meant findings
as to possible contraventions and recommended referrals, which were numerous,
could be set out in the report instead of adhering to the referral procedure in
Royal Commissions Act
Report of the HIH Royal
recommended that 56 possible breaches of the
Corporations Act
(Cth) and the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) be referred to either ASIC
or the New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions for further
investigation.
This approach
contemplated the transfer of evidence and documents to the relevant authorities
at the conclusion of the Royal Commission.
In the event, however, separate
legislation was required to facilitate the transfer of these
This overcame the
requirement to give notice of the transfer to the owners of the documents and
enabled ASIC to obtain custody of
the Royal Commissions
As discussed in
Chapter 8, the
Royal Commissions Act
was subsequently amended to
incorporate similar provisions—now in s 9 of the Act—for the
retention and use of records
in all Royal
Commissions.
11.137 In 2003, the Building Royal Commission recommended that s 6P be
amended to enable Royal Commissions to communicate evidence
or information
relating to a contravention of any law to ‘any agency or body of the
Commonwealth, a State or a Territory prescribed
regulation’.
Commissioner Cole’s view, the scope of s 6P(1)(e) in its present
form, which enables the communication of information relating
to a contravention
of a law to ‘the authority or person responsible for the administration or
enforcement of that law’,
In particular,
Commissioner Cole thought that there may be a problem with passing the
information to a state crime commission or
similar body, as there may be a
distinction between bodies which ‘enforce’ the law and bodies which
investigate breaches
11.138 It is not clear whether a referral—whether under s 6P, or the
terms of reference or as a natural concomitant of the power
report—could encompass referral of the conduct of a member of a profession
to a relevant disciplinary tribunal.
Submissions and
consultations
11.139 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether Royal Commissions and other public
inquiries should be able to communicate information relating
to a contravention
of a law to law enforcement bodies in addition those listed in the
Commissions Act
and, if so, which additional
11.140 Liberty Victoria submitted that inquiries should be able to
communicate information to other bodies, but only where it would
not breach a
person’s civil liberties or where adequate protections were in place.
Further, information obtained by an inquiry
that revealed criminal conduct
should be referred to police for further investigation but, depending on how it
was obtained, should
not be admissible in later proceedings. Liberty Victoria
considered that this would ensure that a person would not withhold information
from an inquiry due to a fear of how that information could be used at a later
11.141 The AGS made a number of comments about the practical operation of the
referral power in
Royal Commissions
If referrals are to
be made, resources must be allocated in advance and should be timetabled
alongside the preparation of the final
report. Referrals had to be made during
the currency of the Royal Commission as the power was not exercisable once the
been delivered. Further, referrals under
required the
Commissioner to decide that it was appropriate to refer each piece of evidence
or item of information and did not contemplate
a ‘global’ referral
of evidence or information. If a particular Royal Commission possessed
significant amounts of evidence
or information relating to contraventions of the
law, the process of making referrals could be time consuming and require
significant
11.142 The AGS also noted that where large amounts of evidence are involved
it may not be possible for all referrals to be made prior
to delivery of the
final report. Further, an affected person would normally have to be put on
notice and given the opportunity to
make submissions for reasons of procedural
11.143 The AGS submitted that the interaction between the regime in
Royal Commissions Act
—which provides for the custody and use of
records of a Royal Commission—and the scope of the referrals power in
had become complicated and required review and simplification.
11.144 Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries under the proposed new
statutory framework should have powers to enable inquiry members
evidence or information about contraventions of the law to appropriate law
enforcement authorities. The existing referral
power in the
Royal Commissions
requires clarification in a number of respects before
it is incorporated into the proposed
Inquiries Act
11.145 First, the referral power should be drafted in a way that does not
have the effect of requiring inquiry members to make referral
decisions in
respect of individual items of evidence and information if that is not necessary
in the particular circumstances. The
Inquiries Act
example, enable an inquiry member to refer evidence or information that relates
to the contravention of any law ‘in
any manner that he or she considers
appropriate’. This would allow a more flexible approach to referrals of
information and
remove present doubts about the operation of
Royal Commissions Act
. For example, it would enable an inquiry member to
decide to refer a class of documents, rather than individual items of evidence
or information. In this regard, the ALRC does not propose that the abrogation of
procedural fairness obligations in the context of
the transfer of the records of
completed Royal Commissions be extended to referrals of information made during
the currency of an
11.146 Secondly, for the avoidance of doubt, any referral power in respect of
information or evidence obtained by a Royal Commission
should operate subject to
the protections in respect of statements made by witnesses or documents produced
to a Royal Commission
and the application of client legal privilege. This would
ensure consistency with the existing framework for the transfer of records
Royal Commissions
11.147 Thirdly, the referral power should clarify the persons and agencies to
which information or evidence may be communicated. In
the ALRC’s view, it
is preferable that the proposed
Inquiries Act
provide that Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries be empowered to communicate information to
bodies or persons responsible for
the administration or enforcement of the law
as prescribed by regulations under the Act. This would enable the list of
agencies of
bodies to be updated from time to time without requiring legislative
amendment of the principal Act as has occurred in the past.
This approach would
still ensure parliamentary oversight through the usual procedures for scrutiny
of delegated legislation. The
proposal would, if adopted, leave it open to the
Australian Government to make regulations enabling the communication of
information
to disciplinary bodies. It may also remove the need to make specific
provision for referrals of information in the terms of reference
of an inquiry,
although it would not preclude the Australian Government from doing so.
Proposal 11–8
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries to communicate information that relates
to a contravention, or evidence of
contravention, of a law of the Commonwealth
or of a state or territory, to bodies or persons responsible for the
administration or
enforcement of the law as prescribed by regulations under the
Concurrent functions
and powers under state laws
11.148 There is nothing to stop the establishment of joint federal-state
Royal Commissions through the issuance of complementary Letters
There have been a number of such Commissions in Australia including: the Stewart
Royal Commission; the Royal Commission into the
Activities of the Australian
Building Construction Employees’ and Builders Labourers’ Federation
(1982); and the Royal
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody (1991).
11.149 Royal Commissions may gain access to documents and other material by
the use of state legislation in the case of joint inquiries.
The Stewart Royal
Commission was able to search and seize documents under the
Criminal Code
(Qld) and the
Health Act 1937
Section 7AA
Royal Commissions Act
allows a federal Royal
Commission to accept powers and functions given to it by a state government in
the Letters Patent of joint
Royal Commissions. It was inserted in the Act in
1982 following the decision in
R v Winneke: Ex parte
In that case, the court found that a commissioner could rely on both the federal
Royal Commissions Act
and the relevant state legislation in issuing a
summons to a witness where the matter under inquiry fell within both terms of
The inclusion of
was intended to remove any doubt about this
11.151 While the coercive powers granted under the
Royal Commissions
may be exercised throughout Australia, the powers possessed by a state
commission may be exercised only in that state. Campbell notes
that during a
joint commission, the federal Royal Commission must be careful not to use a
state power outside of that state, even
where the power is being used in a way
that is relevant to the state
This does not appear
to be affected by
11.152 There also may be issues where subsequent legal proceedings arise from
a Commission. In
Giannarelli v The Queen
, two witnesses who had given
evidence to the Costigan Royal Commission were charged with perjury. The
proceedings were brought in
the Supreme Court of Victoria under the
(Vic). Transcripts of their evidence in the Royal Commission were
used as evidence in the case. The High Court overturned the conviction
basis that the transcripts from the federal Royal Commission should not have
been admitted as evidence because of
Royal Commissions
—which does not allow a statement of a witness to be used in
evidence against a witness in criminal or civil
proceedings.
Submissions and
consultations
11.153 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether any issues arise from the exercise of
coercive powers by a Royal Commission or other public
inquiry established
jointly by the Australian Government and the government of a state or
There was no
indication by stakeholders that there were any problems in this area.
11.154 The AGS noted that there is always going to be some prospect of
challenges of the type that was involved in
R v Winneke; Ex parte
observed that close consultation and co-operation between the Australian
Government and state or territory governments involved
should ensure that the
arrangements work in a way that limits the scope for
11.155 The subject matter of a Royal Commission may have a
multi-jurisdictional character or involve events occurring throughout Australia.
As such, the ALRC proposes that the power to confer concurrent functions and
powers on federal Royal Commissions under state law
should be retained in the
Inquiries Act
subject to the following comments. The ALRC has
not identified any reason in principle why these provisions should not also
the conferral of powers under the law of a territory.
11.156 As noted by stakeholders, it is possible that the concurrent sources
of power of joint Royal Commissions may give rise to legal
complexities from
time to time. For example, it may not always be clear whether federal or state
powers are being exercised at any
given time. While these complexities cannot be
easily remedied in Commonwealth legislation, the inter-governmental agreement
establishing
the joint Royal Commission should clarify these issues and ensure
that both the terms of reference of the Commonwealth and of the
territory are—subject to any legal limitations—coextensive.
11.157 In the ALRC’s view, only Royal Commissions should be able to
exercise concurrent functions and powers under state and
territory laws. Under
the ALRC’s proposed statutory framework, it is envisaged that Official
Inquiries will have a limited
range of coercive information-gathering and
investigatory powers. In contrast, some state and territory legislation confers
other public inquiries.
would not be appropriate to enable the limitations on the powers of Official
Inquiries to be sidestepped by the conferral of wider
powers under state and
territory inquiries legislation. Official Inquiries are also less likely to
inquire into broad ranging matters
across a number of jurisdictions that would
otherwise necessitate the establishment of a concurrent state or territory
Proposal 11–9
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that only Royal Commissions may have concurrent functions and powers conferred
under the proposed Act and state and
territory laws.
The option of selecting powers for each
tier of inquiry is discussed in Ch 5.
Ransley, ‘The Powers of Royal Commissions and Controls Over Them’ in
P Weller (ed)
Royal Commissions and the Making of Public Policy
This is not always the case. For
example, the Equine Influenza Inquiry (2008), established under the
Quarantine Act 1908
(Cth), was vested with most of the powers of an
inquiry established under the
Royal Commissions
Ross v Costigan
H Reed, ‘The
“Permanent” Commissions of Inquiry—A Comparison with Ad Hoc
Commissions—
Australian Journal of
Administrative Law
Ransley, ‘The Powers of Royal Commissions and Controls Over Them’ in
P Weller (ed)
Royal Commissions and the Making of Public Policy
New Zealand Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Administrative Review Council,
The Coercive Information-Gathering Powers of Government Agencies
No 48 (2008).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 7–1.
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
Protections, procedural safeguards, and privileges and immunities are discussed
in Chs 12, 15 and 16 respectively.
Law Council cited the following as model legislation for such powers and
protections:
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Public Sector Management Act
Inquiries Act 1991
Inquiries Act 1945
Department of Immigration and
Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Community and Public Sector
22 May 2009.
17 May 2009.
Administrative
Review Council,
The Coercive Information-Gathering Powers of Government
, Report No 48 (2008), 5.
These issues are explored in Chs 12, 15 and
The privilege against
self-incrimination and direct use immunity are discussed in Ch 16. The
application of client legal privilege
to Royal Commissions was the subject of a
recommendation by the ALRC in Australian Law Reform Commission,
Privilege in
Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal Investigations
(2007), Rec 6–2. The application of client legal privilege to Official
Inquiries is discussed in Ch 16.
Examples of court processes include the issuing of subpoenas and notices to
produce and the summonsing of
For example, agencies such
as the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission
and the Australian Taxation
See Administrative Review
The Coercive Information-Gathering Powers of Government
, Report No 48 (2008), Appendix
S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions
and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Royal Commissions Act 1902
This includes the power to require a person to produce a document
that is subject to privilege, although the fact that the document
is subject to
client legal privilege may still be a reasonable excuse for failing to produce
the document. Privilege is discussed
Penalties under the
Royal Commissions Act
are discussed in Ch
Supplementary Explanatory
Memorandum,
Royal Commissions and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2001
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 2,
Royal Commissions and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2001
There are penalties for
non-compliance with a summons. These are discussed in Ch
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 7–3(a).
6 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
S Donaghue,
Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Royal Commissions Act 1902
An alternative is to
provide that a person may produce documents or things before the date specified
in the notice and, unless otherwise
directed, is not then required to attend the
hearing unless he or she is also required to give evidence at the hearing: see
Administrative Appeals Tribunal 1975
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) defines ‘document’ to include
‘any book, register or other record of information, however compiled,
or stored’.
S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
An oath or an affirmation may be
administered by an inquiry member, or a person authorised by an inquiry member:
Royal Commissions Act 1902
The power to take evidence on
oath or affirmation is also essential to ensure that offences in the
(Cth) apply. This is discussed in Ch
Royal Commissions Act 1912
Royal Commissions Act
Special Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1983
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Inquiries Act 1991
(ACT), which does not confer any arrest
powers on boards of inquiry).
Commissions Act 1917
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Crime Commission Act 2002
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions
and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Ombudsman Act 1976
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
The ALRC proposes that these
powers be retained in the proposed
Inquiries Act
Final Report of
the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol
Corruption and
Crime Commission Act 2003
Australian Crime Commission
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 12 September 1991, 1293
(M Duffy—Attorney-General).
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and
Construction Industry
(2003), vol 2, Rec 1(a).
Ibid, vol 2,
H Coombs and others,
Commission on Australian Government Administration
(1976), Appendix 4K,
Superannuation Industry
(Supervision) Act 1993
Life Insurance Act 1995
Commissions of
Investigation Act
(Hong Kong) s 16(1)(c),
Explanatory Notes, Inquiries Bill
2005 (UK), 13.
Commissions and Public Inquiries in Australia
J Hunter, C Cameron and T Henning,
Litigation I: Civil Procedure
2005), Ch 7.
In an earlier report,
the ALRC observed that the provision of witness statements in Federal Court
matters was seen to be cost effective
by many practitioners: Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice
, ALRC 89 (2000), [7.198].
Coroners Act 2008
See Appendix 2 for a List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union,
17 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Commissions
of Inquiry Act
New Zealand Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Report of the
HIH Royal Commission
(2003), Appendix
I Callinan,
Equine Influenza:
The August 2007 Outbreak in Australia—Report of the Equine Influenza
(2008), Appendix D.
Report of the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to
the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), vol 1,
Cross-examination of witnesses
is discussed in Ch 15.
16–2. The use immunity that applies to evidence given to an inquiry is
discussed in more detail in Ch 16.
Offences and penalties are discussed in detail in Chs 18, 19 and
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Sections 7A
were inserted into the
Commissions Act
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No 1)
Royal Commissions
Explanatory Memorandum,
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill (No 1) 1982
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 7–3(b).
assistance is the process countries use to provide and obtain assistance from
overseas governments in criminal investigations
and prosecutions and is also
used to recover the proceeds of crime: Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Extradition and mutual
assistance—What is mutual assistance?
<www.ag.gov.au> at 20 July
Australian Government Solicitor,
Report of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), Appendix 4.
Ibid, vol 1, [7.11].
Ibid, vol 1,
[7.11]. The statement was tendered in evidence: Exhibit No EXH_0965,
into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food
(2006) <www.oilforfoodinquiry.
gov.au/> at 4 August 2009.
Report of the HIH Royal Commission
(2003), vol 1,
Mutual Assistance in
Criminal Matters Act 1987
The Australian
Government has also released an Exposure Draft of the Extradition and Mutual
Assistance in Criminal Matters Legislation
Amendment Bill 2009 (Cth). Schedule 3
of Part 6 of the Bill proposes, among other things, to clarify that the
Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act
does not affect the provision
or obtaining of forms of international assistance in criminal matters that are
not covered by the Act.
Commissions Act 1902
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Victorian Society for
Computers and the Law,
12 May 2009.
H Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration
Appendix 4K, 350.
‘The Powers of Royal Commissions and Controls Over Them’ in P Weller
Royal Commissions and the Making of Public Policy
Royal Commissions
and Public Inquiries in Australia
F Costigan,
Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union
Interim Report No 4 (1982), 8.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 16 November 1982, 2337 (F
Chaney—Minister for Social Security);
Royal Commissions Amendment Act
Commissions Act 1902
The amendment was inserted by the
Royal Commissions and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2001
(Cth), Item
Royal Commissions Act
S Donaghue,
Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 19E;
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1995
Investigating Corruption and Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions
of Inquiry—Powers and Procedures
A similar provision is also
contained in the
Royal Commissions Act 1917
Commissions Act 1991
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1950
Tasmania Law Reform
Report on the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
This is because the issue of a
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
New Zealand Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Rec
Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
Ontario Law Reform
Commission,
Report on Public Inquiries
(1992), Rec 8. This recommendation
has not been adopted.
R Sackville,
‘Royal Commissions in Australia: What Price Truth?’ (1984) 60(12)
Current Affairs Bulletin
Royal Commissions
and Public Inquiries in Australia
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 2,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 7–5.
6 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Protections and immunities in
the context of entry, search and seizure powers are discussed in
Australian Government
S Donaghue,
Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Crimes Act 1914
A search warrant may also be issued by a justice of the peace or other
person employed in a court of a state or territory who is
authorised to issue
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Report of 2000—Entry and Search Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation
The Committee conducted a further inquiry into the
Government’s response to its 2000 report, entry and search provisions made
since the report and provisions that authorise the seizure of material:
Parliament of Australia—Senate Standing Committee for
the Scrutiny of
Twelfth Report of 2006—Entry, Search and Seizure Provisions
Conferring non-judicial
functions or powers on a judge or magistrate in their capacity as the court or a
member of the court to
which they belong would be contrary to the independence
of the judiciary under the separation of powers doctrine enshrined in Ch
Constitution
. A judge of the Federal Court or Federal
Magistrate may agree to exercise a non-judicial function if the power is vested
in the judge’s
or magistrate’s personal capacity, separate from the
court they constitute (see, eg,
Grollo v Palmer
(1995) 184 CLR
In 2001 the Act was called
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
(Cth). The current name of
the Act was introduced by the
Telecommunications (Interception) Amendment Act
The amendments were
made by the
Royal Commissions and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2001
(Cth) ss 8–29.
Supplementary
Explanatory Memorandum, Royal Commissions and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
A prescribed offence is
subsection 5(1)
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act 1979
(Cth) and includes an offence punishable by a maximum
penalty of a least three years
imprisonment.
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1950
Tasmania Law Reform
Report on the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 2, 20.
Commissions Act 1902
inserted by
Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No 2) 1983
Royal Commissions Act
s 6P(1)(aa)
inserted by the
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Consequential Amendments) Act 1983
of Public Prosecutions (Consequential Amendments) Act 1983
; Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
Representatives, 17 November 1983, 2883 (L
Bowen—Attorney-General).
Bills Digest No 42—
Royal Commissions and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2001
, Department of the Parliamentary Library, Information
and Research Services, 9.
Commissions Act 1902
inserted by
Royal Commissions and
Other Legislation Amendment Act 2001
Explanatory Memorandum,
Commissions and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2001
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission
(2003), vol 1,
Bills Digest No
HIH Royal Commission (Transfer of Records) Bill 2003
of the Parliamentary Library, Information and Research Services,
HIH Royal Commission
(Transfer of Records) Act 2003
The procedural fairness
requirements arose as a result of the High Court decision in
Australian Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) was inserted by the
Royal Commissions
Amendment (Records) Act 2006
(Cth). Issues relating to custody, use and
access to records of completed Royal Commissions are discussed in Ch
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 2,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 7–8.
6 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Johns v Australian
Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR 408.
The principles of procedural
fairness are discussed in Ch 15.
The removal of the obligation to accord procedural fairness to a person who
could be adversely affected if documents obtained by
a completed Royal
Commission are subsequently transferred to other persons or agencies and used
for other purposes is contained in
Royal Commissions Act
(Cth). Issues relating to the custody, transfer and use of records of
completed Royal Commissions are discussed in Ch
Section 9(12)
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) preserves, for the avoidance of doubt, the
operation of s 6DD of the Act, which provides that certain statements by a
before a Royal Commission are not admissible in evidence against the
witness: Explanatory Memorandum,
Royal Commissions Amendment (Records) Bill 2006
(Cth). Section 6DD of the Act is discussed in
E Campbell,
Contempt of
Royal Commissions
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982
R v Winneke; Ex parte
(1982) 152 CLR 211.
R v Winneke; Ex parte Gallagher
(1982) 152 CLR 211
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 16 November 1982, 2337 (F Chaney—Minister for Social
Security). In
Sorby v Commonwealth
, Gibbs CJ noted that the enactment of
s 7AA was unnecessary, given the decision in
Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
E Campbell,
Contempt of
Royal Commissions
(1984), 11.
Giannarelli v The Queen
[1983] HCA 41
(1983) 154 CLR 212
; see P Hall,
Investigating
Corruption and Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions of Inquiry—Powers
and Procedures
(2004), 631. However, s 6DD does not apply to
admissibility of evidence in proceedings for an offence under the
Commissions Act 1902
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
R v Winneke; Ex parte
(1982) 152 CLR 211.
Australian Government Solicitor,
In relation to entry, search
and seizure powers, see:
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 19E;
Commissions Act 1968
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
In relation to arrest powers, see:
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Commissions Act 1968
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Protection from Legal Liability
Introduction
Current protection from legal liability
Need for protection from legal liability
Form of protection from legal liability
ALRC’s view
Gaps in protection from legal liability
Inquiry staff and experts
Inquiry reports
Electronic publications
ALRC’s view
Compellability
Protection from Legal Liability
Introduction
12.1 In this chapter, the ALRC examines the protection from legal liability
that should be afforded to those involved in Royal Commissions
and the Official
Inquiries proposed in this Discussion Paper.
12.2 It discusses the current protection from legal liability afforded under
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), the need for such protection,
and the form such protection should take. The ALRC also considers whether
members of Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries should be able to be
compelled to give evidence in court proceedings about those inquiries.
Current protection
from legal liability
Royal Commissions Act
protects Royal
Commissioners, legal practitioners assisting or appearing before a Royal
Commission, and witnesses from incurring
legal liability as a result of their
participation in a Royal Commission.
confers upon them the same
protection as participants in High Court proceedings. It provides:
(1) Every such Commissioner shall in the exercise of his or her duty as
Commissioner have the same protection and immunity as a Justice
of the High
(2) Every witness summoned to attend or appearing before the Commission shall
have the same protection, and shall in addition to
the penalties provided by
this Act be subject to the same liabilities in any civil or criminal proceeding,
as a witness in any case
tried in the High Court.
(3) A legal practitioner assisting a Commission or appearing on behalf of a
person at a hearing before a Commission has the same
protection and immunity as
a barrister has in appearing for a party in proceedings in the High Court.
12.4 All Australian state and territory legislation governing Royal
Commissions provides similar immunities for Royal Commissioners
and witnesses,
and usually also for counsel.
12.5 At common law, judges are immune from civil or criminal proceedings for
their judicial conduct. Witnesses are immune from civil
or criminal proceedings
for what they say or do in court, as well as any steps taken in preparation for
giving testimony in court.
Counsel are immune from civil or criminal proceedings
for any work done in court, or ‘work done out of court which leads to
decision affecting the conduct of the case in
These immunities were
developed to: ensure that matters were freely and fully adjudicated before the
courts; provide finality in
litigation;
and ensure the
independence of the judiciary.
Need for protection
from legal liability
12.6 Protecting Royal Commissioners, witnesses and counsel from legal
liability serves a number of purposes. As the New Zealand Law
Commission (NZLC)
has observed in its recent report,
Inquiries Act
, these purposes
include the need to:
• promote the fearless pursuit of the truth;
• ensure that the role of inquirer is fairly and efficiently exercised
without improper interference;
• safeguard a fair hearing in accordance with natural justice, which
should reduce the prospect of error;
• promote the independence of inquirers; and
• ensure that any challenges to the inquiry are through the proper
channels, for example, judicial review or political
Royal Commissions Act
is used most commonly to
protect Royal Commissioners, witnesses and counsel from legal liability for
defamatory statements made before
or by a Royal
Commission.
Defamation is the
publication of words or matter that is likely to injure the reputation of
another. Some inquiries, such as those
which investigate allegations of
misconduct or impropriety, are likely to injure the reputations of others by
their very nature.
12.8 Experience has shown that there is a need for such protection. For
example, in
Bretherton v
Mr Bretherton brought a
defamation action against a Victorian Board of Inquiry into allegations of
police corruption, and counsel
assisting the Board, in relation to statements
made by counsel assisting in his opening address to the Board. The judge noted
if counsel were constantly at risk of actions for defamation in inquiries,
‘cautious counsel could well fail in the performance
of the duty of
fearlessly pursuing the inquiry for
Although the action
failed in that case on the grounds that the public interest required that such
statements should be protected
from a defamation action, the judge indicated
that this did not necessarily apply to all proceedings before a board of
Subsequently, the
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) was amended to confer statutory protections
similar to those in
Royal Commissions
12.9 While participants in Royal Commissions may be protected by
Royal Commissions Act
, participants in non-statutory inquiries
receive no such protection. In consultations, the ALRC heard that those
conducting non-statutory
inquiries were usually, but not always, offered
indemnities against civil or criminal liability by the Attorney-General’s
Department.
12.10 In its submission, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC)
noted that, in the Inquiry into the Circumstances of
the Immigration Detention
of Cornelia Rau (2005), state governments participating in the review
sought legal arrangements and safeguards
for participating in the
DIAC suggested that:
automatic statutory access to legal protections for witnesses may have provided
more surety for participants and may have helped
to negate the requirement for
witnesses to seek those protections.
12.11 In consultations and submissions, stakeholders who addressed the issue
unanimously supported this kind of protection from legal
liability in relation
to Royal Commissions and other forms of public
12.12 In the ALRC’s view, members of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries, counsel assisting or appearing before them, and
witnesses should be
protected from legal liability in relation to the conduct of these inquiries. As
noted above, such protection
enables them to pursue the truth or speak freely
without fear of being sued. Such protection also ensures the independence of
members. These reasons are equally relevant to both Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries.
Form of protection
from legal liability
12.13 In the Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
(IP 35), the ALRC asked whether it was appropriate to give Royal
Commissioners the same immunity from civil liability as that enjoyed
Justice of the High Court, given that Royal Commissions form part of the
executive branch of government.
No submissions or consultations addressed this issue.
12.14 Professor Enid Campbell has suggested that it may be appropriate to
give Royal Commissions similar protection to that accorded
to the Ombudsman
Ombudsman Act 1976
This section
, neither the Ombudsman nor a person acting under his
or her direction or authority is liable to an action, suit or proceeding for
in relation to an act done or omitted to be done in good faith in exercise or
purported exercise of any power or authority conferred
by this Act or
Division 7 of Part V of the
Australian Federal Police
12.15 Under such protection, Royal Commissioners would not be immune from
suit for acts committed blatantly in excess of their jurisdiction.
This is more
limited than the complete immunity from civil or criminal liability afforded to
judges. A contrary view has been expressed
by Dr Leonard Hallett, who suggested
that this limitation would make the scope of the immunity uncertain, and that
Royal Commissions
are sufficiently analogous to judicial proceedings to warrant
similar protections.
Inquiries Act
, the NZLC considered that it was
inappropriate to confer on inquiry members an immunity equivalent to a judicial
immunity. The NZLC
observed that inquiries do not have the same ongoing need as
courts to ensure individual or institutional independence, and that
inquisitorial nature of inquiries, and the more relaxed application of rules of
evidence, meant there was greater likelihood
of unfair harm to a person’s
interests. Further, it was not evident that a complete immunity from legal
liability was necessary
for inquiries to perform their
12.17 The NZLC recommended, instead, that inquiries should enjoy a qualified
immunity. It recommended that inquiries and their members
should have no
liability for anything they may report, say, do or fail to do in the exercise or
intended exercise of their functions
unless the inquiry or inquiry member acted
in bad faith, as was common to most statutory
It rejected an
additional requirement that the act or omission be ‘reasonable’, on
the grounds that such a requirement
would be likely to generate unnecessary
litigation.
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) similarly provides a qualified
immunity. It provides that no action shall lie ‘in respect of any act done
or omission made
in the execution of his duty as such, or any act done or
omission made in good faith in the purported execution of duty as such’
the course of an inquiry.
12.19 Another issue is that, although the language in
Royal Commissions Act
is used commonly in legislation, the scope of the
immunity it confers is not necessarily clear. The section refers to the
enjoyed by judges, counsel and witnesses in the High Court. An
ordinary reader is unlikely to know which immunities and liabilities
witnesses, counsel and judges. The language also reinforces the misleading
perception that inquiries are ‘judicial’
in nature, rather than
investigations for the purposes of the executive.
12.20 Further, the phrasing of similar protections in Australian state and
territory legislation has caused some difficulties of interpretation.
Carruthers v Connolly
, the Supreme Court of Queensland considered and
rejected an argument that a similar immunity provision in the
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1950
(Qld) extended to all civil proceedings, including
proceedings for judicial review.
Thomas J noted in that case:
because of the difference of function and place in the legal system, there is an
immediate difficulty in giving a precise meaning
and application to the words
‘the same protection and immunity’ as a
12.21 The difficulties caused by the phrasing of a similar immunity provision
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) were also evident in the case of
action against a solicitor for the tort of misfeasance and collateral abuse of
process should be summarily dismissed or
struck out was at issue in that case.
Section 60(2)
gave a solicitor appearing before the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal the same immunity as a barrister has before the High Court.
South Wales Court of Appeal considered whether the immunity of a barrister
extended to torts that required intention, such
as the tort of misfeasance of
public office or collateral abuse of process. The Court held that it was
insufficiently clear whether
the immunity did extend to those torts. A judge
could not, therefore, summarily dismiss or strike out proceedings on that
Tampion v Anderson
, the Full Court of the Supreme Court of
Victoria held that counsel assisting a Board of Inquiry was not liable for the
tort of misfeasance
in a public office, as he did not exercise a ‘public
office’—a necessary element of that
The Court also questioned
whether a Board of Inquiry exercised a ‘public office’ for the
purposes of the tort, although
it assumed without deciding the point that the
tort was available for a ‘conscious abuse of [Board of Inquiry’s]
12.23 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS), referring to these cases,
submitted that:
In so far as there is some uncertainty over these questions, we suggest that
some consideration be given to whether the protection
of legal practitioners
provided for in
Royal Commissions Act
sufficiently clear to protect against claims of misfeasance in public office
arising from the conduct of the role of solicitors
12.24 In the ALRC’s view, a complete judicial immunity is unnecessary
for inquiries. For the reasons articulated by the NZLC,
a qualified immunity is
preferable. An inquiry does not have the same ongoing need for independence as a
court. Further, because
inquiry members play an active role in investigating
matters and are able to obtain and examine a wider range of material, there
greater potential for harm than in the case of judges examining evidence
presented to a court by opposing parties.
12.25 In addition, the ALRC proposes that the language used in
Royal Commissions Act
should be clarified. This will have the benefit
of making the extent of the immunity clear to the ordinary reader, as well as
some of the difficulties of interpretation encountered by courts.
12.26 In the ALRC’s view, the proposed
Inquiries Act
conferring protection on inquiry participants should be phrased in terms similar
Ombudsman Act
. That is, such a provision
should express clearly the intention to confer immunity from criminal or civil
proceedings for acts or
omissions done in good faith in the exercise of, or
intended exercise of, powers or functions under the proposed
12.27 The ALRC notes that the proposed provision does not address whether
inquiries and counsel or solicitors assisting are liable
for the tort of
misfeasance of public office. The proposed immunity is unlikely to protect
against the tort, since the tort requires
a conscious abuse or excess of
which indicates that
those acts or omissions are not done or made in good faith. The ALRC is of the
view, however, that no immunity
should be extended to such conduct.
Gaps in protection
from legal liability
Royal Commissions Act
protects Royal Commissioners, legal
practitioners assisting a Royal Commission and appearing on behalf of a person
before a Royal
Commission, and witnesses. It does not protect all those involved
in an inquiry.
Inquiry staff and
12.29 Much of the work done by Royal Commissions and other public inquiries
is conducted by the inquiry’s support staff. This
work may include
corresponding with potential witnesses, requesting information and comments from
the public and preparing preliminary
Staff of an inquiry are
likely to be involved in the collection and use of evidence. The duties of staff
may well overlap with the
duties of legal practitioners assisting and inquiry
members, and there is, therefore, a possibility that inquiry staff may incur
legal liability in relation to the conduct of an inquiry.
12.30 Protection from legal liability is afforded to the staff of
investigatory bodies.
Ombudsman Act
above, protects the Ombudsman (defined to include the Deputy Ombudsman and a
delegate of the Ombudsman) and any person ‘acting
under his or her
direction or authority’.
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(Cth) protects the Inspector-General
and a ‘person acting on behalf’ of the Inspector-General.
12.31 The support staff of an inquiry are not protected by
Royal Commissions Act
. Campbell and Hallett have both
expressed the view that, although public servants may be protected from
defamation suits,
it would be
desirable to protect the staff of an inquiry from legal liability, in line with
the protection afforded to Royal Commissioners
practitioners.
12.32 Among stakeholders who addressed this issue, there was general support
for an extension of the protection from legal liability
to others employed by
inquiries. For example, the CPSU submitted that such protection
should also extend as necessary to employees of the Royal Commission fulfilling
their employment duties.
Participants involved in other forms of public inquiry should be afforded
similar protections.
12.33 Further, in Chapter 6, the ALRC proposes that Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries should have the power to appoint expert
advisors to
provide technical or specialist
If no protection from
legal liability is provided for such expert advisors, they may be vulnerable to
legal action challenging their
advice. For example, a person may argue that an
expert was negligent in the provision of advice. This may have the effect of
discouraging
experts from advising inquiries, or of encouraging an over-cautious
approach by experts.
12.34 The protection afforded to witnesses under
Commissions Act
is expressed to apply to those ‘summoned to attend or
appearing before the Commission’. This suggests that those who choose
give evidence other than at hearings will not benefit from the protection. As
discussed in Chapter 15, it may be appropriate in
many inquiries to gather
evidence outside of formal hearings and in a non-adversarial setting.
12.35 Much broader protection is afforded in respect of some investigatory
bodies that employ more informal inquiry
procedures.
For example,
Ombudsman Act
Civil proceedings do not lie against a person in respect of loss, damage or
injury of any kind suffered by another person by reason
of any of the following
acts done in good faith:
(a) the making of a complaint to the Ombudsman under this Act;
(b) the making of a statement to, or the furnishing of a document or
information to, a person, being an officer within the meaning
section 35, for the purposes of this Act, whether or not the statement was
made, or the document or information was furnished,
in pursuance of a
requirement under section 9 or an order under section 11A.
12.36 This section protects anyone giving information to an officer of the
Ombudsman—including where such information was given
voluntarily—if
it was given in good faith. In consultations, both the Ombudsman and the
Inspector of Transport Security indicated
that these broader protections were
useful in encouraging people to provide
information.
12.37 Another issue concerns the potential liability for defamation in
relation to the publication of inquiry reports. Some commentators
that those reporting upon, or involved in the preparation or publication of,
inquiry reports, are not protected under
provisions similar to
Royal Commissions Act
DIAC noted that some witnesses involved in a non-statutory inquiry had
‘raised general concerns over whether their answers
and transcripts would
be made public and whether that could expose them to personal
12.38 This concern has been addressed by the uniform Defamation Acts
introduced in all Australian jurisdictions in
provide a defence of absolute privilege—that is, the defence applies
regardless of the motive of the person making
the statement—in relation to
any matter published in the course of proceedings of an Australian
An ‘Australian
tribunal’ is defined as any tribunal with the power to take evidence on
oath or affirmation, and expressly
includes Royal Commissions or other special
commissions of inquiry.
defence expressly applies to: any document filed or lodged with, or otherwise
submitted to, the tribunal; evidence given before
the tribunal; and any
judgment, order or other determination of the
12.39 The uniform Defamation Acts also provide for a defence in relation to
the publication of matters in public documents, or a fair
report or summary of
public documents.
document is defined to include, relevantly, any document authorised by the law
of any country to be published, or required
to be submitted or tabled before
Parliament.
In addition,
documents tabled in Parliament attract parliamentary privilege. In
Chapter 7, the ALRC proposes that the Australian
Government should table in
Parliament reports of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries or, if part of a
report is not to be tabled,
a statement of reasons why the whole report is not
being tabled.
12.40 The uniform Defamation Acts also protect publication of fair reports of
‘proceedings of public concern’, which is
defined as including any
proceedings in public of an inquiry authorised under any
The defences of publication
of public documents and fair reports of proceedings of public concern are
defeated if, and only if, the
plaintiff proves that the defamatory matter was
not published honestly for the information of the public or the advancement of
12.41 Finally, there is also a defence in relation to information published
to a recipient with an interest in receiving that
information.
This defence is
defeated if it is proved that the publication was actuated by
12.42 In the ALRC’s view, these defences provide appropriate protection
from defamation in relation to the publication of reports
and the giving of
evidence in inquiries, including the proposed Official Inquiries.
publications
12.43 Finally, some stakeholders raised concerns about the possibility of
civil proceedings in relation to publication of evidence
or reports on the
internet, or where a person gives evidence from a foreign jurisdiction using a
video link. Recent Royal Commissions
and some public inquiries have published
their reports and much of the material available to them on websites.
Dow Jones v Gutnick
the High Court of Australia
determined that, in relation to material published electronically, the tort of
defamation is committed
in the place where the material is
downloaded.
Potentially,
therefore, a person downloading material from an Australian inquiry website
outside of Australia may be able to sue
for defamation in that foreign
from legal liability discussed in this chapter will
not apply to claims made outside Australia. Similar considerations arise if a
person is giving evidence outside Australia, using a video link.
12.45 In Chapter 15, the ALRC discusses circumstances in which it may be
appropriate to restrict public access to matters before an
inquiry, including
where it may cause prejudice or hardship to an individual. These matters are
also relevant when an inquiry is
considering what should be published
electronically.
12.46 In its 2008 report
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
, the ALRC discussed the differences between generally available
information, such as electoral rolls, and the publication of such
information
electronically.
The ALRC noted
that the greater accessibility of electronic information, the novel ways in
which it could be aggregated or used,
and the greater difficulties in enforcing
rules relating to the collection and publication of such information, meant that
caution was required before making generally available information
available in electronic form.
12.47 The Office of the Privacy Commissioner has developed guidelines to
promote best practice in ensuring an appropriate degree of
and ACT government websites.
These provide a useful starting point for inquiries considering electronic
publication.
12.48 In the ALRC’s view, the staff of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries, should have protection equivalent to the protection
conferred on
those conducting the inquiry. Much of the work of an inquiry is likely to be
done by staff, and the same reasons that
justify the protection of inquiry
members and legal practitioners assisting or appearing before the inquiry
justify similar protection
for inquiry staff. As noted above, this would be
consistent with protection offered to the staff of standing investigatory
12.49 Expert advisors should have similar protection, since the work of such
advisors may overlap with, or take the place of, the
duties of legal
practitioners or inquiry members in some respects. The ALRC proposes that
inquiry staff and expert advisors have
similar protection to inquiry
12.50 It also appears desirable to extend protection from legal liability to
all those who supply information to inquiries, whether
they are required to
attend a hearing or otherwise. There is no reason to distinguish between the
protection of witnesses summoned
to a hearing, and others providing information
in less formal ways. Both need to be able to provide information fully and
to an inquiry, without fear of legal action in relation to the
information provided. Further, the extension of such protection will
inquiries to proceed more informally, as discussed in Chapter 15. The ALRC
proposes that a provision in similar terms to
, as set out above, should be included in the proposed
Proposal 12–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that no civil or criminal proceeding shall lie in respect of any actions done,
or omissions made, in good faith by
members of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries, legal practitioners assisting inquiries or legal representatives of
participants, expert advisors and inquiry staff, in the exercise of, or
intended exercise of, powers or functions under the Act.
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that civil
proceedings shall not lie against a person for loss, damage or injury of any
kind suffered by another person
by reason of the provision of any information or
the making of any statement to Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries, done in
good faith, whether by notice or otherwise.
Proposal 12–3
Inquiries Handbook
Commissions and Official Inquiries should address liability for defamation and
other court action in the case of electronic
publications.
Compellability
12.51 Under
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), a person who is
or was a judge in an Australian or overseas proceeding cannot be compelled to
give evidence about that proceeding
unless the court gives
This section was
recommended by the ALRC, on the basis that there was a risk of ‘judges
… being involved unnecessarily
proceedings’.
The NZLC, in
A New Inquiries Act
, considered that it was arguable that a provision
Royal Commissions Act
may also prevent a
commissioner from being compellable to give evidence in respect of their conduct
of the commission.
12.52 The legislation governing other investigatory bodies often includes a
provision that investigators are not compellable in proceedings.
For example,
the Ombudsman and his or her delegates are not compellable in proceedings in
relation to information acquired during
the course of their
investigation.
12.53 In its 1987 report on
, the ALRC recommended that Royal
Commissioners should be compellable only in respect of proceedings in which they
had been involved,
if leave is granted by the court trying the alleged
In its report
Inquiries Act
, the NZLC recommended a different provision, namely that that
members of an inquiry should not be compellable witnesses in relation
inquiry, except if bad faith is alleged, in which case they are compellable if
leave of the court is
12.54 There is a public interest in ensuring that members of Royal
Commissions or Official Inquiries are not brought to court unnecessarily
result of their involvement in inquiries. This protection should extend to both
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, since
the public interest is the same
in relation to both forms of inquiry.
12.55 The ALRC proposes that, in line with
, the proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that those conducting
inquiries should not be compellable to give evidence about those inquiries,
unless the court
gives leave. It is expected that a court usually will not give
leave if the evidence required is evidence that can be supplied in
another form,
such as by a transcript of inquiry proceedings, or by the documents of an
Proposal 12–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries are not compellable to
give evidence about those inquiries,
unless the court gives leave.
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 21A;
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1950
Royal Commissions Act 1917
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Royal Commissions Act
Inquiries Act 1945
D’Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria
[2005] HCA 12
(2005) 223 CLR 1
, [37]–[45],
Fingleton v The Queen
[2005] HCA 34
(2005) 227 CLR 166
, [38]–[40].
New Zealand Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Royal Commissions
and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural Aspects
Bretherton v Kaye
[1971] VicRp 12
Evidence (Boards and
Commissions) Act 1971
(Vic), inserting s 21A. For a fuller discussion,
see L Hallett,
Royal Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and
Procedural Aspects
Department of
Immigration and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
For example,
Community and Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009; Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35
(2009), [8.72].
H Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration
Appendix 4K, 359.
Royal Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural
(1982), 315.
New Zealand
Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Inquiries Act
Carruthers v
[1998] 1 Qd R 339
Leerdam v Noori
[2009] NSWCA 90
Tampion v Anderson
[1973] VicRp 70
[1973] VR 715
Australian Government Solicitor,
Northern Territory v
(1995) 185 CLR 307
H Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration
Appendix 4K, 360.
The protection
referred to is the defence of qualified privilege that protects (among other
things) the publication of government
and political matters. See
(these defences are replicated in all
Australian jurisdictions under the uniform
Defamation Acts
2006, as discussed below).
Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government
Administration
(1976), Appendix 4K, 359–360; L Hallett,
Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural Aspects
Community and Public
Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Proposal 6–8.
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Consultation
, Canberra, 14 May 2009; Inspector of Transport Security,
Consultation
, 4 June 2009.
Royal Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural
(1982), 320–321.
Department of Immigration and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
(ACT) as amended; and
Defamation Act 2006
(NT). The sections
cited below in relation to the
Defamation Act 2005
(NSW) apply to the
legislation of other states and territories, except as noted otherwise.
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
s 137(2)(b)
Defamation Act
s 24(2)(b).
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Dictionary;
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Defamation Act
Defamation Act 2005
s 27(2)(b)(i)
s 25(2)(b)(i)
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
s 137(2)(b)(i)
Defamation Act 2006
s 24(2)(b)(i)
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Defamation Act
Defamation Act 2005
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
s 138(4)(c)
Defamation Act
s 25(4)(c). The issue of tabling reports is discussed in
Proposal 7–2.
Defamation Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
s 139(4)(f)
Defamation Act
(NT) s 26(4)(f).
Defamation Act 2005
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Defamation Act
(NT) ss 25(3),
Defamation Act
Defamation Act 2005
(Wrongs) Act 2002
Defamation Act
Defamation Act
Defamation Act 2005
Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Defamation Act
Dow Jones & Co
Inc v Gutnick
(2002) 210 CLR 575.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008), Ch
Ibid, [11.27]–[11.28],
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner,
Guidelines for Federal and ACT Government Websites
See also the Office of the Victorian Privacy Commissioner,
This provision is replicated
in the uniform evidence legislation of other Australian jurisdictions, such as
Evidence Act 1995
Section 192
Evidence Act
requires courts to take into consideration, before
granting leave, matters such as: the effect on the length of the hearing; any
to a party or witness; the importance of the evidence; and the nature
of the proceeding.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Evidence (Interim)
ALRC 26 (1985),
New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Ombudsman Act 1976
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act
Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987), Rec
New Zealand Law Commission,
New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Rec 51.
13. National Security
Introduction
Royal Commissions and inquiries in cases of national security
Royal Commission on Espionage
Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security
Royal Commission on Australia’s Security and Intelligence Agencies
Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Secret Intelligence Service
Inquiry into Australian Intelligence Agencies
AWB Inquiry
Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
Overview of the use of national security information by inquiries
Other issues
Government policies and protocols
Existing permanent bodies
Expert role for the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Protection of national security information in court proceedings
Security clearances
Overseas jurisdictions
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Are special arrangements and powers required?
Should the NSI Act apply to inquiries?
A framework for the protection of national security information
Role of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Technical assistance
13. National Security
Introduction
13.1 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry ask the ALRC to consider whether
there is any need to develop special arrangements and
powers for inquiries
involving matters of national security. At present, the
Royal Commissions Act
(Cth) does not contain any provisions dealing specifically with the
protection of information that may prejudice national security
conduct of an inquiry or after its completion.
13.2 The discovery of the truth has been described as a prime function of a
Royal Commission.
Royal Commissions
are established only where a particular area of public concern has been
identified. Their purpose is to determine
factual circumstances, report on the
matters specified in the Letters Patent and make recommendations. Royal
Commission proceedings,
therefore, are generally conducted in public and full
reporting by the media is allowed. A comprehensive final report detailing all
the evidence heard is generally prepared by the Commission. However, there may
be some national security-related information which,
in the public interest,
should not be disclosed publicly. Further, there are occasions on which the
public interests in open justice
and open government must be weighed against a
proper need for secrecy.
13.3 Against this background, this chapter provides an overview of previous
Royal Commissions and inquiries that have considered matters
involving national
security or have required access to national security information in the course
of their inquiries. From this
discussion, it is possible to identify a number of
existing mechanisms that inquiries have used to protect national security
information.
The chapter then examines some issues that arise for consideration
in the context of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries such
as: existing
government policies and protocols for the protection of national security
information; the role of existing permanent
bodies; the protection of national
security information in court proceedings; and the use of security clearances as
a method of protecting
and limiting access to such information. The approach
taken in comparable overseas jurisdictions to the protection of national
information is also considered.
13.4 The ALRC puts forward a number of proposals for special arrangements and
powers for Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
where matters of national
security are under consideration. The proposals take into account the need for a
flexible system for inquiries
that incorporates both legal and practical
solutions, including by way of guidance in the proposed
. They also emphasise the role of the inquiry members in tailoring
procedures that will apply in any particular case in line with
the specific
circumstances of the inquiry and the dictates of procedural fairness.
Royal Commissions and
inquiries in cases of national security
13.5 This section examines a number of past Royal Commissions and inquiries
that have dealt with issues of national security or have
required access to
national security information in conducting their inquiries.
Royal Commission on
13.6 The Royal Commission on Espionage (1955) was established in May 1954
following the defection of two Soviet diplomats, Vladimir
and Evdokia Petrov.
The Letters Patent authorising the investigation and report were issued pursuant
to s 3 of the
Royal Commissions Act 1954
Subsequently, in order to
increase the powers conferred upon the Royal Commission and to remove certain
doubts that had arisen, the
Royal Commission on Espionage Act 1954
was enacted.
13.7 The Royal Commission was ‘concerned with matters which vitally
affect the security and defence of the country’, its
investigations
involved ‘an examination of evidence and of material of a most
confidential character; for example material
in the possession of [ASIO], and
some supplied by similar organizations in friendly countries’ and to
‘investigate material
of this nature in public was, in the national
interest, undesirable’. Despite the subject matter, the Royal Commission,
sat over 126 days in Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne, held most of its
hearings in public except in ‘certain cases in which
it seemed ... that
the national interest demanded’ that evidence be heard in private
sessions. Those cases fell into four broad
where the evidence was known to be of such a nature that, for
reasons of security, it should not be made public;
where a witness was engaged in counter-intelligence work and it was
not desirable to disclose their identity;
where it was uncertain until a matter had been investigated whether
the answers to the questions would involve security considerations;
where the relations of Australia with other countries made it
desirable that evidence concerning their nationals either should not
published or should be made known to the governments of those countries before
publication.
13.8 Transcripts
of most of these private proceedings were withheld from publication until after
the Royal Commission had presented
its report. Some of the transcripts, however,
were never published including in camera evidence of former and serving
servants of the
Report of the Royal Commission on Espionage
was presented to
the Governor-General on 22 August 1955 and tabled in Parliament on 14 September
A separate 20 page
Annexure to the Report of the Royal Commission on Espionage
presented consisting of excerpts from the ‘Moscow Papers’ and
in-camera evidence that the Royal Commissioners
withheld from the report. This
included the names of certain foreign diplomats in Australia, officers of the
Department of External
Affairs and slanderous material which the Royal
Commissioners and government agencies felt should not be made public. The
was intended for ‘official eyes only’ and had a very
limited distribution.
Royal Commission on
Intelligence and Security
13.10 The Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security (1977) involved a
comprehensive review of Australia’s security services,
including their
history, administrative structure and functions. The Royal Commission, chaired
by the Hon Justice Robert Hope, was
established by Letters Patent on 21 August
1974 and concluded its work in 1977.
13.11 The nature of the inquiry required ‘a somewhat different
procedure to be adopted to that commonly adopted in the case
Commissions ... particularly because of the degree of secrecy attached to many
of the matters subject of the
Consequently, while
some of the sittings were held in public, most of them were held in camera. This
practice was adopted not only
because of the nature of the subject matter of the
evidence and submissions, but also to protect those participating in the inquiry
or those to whom they referred.
Commissioner Hope made orders pursuant to s 6D(3) of the
Royal Commissions
, directing that evidence given before the Commission, or the contents of
documents, books or writings produced at the inquiry, not
13.12 The Royal Commission also adopted other mechanisms to protect sensitive
material. For example, in inviting submissions, the
Commission advised those
wishing to refer to secret information in their submission that the secretary of
the relevant department
must be informed in
Further, Hope adopted a
practice of making a recommendation as to whether each of the eight separate
reports of the Royal Commission
should be made public or regarded as
classified.
recognised that information about many of the matters under investigation could
not be released publicly, he was concerned
that where possible his findings
should be set out in a way that would enable them to be released
immediately.
Accordingly, some
of the reports were divided into publishable and non-publishable portions and
some were accompanied by abridged
versions of the findings and recommendations
suitable for publication.
13.13 The Royal Commission’s operating procedures were also influenced
by the subject matter of the inquiry, which drew upon
some 2,000 supporting
files from security and intelligence agencies. As described by the former
Secretary of the Royal Commission,
George Brownbill, the minimum classification
of most of the files provided to the Royal Commission was ‘secret’
were ‘top secret’ or
The office was located
in secure premises in Canberra with a cipher locked entrance, 24 hour police
guard and two secure electronic
perimeters. All staff had top secret security
clearances as provided for in the
Protective Security
. Brownbill required all staff to observe strictly procedures for
paper handling, communications security and personal
discretion.
13.14 Hope was concerned about the records of the Royal Commission and in the
Eighth Report set out recommendations about the disposal
and subsequent use of
the records—which he envisaged would be preserved and eventually released
for public access.
The sensitive
records of the Commission were transferred to the National Archives of Australia
for appropriate
classification.
Royal Commission on
Australia’s Security and Intelligence Agencies
13.15 The Royal Commission on Australia’s Security and Intelligence
Agencies (1984) was announced on 12 May 1983 following the
expulsion from
Australia of the Soviet diplomat, Mr Valeriy Ivanov, and exposure of his
relationship with the Australian lobbyist,
David Combe. Justice Hope was again
appointed Royal Commissioner.
13.16 At the outset of hearings, Hope indicated that the nature of the
investigation would require that some evidence be heard in
closed session.
Difficulties arose, however, from the exclusion of Combe from part of the
hearings notwithstanding that he was mentioned
by name in the terms of reference
and had a clear interest in any findings that were
Hope decided to
characterise information as falling within four separate classes:
matter so sensitive it should not be shown either to Mr Combe or his
matter that could be shown to Mr Combe’s counsel, but not to
Mr Combe or his instructing solicitor;
matter that could be shown to Mr Combe and his instructing
solicitor; and
matter that could be made
made ‘class orders’ from time to time covering specific portions of
the evidence and every exhibit was listed
with a notation indicating to which of
the four classes it was
There were only two
pieces of evidence which fell within the most sensitive class. These were of
only peripheral relevance and had
no bearing upon Hope’s
conclusions.
Evidence falling
within the next most sensitive class was made available solely on the basis of
the ‘need-to-know’ principle.
Hence, only counsel and the witness
giving evidence remained in the hearing
13.18 Of a total of 68 hearing days there were in camera hearings on 54 days.
The full transcript of public hearings and edited transcript
of in camera
hearings were published. Material was deleted only for reasons concerning
national security or privacy. The national
security considerations taken into
account in editing material included information on intelligence sources,
methods of operation,
resources, technical capacity, and knowledge about foreign
intelligence services and methods of countering their
activities.
Hope adopted a
procedure whereby Royal Commission staff undertook preliminary editing of the
transcripts of in camera proceedings.
The draft transcript was then circulated
to counsel for the Australian Government and counsel for Mr Combe (and,
where appropriate,
counsel for particular witnesses) to enable them to express a
view. Hope noted that ‘by this process a large measure of agreement
reached as to what should be published but when a difference remained it was
resolved by me’.
13.19 Hope observed that throughout the hearings he ‘was faced with the
difficult problem of balancing competing interests’—which
‘valid security considerations, valid considerations of the public
interest and Mr Combe’s interests’—and
the need to make
rulings with regard to the publication of evidence arose
frequently.
He dealt with these issues on a case-by-case basis.
13.20 The report contained all the material which the Commissioner considered
could be made public. Other material, which the Commissioner
recommended not be
published, was contained in a separate volume of
appendices.
Commission of Inquiry
into the Australian Secret Intelligence Service
13.21 The genesis of the non-statutory Commission of Inquiry into the
Australian Secret Intelligence Service (1995) was media stories
disclosing what
purported to be details of certain Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS)
operations based on information
supplied by two former ASIS officers (the
complainants).
On 23 February
1994, the Australian Government announced the terms of reference of a
‘judicial inquiry into the operations
and management of
Subsequently, the
Hon Gordon Samuels QC and a former senior public servant, Mr Michael Codd, were
appointed to head the inquiry.
The inquiry held an initial public hearing on 2 May 1993 and thereafter sat for
64 days in camera. The inquiry did not release any
transcript of the evidence
which it had taken or any of the exhibits it had
13.22 On 31 March 1995, the inquiry delivered to the Prime Minister a three
volume secret report together with a summary report. The
summary report was
released publicly on 24 April 1995. Subsequently, the Australian Government
tabled the first volume of the report
with deletions recommended by the inquiry
to protect national security and privacy. The second volume of the report was
public for reasons of privacy and national security, although the
complainants and their legal representatives were allowed to see
certain parts
on conditions of strict confidentiality. A copy of the full classified report
was provided to the Leader of the Opposition
and the Shadow Foreign Minister,
subject to assurances of
confidentiality.
Inquiry into
Australian Intelligence Agencies
13.23 The Inquiry into Australian Intelligence Agencies (2004) was a
non-statutory inquiry conducted by Mr Philip Flood at the request
of the Prime
Minister. The primary focus of the inquiry was on the intelligence agencies in
relation to foreign intelligence collection
and assessment. In preparing the
report, Flood was given full access to all intelligence material that he
required. He also conducted
formal and informal interviews with members of the
Australian Government, members and former members of Parliament and members and
former members of the Australian Public Service and the Australian Defence
Force. Only one person declined to be interviewed by the
As required by his
letter of appointment, Flood delivered a classified and unclassified version of
his report.
AWB Inquiry
13.24 During the Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the
UN Oil-For-Food Programme (2006) (AWB Inquiry), the
Australian Government,
through the Australian Intelligence Community (AIC), produced certain classified
documents to the inquiry
in response to a notice. The AIC sought orders that
some of the documents not be produced, together with statutory declarations in
support of the application for non-publication. The grounds of the application
were that the public interest required that the documents
remain secret because
they were highly classified for national security reasons and the accompanying
statutory declarations, if disclosed,
might reveal information that might defeat
the protection of the documents.
13.25 The Commissioner, the Hon Terence Cole QC, upheld these claims and
ordered, pursuant to s 6D of the
Royal Commissions Act
, that the secret
documents and statutory declarations not be published and only be viewed by
nominated members of the inquiry legal
team. It was also ordered that witnesses
who might be expected to have seen the secret documents at the time they were
officers of
the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade could be shown a copy
and asked questions in a manner that did not disclose, in any way,
the contents,
the sources of the contents or the originating agency of the contents of the
documents unless specifically authorised
13.26 Subsequently, various parties submitted that the Commission did not
have powers to hear or decide questions of public interest
immunity under the
Royal Commissions Act
. Cole rejected those
submissions.
No party sought
judicial review of this decision.
13.27 Counsel assisting the Commission produced in draft form a
‘summation of the material’ contained in the secret documents.
document was provided initially to the Australian Government on a confidential
basis to ensure that it did not disclose any material
which ought not to be
disclosed in the public interest. A substitute document, containing minor
amendments to satisfy the government’s
concerns, became an exhibit and a
public document.
satisfied that the document was a sufficient and adequate summation of the
secret documents.
Clarke Inquiry into
the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
13.28 Issues concerning the protection of classified and security sensitive
material also arose in the Inquiry into the Case of Dr
Mohamed Haneef (2008)
(Clarke Inquiry). The head of the inquiry, the Hon John Clarke QC, had
considerable difficulty negotiating
access to sensitive material from the
National Security Committee of Cabinet, as well as departments and agencies. In
his report,
Clarke noted that the physical arrangements made for the protection
of relevant information were inconvenient and cumbersome, and
documents were over-classified and should have had their security classification
He also noted that gaining access to classified material from the United Kingdom
was a ‘huge obstacle for all involved in the
Finally, there was some difficulty in establishing which aspects of the report
could be freely published.
of these difficulties delayed the progress of the inquiry and eventually led to
an extension of the reporting date.
13.29 Clarke’s report consisted of two volumes. The first volume sought
to deal fully with the matters covered by the terms
of reference and Clarke
envisaged that it would be publicly released. In describing the events of the
case, Clarke ‘made every
effort to avoid including any material that might
be judged a threat to national security information or continuing operations or
might jeopardise any current
The second volume
contained supplementary material that provided greater detail and analysis of
the events examined and included
references to sensitive or classified material
that could not be published immediately.
13.30 Clarke expressed the view that inquiries or independent reviews that
involve national security and thus deal with sensitive
documentation and
evidence should be covered by statutory
provisions.
He recommended that
the Australian Government consider incorporating in legislation the special
arrangements and powers that would
apply to inquiries and other independent
reviews and investigations involving matters of national
of the use of national security information by inquiries
13.31 Royal Commissions are not formally bound by the same requirements of
openness as courts or tribunals and may call any witness,
conduct hearings in
private, and direct that any evidence or documents provided shall not be
As can be seen from
the above examples, previous Royal Commissions and inquiries have used a number
of mechanisms to ensure the protection
of national security information in the
conduct of their inquiries, including:
holding hearings and examinations in private;
withholding material, such as transcripts and exhibits, from
publication, or deferring publication of such material;
making orders prohibiting the disclosure of particular documents or
classes of documents;
making orders prohibiting the disclosure of the identity of
participants in an inquiry;
making orders relating to how a person should be examined and what
documents can be shown to the person;
adapting inquiry procedures, for example, implementing arrangements
with inquiry participants and the Australian Government to enable
agreement to
be reached on what portions of the transcript should, and should not, be
requiring inquiry participants to provide notice prior to referring
to national security information in the course of the inquiry,
including in
submissions;
preparing confidential volumes or annexures of the report and
placing limits on their distribution;
making recommendations to the Australian Government regarding which
parts of a report should, or should not, be made public;
preparing abridged versions of findings and recommendations suitable
for publication;
examining national security information and preparing summaries of
such information for use in the conduct of the inquiry;
entering into arrangements with Australian Government agencies for
the protection of national security information provided to the
including handling and storage; and
making arrangements for persons accessing national security
information in the course of an inquiry to obtain security
clearances.
13.32 The doctrine of public interest
immunity—which protects certain government documents from being called for
under a coercive
power—has been used to prevent the disclosure of
information that is likely to prejudice national security in the context of
Royal Commissions.
Commonwealth inquiries, such as the Clarke Inquiry, have developed ad hoc
procedures to deal with issues concerning the protection
of classified and
security sensitive material.
13.33 Royal Commissions and other inquiries must also comply with the
requirements of s 15XT of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), the purpose of which
is to ensure, to the greatest extent possible, that the real identity of a
person who has an assumed
identity—such as members of intelligence and law
enforcement agencies—is protected from disclosure in the course of
proceedings
before a court, tribunal, Royal Commission or other commission of
Government policies
and protocols
13.34 The Australian Government has an existing security classification
system and a protective security policy—the
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual
(PSM). The PSM is produced and periodically
revised by the Protective Security Coordination Centre (PSCC) in the Australian
Attorney-General’s Department (AGD).
The PSM is the principal means for communicating protective security policies,
procedures and minimum security requirements related
to the protection of the
Government’s official resources. It is designed to assist agencies with
their protective security
arrangements, and includes principles, standards and
procedures for the protection of government personnel, infrastructure and
information.
13.35 In the Clarke Inquiry, the AGD assisted the inquiry to develop and
promulgate arrangements for the protection of national security
classified information provided to the inquiry. According to the report, the
arrangements ‘were in accordance with
the prescriptions of the [PSM] and
the relevant legislation’.
As part of this process, the inquiry had systems and equipment installed to
upgrade its premises and storage facilities to meet the
standards required for
classification as a ‘secure area’. While all inquiry staff had
security clearances at top secret
or secret level, they were still required to
view some documents at the premises of particular agencies with some documents
delivered to, and removed from, the inquiry offices daily. In his report,
Clarke noted that the situation was extremely inconvenient
both administratively
and operationally. He also formed the view that many documents were
‘over-classified’.
Existing permanent
13.36 There are a number of existing permanent bodies that may be tasked with
conducting inquiries into matters involving consideration
of national security
issues and information. In this section, the ALRC examines issues relating to
the functions, powers and jurisdiction
of these bodies. In some circumstances,
it may be more appropriate, in terms of expertise and resources, for the
Australian Government
to appoint existing bodies to conduct inquiries rather
than establishing a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and
13.37 At least in respect of the six AIC
there is already an
independent statutory office within the Prime Minister’s portfolio
established to conduct inquiries into
the legality and propriety of their
activities—the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS).
13.38 The IGIS has an own motion capacity and strong coercive powers and
protections as set out in the
Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(Cth). Given the nature of the
material involved, inquiries under the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security Act
must be conducted in
The IGIS is well
practised in accessing, handling and dealing with the storage and further use of
classified material. It also occupies
highly secure premises and the AIC has
grown comfortable over time with the level of security practised by the office
over more than
20 years of maintaining and protecting
confidentiality.
Given that the
its inquiries to other agencies or non-public
sector bodies even if a national
security-related matter could be adequately examined only by looking beyond the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
imposes secrecy obligations on the IGIS and IGIS staff. Such persons
cannot communicate any information acquired by reason of their
position, except
in the performance of their statutory functions or the exercise of their
statutory powers.
Section 34(5)
exempts such persons from any obligation to produce documents or provide
information to a court, tribunal, authority or person which
has power to require
production of documents or answering of questions except where it is necessary
to do so for the purposes of
Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security Act
13.40 Following the establishment of the Royal Commission into the Australian
Secret Intelligence Service in 1994, the Australian
Government considered that
the secrecy provisions in
might prevent the IGIS and IGIS staff from giving
information or documents to assist the
Commission.
Accordingly,
was inserted into the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security Act
to ensure that the IGIS and IGIS staff were able to cooperate
fully with the Royal
Commission.
13.41 The current IGIS submitted that, while
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
is a protection from
compulsion, it leaves a discretion for the IGIS to decide to release
information, should there not be another
constraint on doing so. The IGIS
submitted that
should be repealed so that the IGIS is not potentially
constrained from providing assistance to a Royal Commission, should the IGIS
consider it appropriate to do
Commonwealth Ombudsman
13.42 The office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman, another independent statutory
office tasked with investigating the administrative
actions of Commonwealth
departments and prescribed authorities, is equipped with coercive
information-gathering powers, employs staff
with varying levels of security
clearance and has existing information technology infrastructure to corral
sensitive information.
As in the case of the IGIS, however, there are
limitations on the extent to which the Ombudsman can investigate
matters—including
those involving matters of national
security—beyond the public
13.43 The powers of the Ombudsman to investigate national security-related
matters may be limited by
Ombudsman Act 1976
(Cth). This
section provides that the Attorney-General may issue a certificate certifying
that the disclosure to the Ombudsman of
certain information or documents would
be contrary to the public interest for a number of reasons—including that
it would prejudice
the security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth.
Parliamentary Joint Committee
13.44 The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
has limited inquiry
powers relating to the review of the administration, expenditure and financial
statements of intelligence agencies
within the AIC and other matters. The
Committee can also review matters relating to the AIC referred to it by the
responsible minister
or the Parliament. The Committee is not authorised to
initiate its own references, but may request the responsible minister to refer
particular matter to it for review. The Committee is specifically excluded from
reviewing, among other things, the intelligence-gathering
priorities of the
agencies, their sources of information or other operational matters, and from
conducting inquiries into individual
complaints made against those
Expert role for the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
13.45 There may be scope to give existing permanent bodies, such as the IGIS,
a role in advising and assisting Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries in the
use of national security information. An expert advisory role for the IGIS is
currently under consideration
Freedom of Information (Removal of
Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
(Cth). The Bill proposes a
new role for the IGIS in proceedings in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT) involving merits review
of claims under a national security, defence, or
international relations exemption, or a confidential foreign government
communication
The Bill provides that before making a determination that a document is not
exempt, the AAT will be required to request the IGIS
to give evidence on:
the damage that would, or could reasonably be expected to, result
from disclosure to:
• the security of the Commonwealth; or
• the defence of the Commonwealth; or
• the international relations of the Commonwealth; or
whether giving access to the document would divulge any information
or matter communicated in confidence by or on behalf of a foreign
government, an
authority of a foreign government or an international organisation to the
Government.
If the AAT is already satisfied that the exemption claim should be upheld on
other evidence, it is intended that evidence would
not be sought from the IGIS.
According to the Explanatory Memorandum, the purpose of the new procedural
requirement is to assist
the AAT through the provision of expert advice, which
would be independent to an agency’s submissions in support of its decision
to claim an exemption. The AAT, however, is not bound by any opinion expressed
by the IGIS. Nor is the measure intended to affect
the ability of agencies to
give evidence before the AAT on the harm that could result from the disclosure
of the documents. Additionally,
the IGIS could only be called to give evidence
after the relevant agency or minister has given evidence or made
submissions.
13.47 The Bill requires the IGIS to give evidence if requested, unless the
IGIS is of the view that he or she is not qualified to
give expert evidence.
Provision is made for the IGIS to have access to documents in order to be
properly informed before giving evidence.
Protection of
national security information in court proceedings
13.48 The ALRC reviewed the handling and protection of national security
information in legal proceedings in its 2004 report
Keeping Secrets:
Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive Information
(ALRC 98). In
that report, the ALRC recommended the introduction of legislation to govern the
use of such information in all stages
of proceedings in all courts and tribunals
in Australia. The ALRC’s recommended scheme was intended to provide courts
and tribunals
with a range of options to tailor orders to suit the circumstances
of the particular case, including:
admitting the sensitive material after it has been edited or
‘redacted’ (that is, with the sensitive parts obscured);
replacing the sensitive material with alternative, less sensitive,
forms of evidence;
using closed-circuit TV, computer monitors, headphones and other
technical means to hide the identity of witnesses or the content
of sensitive
evidence (in otherwise open proceedings);
limiting the range of people given access to sensitive material (for
example, limiting access only to those with an appropriate security
clearance);
closing all or part of the proceedings to the public; and
hearing part of the proceedings in the absence of one of the parties
and its legal representatives—although not in criminal
prosecutions or
civil proceedings (except some judicial review matters), and only in other
exceptional cases, (subject to certain
safeguards).
was the ALRC’s view that the same principles that apply to court
proceedings should generally apply to tribunal proceedings
Commissions.
National Security Information (Criminal and
Civil Proceedings) Act 2004 (Cth)
13.50 In 2004 and 2005, the Australian Government introduced legislation
establishing a scheme for the handling of national security
information in
criminal, and some civil, proceedings. The
National Security Information
(Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth) (NSI Act) largely
incorporates the framework and terminology developed by the ALRC, as well as a
number of principles and processes
that are consistent with those expressed in
ALRC 98. There are some points of departure in detail, however, between the NSI
the ALRC’s recommended statutory scheme. Further, and critically
important in the context of this Inquiry, the Act only relates
criminal and civil proceedings, and not to Royal Commissions or other types of
13.51 The NSI Act sets out a comprehensive procedure to determine the way in
which information that may prejudice national security
may be used in court
proceedings.
The NSI Act is
thereby said to facilitate the prosecution of an offence without prejudicing
national security or the right of a defendant
The NSI Act is
supplemented by the
National Security Information (Criminal Proceedings)
Regulations 2005
(Cth) (NSI Regulations) and the
Requirements for the
Protection of National Security Information in Federal Criminal Proceedings and
Civil Proceedings
issued by the AGD (NSI Requirements). Together, these
documents provide a comprehensive regulatory framework for the disclosure,
storage and handling of national security information in federal criminal
proceedings and civil proceedings, whether in documentary
The AGD has also published
Practitioner’s Guide
13.52 The current practice in proceedings to which the NSI Act applies
involves alternative ‘tracks’ for the management
of national
security information issues.
first track, under Division 1 of Part 3, provides for pre-trial conferences to
consider issues regarding the disclosure in the
trial of information that
relates to, or may affect, national
and for the parties to
agree to consent arrangements about such
disclosures.
The Court may make
orders to give effect to consent
arrangements.
The second track,
under Division 2 of Part 3, involves the parties providing notifications to the
Attorney-General about any expected
disclosure of national security
information
and mandatory
adjournments of proceedings until the Attorney-General has either provided a
non-disclosure certificate or witness-exclusion
certificate to the
or advised that no such
certificates will be issued. If the Attorney-General is satisfied that the
disclosure of information would
be likely to prejudice national security and has
issued a certificate, he or she may provide a copy of the document with the
information
deleted, with or without a summary of the information or a statement
of the facts that such information would be likely to
13.53 The procedures for the disclosure of national security information in
federal criminal proceedings and civil proceedings in
the NSI Act have been in
operation for over four years and, as at June 2008, have been invoked in federal
criminal cases involving
28 defendants and in civil proceedings relating to the
making of a control order under the
Criminal Code Act 1995
It has been observed that
the first track, involving consent arrangements, has become common practice in
and ‘provides a
way of dealing with the complications that can arise’ from the second
As noted in the
Practitioner’s Guide
, consent arrangements ‘are useful
because they can alleviate the need for the parties to fully adhere to detailed
set out in the NSI Regulations and NSI Requirements
arrangements are ordinarily negotiated as part of the pre-trial process between
counsel for the Attorney-General and the
defendant. The orders made are
invariably detailed and may run to many
Public interest immunity
13.54 Before the NSI Act, the common law doctrine of public interest immunity
was the main mechanism by which the Commonwealth could
seek to protect national
security information from disclosure during court
proceedings.
As noted in
Chapter 16, public interest immunity allows a court to exclude evidence
which, if admitted, would be injurious to the
public interest.
13.55 According to Donaghue, ‘traditional public interest immunity
claims are, in the vast majority of cases, just as effective
as the NSI Act in
preventing any disclosure of information that is likely to prejudice national
Donaghue also
argues that traditional public interest immunity claims have practical
advantages over the NSI Act procedure, namely:
they do not require the personal involvement of the
Attorney-General, but can be made by a senior public servant or head of the
they can often be heard in public whereas claims made under the NSI
Act must be held in private;
they do not require the adjournment of the entire proceeding while
the claim is prepared, but it is arguable that the NSI Act does
require such an
adjournment.
13.56 According
to Donaghue, the main type of case that calls for the NSI Act to be used arises
where either the prosecution or the
defence needs to rely, as a central part of
their case, on information that, if disclosed, would damage national
If a public interest
immunity claim was made and upheld in that type of case, crucial evidence may
not be available resulting in
the prosecution either failing or being stayed
because information had been denied to the
In contrast, the NSI
Act creates a procedure for such information to be admitted into evidence, but
in a form that ensures that it
does not prejudice national security—for
example, edited documents, summaries, or statements of facts of the kind
contemplated
by s 26 of the NSI
13.57 A number of additional difficulties associated with reliance upon
public interest immunity to protect national security information
identified.
National security
issues may arise unexpectedly, even after an inappropriate disclosure has
occurred, and claims for public interest
immunity will therefore often have to
be determined at very short notice. Additionally, it does not protect
information from disclosure
before the making of a court order. Nor does it
allow for summaries or stipulations of fact to be substituted (in contrast to
procedure under s 26 of the NSI Act).
13.58 The requirement of a security clearance is another method used to
protect national security
information.
In ALRC 98, the
ALRC considered existing procedures in relation to security assessments and
clearances. It also considered issues
concerning security clearances for various
people (including lawyers) involved in court and tribunal
proceedings.
Similar issues may
arise in the context of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries that require
access to national security information
for the purposes of conducting the
inquiry. There are a number of examples—including the Royal Commission on
Intelligence and
Security and, more recently, the Clarke Inquiry—in which
inquiry staff have obtained security clearances in order to access
security information.
13.59 In ALRC 98, it was recommended that courts retain the discretion to
grant lawyers without a security clearance participating
in proceedings access
to national security information, subject to such restrictions and undertakings
that the court considers
The ALRC was of the
view that, in particular cases, it may be desirable to restrict access to those
holding an appropriate security
Rather than imposing
obligations on lawyers to obtain a security clearance, however, it was
recommended that the power to grant orders
should be directed at controlling
access to sensitive documents or
information.
The ALRC concluded
that allowing courts to order that specified material not be disclosed to any
person who does not hold a security
clearance at a relevant level was an
appropriate part of an overall procedural framework for the disclosure and
admission of classified
and sensitive national security information in court and
tribunal proceedings.
also recommended that courts and tribunals be empowered to order that certain
specified material be disclosed only to people
who hold a security clearance at
a specified level, including court and tribunal staff, reporters and
13.60 In contrast, the NSI Act empowers the Secretary of the AGD to give
notice to a defendant’s lawyer (or anyone assisting
that lawyer) that the
proceedings involve information that is likely to prejudice national
That person then may
apply for a security clearance (if he or she does not already have one) at a
level considered appropriate by
the Secretary of the
Any adjournment necessary
to seek that clearance must be given by the
If the person does not
apply for clearance within 14 days, the court must be informed and may then
advise the defendant of the consequences
and may recommend that he or she retain
another lawyer who is cleared or is prepared to seek a
13.61 Those persons who do not obtain a security clearance will be unable to
have access to some of the evidence in the case. The
court cannot override this
prohibition and grant access to information the disclosure of which would
prejudice national security
to any person without a clearance to the requisite
level, whether pursuant to a confidentiality undertaking or
13.62 The ALRC has previously expressed the strong view that judges and
magistrates should never be subject to any security clearance
in relation to
their duties.
This view was
informed by concerns about the separation of powers and judicial independence.
Under the NSI Act, judges are not required
to undergo security clearances. The
court retains a discretion to exclude other court personnel who are not security
cleared such
as associates, tip staff, court reporters, corrections officers and
anyone else involved in the handling and storage of national
information.
13.63 The following section examines the practices of some comparable
overseas jurisdictions with regard to the protection of security
information in the context of public inquiries.
United Kingdom
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) does not specify explicitly that
evidence relating to national security is inadmissible in inquiry proceedings.
Pursuant to
s 22(2) of the Act, however, a claim of public interest immunity may
be made in respect of such evidence.
13.65 Assuming that a claim of public interest immunity fails, several
provisions of the
Inquiries Act
attempt to ensure that sensitive
evidence, if tendered in the proceedings, does not become publically available.
Section 19 of the
Act, for example, allows a minister or inquiry chairperson to
restrict access to inquiry proceedings or evidence on public interest
if, among other things, there is a sufficient risk of ‘damage to national
security or international relations’.
Similarly, s 25 empowers the
minister or inquiry chairperson to issue a non-publication order, which
authorises the withholding of
material in the inquiry’s final report to
the extent necessary to avert ‘damage to national security or
international
relations’.
13.66 This approach has the benefit of granting inquiry chairpersons full
access to the evidence they require to make their findings
(assuming any claim
of public interest immunity is overcome), while ensuring the confidentiality of
sensitive information relating
to national security. Nevertheless, the approach
Inquiries Act
may give rise to situations where the minister, but
not the inquiry chairperson, determines that non-publication or restriction
are in the public interest. In these situations, the public may perceive
that a supposedly independent inquiry is being hampered
by undue political
interference.
13.67 At the federal level, s 4(b) of the
Inquiries Act 1985
grants commissioners the power to require witnesses to ‘produce such
documents and things as [the commissioners] deem
requisite to the full
investigation of the matters into which they are appointed to examine’.
Accordingly, if evidence relating
to national security falls within the purview
of the inquiry’s terms of reference, it is prima facie admissible. Section
however, goes on to specify that ‘commissioners have the same power to
enforce the attendance of witnesses and to compel them
to give evidence as is
vested in any court of record in civil cases’.
13.68 Accordingly, when the disclosure of evidence relating to national
security becomes an issue for a public inquiry, s 38 of the
Canada Evidence
(Canada) is invoked. The section requires that persons who are
or participants in proceedings to which those persons are a party (and who also
believe that information to be sensitive), must notify
the Attorney-General of
Canada in writing of the possibility of the disclosure, and of the nature, date
and place of the proceeding.
Public officials have the same duty of
notification. Once notified, the Attorney-General may authorise or refuse
disclosure within
10 days. Alternatively, the Attorney-General may refer the
question of disclosure to the Federal Court. Pending the final decision
disclosure, the evidence under review may not be given in connection with the
proceedings.
13.69 The Canadian approach has the benefit of ensuring consistency between
the treatment of sensitive evidence in public inquiries
and in civil
proceedings. Nonetheless, the decision with respect to disclosure remains with
the executive in the first instance.
While the Attorney-General may choose to
allow the Federal Court to make the determination, he or she may circumvent the
process by summarily deciding against disclosure.
New Zealand
13.70 Section 4B(1) of the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1908
empowers commissions to ‘receive as evidence any statement, document,
information, or matter that in its opinion may assist
it to deal effectively
with the subject of the inquiry, whether or not it would be admissible in a
Court of law’. Clause 20(a)
of the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) is materially
identical to this provision. Clause 28 of the Bill, however, incorporates the
New Zealand
Law Commission’s suggestion that inquiries legislation embody
the privileges and immunities contained in the
Evidence Act 2006
Thus, public interest
immunity, as enshrined in s 70 of the
Evidence Act
, will be a valid basis
for a refusal to disclose to inquiries evidence relating to national
13.71 Clause 21(c) of the Inquiries Bill provides that the inquiry may:
examine any document or thing for which privilege or confidentiality is claimed,
or refer the document or thing to an independent
person or body, to determine
(i) the person claiming privilege or confidentiality has a justifiable reason in
maintaining the privilege or confidentiality; or
(ii) the document or thing should be disclosed.
13.72 Pursuant to cl 28 of the Inquiries Bill, if the inquiry decides to
disclose or admit the evidence, it may do so subject to ‘appropriate
and conditions’.
13.73 Like the United Kingdom approach, the proposed New Zealand approach
grants inquiries full access to the evidence they require
to make their
findings, provided that there is no successful claim of public interest
immunity. Not only are inquiries granted access
to the evidence for the purposes
of determining its admissibility, but their power to attach conditions to its
disclosure and use
Submissions and
consultations
13.74 In the Issues Paper,
Review of the Royal Commissions Act
35), the ALRC sought stakeholder views on whether there is a need for public
inquiries to have special powers in cases of national
security. In particular,
the ALRC asked whether:
special administrative arrangements should be developed for Royal
Commissions and other forms of public inquiries dealing with matters
relating to
national security, for example, standard arrangements for access to classified
and security sensitive
legislation establishing Royal Commissions or other public inquiries
should incorporate the procedures applied in federal criminal
proceedings—that is, the NSI Act, NSI Regulations and NSI
Requirements—in dealing with matters relating to
13.75 Liberty Victoria raised a number of issues regarding matters
of national security in the context of Royal Commissions and inquiries.
it argued that those with carriage of a public inquiry must have minimum
qualifications and experience including, where applicable,
security clearances
to enable access to secret or highly confidential materials. This would ensure
inquiries had adequate access
to classified information where relevant to the
inquiry (and prevent governments from withholding information on the basis of
security’ or other interests).
13.76 Secondly, Liberty Victoria supported inquiries having access to
classified information where relevant to the inquiry and where
appropriate
protections were in place to ensure security is maintained.
13.77 Finally, it submitted
that where issues of national security or other sensitive matters were dealt
with in an inquiry’s
report, those parts could be redacted or an expedited
version tabled in Parliament—but only to the degree absolutely necessary
to protect Australia’s interests or individual civil
13.78 The Law Council of Australia (Law Council) expressed general support
for the findings and recommendations made in the
Report of the Clarke Inquiry
into the Case of Dr Mohamed
The report stated
inquiries or independent reviews that involve national security and thus deal
with sensitive documentation and evidence should be
covered by statutory
provisions. At a minimum, these provisions would confer coercive powers in
respect of the following:
• Production of documents – which might override claims of public
interest immunity or legal professional privilege
• Appearances before an inquiry
• Maintenance of confidentiality
• Protection of witnesses
The expectation is that inquiries established under these conditions would
normally be conducted in private, and proceedings would
remain confidential,
although this would not necessarily preclude conducting hearings in public where
circumstances allowed.
13.79 The Law Council submitted that government departments and agencies
should not have the discretion to refuse to disclose relevant
information to
public inquiries. Moreover, once information was disclosed, whether it was made
public should be determined by the
independent inquiry head, following
submissions by relevant agencies concerning non-publication. Such applications
should be determined
according to established legal criteria and in an
environment where an agency’s application may be subject to
13.80 The Law Council also submitted that such a process would allow for
national security considerations and the integrity of ongoing
investigations and
prosecutions both here and abroad to be given due weight. This decision would be
made by the inquiry itself applying
criteria defined in law, rather than being
determined solely by the assertion, either by domestic or foreign agencies, that
or police operations may be prejudiced by
disclosure.
13.81 The Law Council expressed the view that any general inquiries
legislation should include criteria to determine whether certain
information
should be protected from public disclosure or publication. Such criteria could
require inquiry heads to consider issues
such as national security and the
public interest in publication before determining whether to conduct hearings in
private or restrict
publication of certain material. The Law Council also
suggested that consideration be given to establishing administrative guidelines
or arrangements for inquiries dealing with national security—for example,
guidelines for accessing classified and security
sensitive documents.
13.82 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) supported the
recommendations made by the Clarke Inquiry referred to above.
It considered that
any general inquiries legislation ‘should also be able to support further
coercive powers to accommodate
inquiries into matters of national security or
serious investigatory inquiries if required’.
13.83 In relation to the use of coercive powers by an inquiry relating to
matters of national security, DIAC submitted that the treatment
of witnesses,
witness statements and transcripts and documents required stronger protections.
For example, documents and transcripts
that have national security implications
should not be disclosed, or if disclosed, should be protected from subsequent
publication,
and accordingly should not be reflected in detail in an
inquiry’s report.
13.84 DIAC queried whether inquiries should have the power to request and
examine confidential material from government agencies in
their own right. DIAC
also submitted that the protections available for handling sensitive information
should also extend to related
information such as transcripts of interviews of
witnesses who discuss the content of sensitive
information.
13.85 There were differing views amongst stakeholders as to whether the NSI
Act should be applied to Royal Commissions and public
inquiries. The Law Council
did not support the adoption of the procedures contained in the NSI Act in the
context of Royal Commissions
13.86 The AIC submitted that while the NSI Act had proven to be a useful
framework for the facilitation of national security information
proceedings, it was a procedurally intricate system that may not lend itself to
Royal Commissions seeking to access information
in an expeditious and flexible
The AIC considered
current legislative arrangements do not inhibit appropriate information sharing
to Royal Commissions and there is no clear need to
incorporate procedures
applied in federal and criminal and civil proceedings in dealing with matters
relating to national security.
The AIC considers that Royal Commissions have, to
date, struck an appropriate balance between access to national security
information
and protections against inappropriate disclosure of sensitive
13.87 In contrast, Liberty Victoria was of the view that the framework under
the NSI Act should be available to
13.88 The Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) observed that while the
Royal Commissions Act
did not expressly deal with national security
information, Royal Commissions did have some flexibility in dealing with such
information.
The AGS observed that extending the regime which is available under
the NSI Act to Royal Commissions would ensure that equivalent
protections were
available to protect national security information in the context of Royal
Commission proceedings.
13.89 If that course was adopted, the AGS submitted that consideration should
be given to whether a Commissioner would be given the
source information in
respect of which a ‘summary’ had been provided by the
Attorney-General.
noted that in the AWB Inquiry, a summary of sensitive evidence was produced for
affected persons, but the Commissioner and
certain identified Commission lawyers
were allowed to access the source material for the purposes of the
13.90 Matters of national security may fall for consideration by a Royal
Commission or inquiry for a number of reasons, including
that the inquiry:
is reviewing and/or investigating the structure and operations of
intelligence and security agencies;
is investigating Australia’s relations with foreign
requires access to national security information and documents to
investigate and establish the facts; or
calls evidence from a witness whose identity, if disclosed, could
raise national security-related
special arrangements and powers required?
13.91 At present, the
Royal Commissions Act
does not contain any
specific powers or procedures for the protection of national security
information. As noted above, however,
Royal Commissions have previously
exercised general powers to make orders to prevent the disclosure of such
information—for
example, by taking evidence in private and making orders
for non-disclosure of information and evidence.
13.92 Royal Commissions and inquiries have also used other procedural
mechanisms and developed ad hoc arrangements with Australian
Government agencies
that are providing national security information to the inquiry. Using existing
mechanisms, inquiries have been
able to prevent inadvertent disclosure of
national security information in the conduct of their inquiries.
13.93 In view of this, the ALRC has considered whether it is necessary to
incorporate special procedures and powers for the protection
and use of national
security information in the proposed
Inquiries Act
. An alternative would
be to leave it to inquiry members to determine their own procedures in relation
to the protection of national
security information in line with certain
statements of principle, for example, in the proposed
13.94 In the ALRC’s view, special procedures and powers should be
provided in a formal statutory regime. Although previous inquiries
able to prevent inadvertent disclosure of national security information, some
have encountered practical difficulties in
relation to their access and use of
such material.
Others have
experienced complications in the determination of public interest immunity
13.95 The proposed
Inquiries Act
should contain provisions dealing
specifically with the protection of national security information in the conduct
of Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries. It is the prevailing view of
stakeholders that issues relating to the use and protection of national security
information in the conduct of inquiries warrant a regime with statutory force.
The ALRC agrees with this view. It is important that
inquiry members have access
to all relevant information, including national security information, and that
there be appropriately
balanced measures to protect such information.
Should the NSI Act
apply to inquiries?
13.96 Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, unlike courts and tribunals,
do not determine rights and are not formally bound by
the same requirements of
openness or the rules of evidence. There are significant differences between
court proceedings—which
involve the determination of a person’s
guilt or innocence or their legal rights and liabilities—and the conduct
findings of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry—which do not
involve such determinations, but may impact the individual
interests of persons
affected by or involved in an inquiry. In the ALRC’s view, any tension
between the mechanisms used to
protect national security information on the one
hand, and principles of open justice and the right of a person to a fair trial,
are likely to be more prominent in court proceedings than in the context of
Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries.
13.97 The regime under the NSI Act is designed for federal criminal
proceedings and selected civil proceedings and entails a number
of prescriptive,
procedural steps that might not be suitable in the context of inquiries. For
example, the regime requires the personal
involvement of the Attorney-General
for the purposes of issuing non-disclosure
certificates.
It also directs
the court to hold closed hearings for the purposes of determining whether to
allow a witness to be called and whether,
and in what form, information
potentially prejudicial to national security may be
Further, the
regime provides for mandatory adjournments of proceedings if information will be
disclosed that relates to or may affect
Finally, the ALRC
notes that parties in court proceedings to which the NSI Act applies often rely
on consent orders in preference
to adherence to the detailed procedures set out
in the Act, NSI Regulations and the NSI
Requirements.
13.98 In the ALRC’s view, the procedural framework under the NSI Act,
which is specifically drafted to apply in the context
of court proceedings,
could not be readily applied to Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries in its
present form. Amendments would
be required to tailor specialist procedures for
inquiries. In view of this, the ARLC proposes that any special arrangements and
relating to the protection of national security information should be
located in the proposed
Inquiries Act
Proposal 13–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should contain
provisions dealing specifically with the protection of national security
information in the conduct of Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries.
A framework for the
protection of national security information
13.99 As noted in Chapter 15, the ALRC proposes measures to encourage greater
flexibility in inquiry procedures. Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries
should retain the discretion to determine the procedures that will apply in a
particular inquiry in relation
to the protection of national security
information. The proposed
Inquiries Act
should, however, incorporate
sufficient powers to enable inquiry members to make directions, including on
their own motion, or at
the request of an inquiry participant, in relation to
the disclosure and use of national security information.
13.100 In certain inquiries—namely, those in which national
security-related matters fall for consideration, or access to national
information is necessary to enable the fullest examination of the matters within
the terms of reference—there is value
in empowering inquiry members to
make directions aimed at controlling access to particular documents or
information on the basis
of whether a person holds a security clearance. While
inquiry members should not be able to impose obligations on a particular person
to obtain a security clearance, the ALRC is currently of the view that such a
power is an appropriate part of its proposed statutory
framework for the
protection of national security information in the context of Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries.
13.101 The ALRC’s proposal for the protection of national security
information is intended to establish the general principles
that would, if
adopted, govern the drafting of special arrangements and powers in the proposed
Inquiries Act
. These principles are analogous to those recommended in
ALRC 98, but tailored to the specific circumstances of Royal Commissions
Official Inquiries.
13.102 In making determinations about the relevance of any national security
information, including any claims for public interest
immunity made in respect
of such information, inquiry members require access to the underlying documents
or material. The procedures
that should generally apply to determining claims of
privilege, including public interest immunity, are discussed in Chapter 16.
framework is also intended to operate in conjunction with the ALRC’s
proposals for offences for non-compliance with a notice
issued by an inquiry to
produce documents or provide information.
13.103 Another aspect of the proposed framework is to enable inquiry members,
in appropriate circumstances, to restrict who can access
national security
information, including by limiting access to those people who hold security
clearances at an appropriate level.
As noted in ALRC 98, requiring security
clearances is an essential feature of sensible risk management in that it helps
people who are discerned to be security risks from gaining access to
the information, as well as providing training and reinforcement
handling of such sensitive
information.
13.104 The ALRC notes that no security clearance is currently required for
members of a Royal Commission under the
Royal Commissions Act
some Commissioners have obtained such clearances in the past. It is also noted
that the security clearance process can
be discriminatory and
requirement that an inquiry member undergo a security clearance in order to
access information is, on the face of it,
inconsistent with the ALRC’s
proposal that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries be independent in the
performance of their
13.105 In the ALRC’s view, the proposed
Inquiries Act
provide that members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries do not require
a security clearance to access national security
information. This would
facilitate access by inquiry members to national security information for the
purpose of determining any
claims for public interest immunity and the making of
appropriate directions about the disclosure and use of such information in
conduct of the inquiry. It would, however, be open to an inquiry member to
request and obtain such a clearance if he or she considered
it desirable.
Proposal 13–2
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries should
retain the ultimate discretion to determine the procedures that will apply in a
inquiry. The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower inquiry
members to make directions on their own motion, or at the request of a person or
body affected by or involved
in the conduct of the inquiry, in relation to the
use of national security information, including, but not limited to, the
(a) determinations of the relevance of any national security information,
including any claims for public interest immunity, and
the use to which that
information may be put in the conduct of the inquiry;
(b) the provision by persons involved with the inquiry of lists of all
national security information that those persons reasonably
anticipate will be
used in the course of the inquiry. The chair of an inquiry may make such
directions as he or she thinks fit in
relation to the specificity with which
national security information is to be described in these lists, the people to
lists are to be given, the use that may be made of the information
and the degree of protection that must be given;
(c) the form in which any national security information may be produced or
otherwise used in the conduct of the inquiry. Such directions
may involve:
(i) the redaction, editing or obscuring of any part of a document containing
or adverting to national security information;
(ii) replacing the national security information with summaries, extracts or
transcriptions of the evidence sought to be used, or
by a statement of facts,
whether agreed by the parties or persons involved in the inquiry or not;
(iii) replacing the national security information with evidence to similar
effect obtained though unclassified means or sources;
(iv) concealing the identity of any witness or person identified in, or
whose identity might reasonably be inferred from, national
security information
or from its use in the conduct of the inquiry (including oral evidence), and
concealing the identity of any
person who comes into contact with national
security information;
(v) the use of written questions and answers during evidence which would
otherwise be given orally;
(vi) the use of technical means by which the identity of witnesses and
contents of national security information may be protected,
for example, through
the use of closed-circuit television, computer monitors and headsets;
(vii) restrictions on the people to whom any national security information
may be given or to whom access to that information may
be given. Such
restrictions may include limiting access to certain material to people holding
security clearances to a specified
(viii) restrictions on the use that can be made by a person with access to
any national security information; and
(ix) restrictions on the extent to which any person who has access to any
national security information may reproduce or disclose
that information.
Proposal 13–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that members of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries do not require a
security clearance to access national security
information.
Role of the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
13.106 In determining the use or disclosure of information in the conduct of
an inquiry, including any claims for public interest
immunity in respect of
national security information, inquiry members may benefit from expert advice,
which would be independent
to the inquiry and to the provider of the information
(who will, in most cases, be a government agency). The ALRC therefore proposes
Inquiries Act
should empower an inquiry member to request advice
or assistance from the IGIS concerning:
the damage or prejudice to national security that would, or could
reasonably be expected to, result from the use or disclosure; and
whether giving access to the information would divulge any matter
communicated in confidence by, or on behalf of, a foreign government,
authority of a foreign government or an international organisation to the
Australian Government.
13.107 In this respect, the ALRC envisages a
role for the IGIS similar to that proposed in the
Freedom of Information
(Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
proposed in the Bill, the IGIS would be required to give advice and assistance
if requested and would be entitled to have
access to documents in order to be
properly informed of the issues under consideration. The IGIS could decline to
assist in limited
circumstances, for example, if the IGIS was of the view that
he or she was not qualified to give expert evidence.
13.108 The ALRC also
envisages some departure in detail between the role of the IGIS in the Bill and
that proposed in relation to
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. First,
inquiry members would have the option of requesting such advice from the IGIS
making a determination, but would not be required to do so. Secondly,
the IGIS could be called upon to assist at any stage of the
inquiry and not only
after the provider of the information had given evidence or submissions.
Finally, any advice provided by the
IGIS could be given in any form agreed upon
by the IGIS and inquiry members and need not be given by way of sworn evidence
or written form.
13.109 The ALRC notes that these proposals, if adopted, may necessitate
consequential changes to the provisions of the
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act
relating to the IGIS’s statutory
functions and secrecy obligations to cover information and documents that the
IGIS or IGIS
staff have acquired in the performance of the IGIS’s role
under the proposed
13.110 Consistent with the submission of the IGIS, the ALRC proposes that
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act
, which relates to information and documents
that may be given to the Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Secret
Intelligence
Service (1995), be repealed. If national security-related matters
are considered by Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries, the
IGIS or his or
her staff should not be precluded from assisting inquiries in appropriate
circumstances, including by disclosing or
communicating information or documents
to the inquiry.
13.111 It is arguable that the repeal of
would be sufficient to remove
potential constraints on the IGIS providing assistance to an inquiry should he
or she consider it appropriate
to do so. For the avoidance of doubt, however,
the discretion of the IGIS to decide to provide such assistance, including by
release of relevant information to an inquiry, should be made explicit by
way of consequential amendments to the statutory functions
and secrecy
obligations of the IGIS. While the IGIS should have a discretion in relation to
such assistance, it is appropriate that
the protection from compulsion in
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
Proposal 13–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should empower
inquiry members, in determining the use or disclosure of information in the
conduct of an inquiry, to request advice
or assistance from the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security concerning:
(a) the damage or prejudice to national security that would, or could
reasonably be expected to, result from the use or disclosure;
(b) whether giving access to the information would divulge any matter
communicated in confidence by, or on behalf of, a foreign
government, an
authority of a foreign government or an international organisation to the
Australian Government.
Proposal 13–5
Section 34A
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
(Cth), which relates to information and
documents that may be given to the Commission of Inquiry into matters relating
to the Australian
Secret Intelligence Service (1995), should be repealed.
Technical assistance
13.112 The ALRC considered whether other arrangements of an administrative
nature should be implemented in addition to the proposed
statutory framework, to
facilitate physical access by a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry to national
security information while
also ensuring adequate protection of such
information. Some stakeholders supported the introduction of such arrangements,
by way of written guidance for inquiry members and staff.
13.113 One option is to leave individual Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries to develop their own arrangements, or enter into
memorandums of
understanding with relevant government departments and agencies, who are usually
the custodians of national security
information. In the ALRC’s view,
however, it is preferable for issues relating to the handling and storage of
national security
information by inquiries to be addressed in the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
. This would provide more consistency and certainty and
avoid duplication of effort from inquiry to inquiry. In the Clarke Inquiry,
inquiry had to negotiate with relevant agencies and promulgate its own
arrangements. This contributed to the consequent delay
in the conduct of the
13.114 The ALRC notes that the PSM already provides a comprehensive
protective security framework from which appropriate standards
and procedures
could be developed for inquiries. Such information could be developed in
consultation with relevant government department
or agencies—who in most
cases will provide national security information to inquiries—and the
Protective Security Policy
Committee, who has responsibility for the management
and dissemination of the PSM.
13.115 There are many technical and practical aspects relating to the
physical protection of national security information, including
its handling and
storage. The ALRC proposes that the Australian Government department responsible
for the administration of inquiries—presently
the AGD—should assign,
upon request by an inquiry member, appropriately trained personnel to advise the
inquiry on the handling
and storage of national security information. Such
officers could be assigned on a part-time or full-time basis to advise on
aspects only and while performing any such function would be
answerable to the inquiry members.
Proposal 13–6
The proposed
Inquiries Handbook
include information on the handling and storage of national security information
by inquiries. The information should be developed
in consultation with relevant
government departments or agencies such as the Protective Security Policy
Committee and the Australian
Intelligence Community and may incorporate, as
appropriate, the standards and procedures in the
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual
Proposal 13–7
If requested by members of Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries, the Australian Government should assign appropriately
personnel to advise the inquiry on the handling and storage of national
security information.
Report of the Inquiry into
Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food Programme
(2006), vol 1, [7.66].
Commission was not established pursuant to the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
W Owen, R Philip and G Ligertwood,
Report of the Royal Commission on Espionage
Section 6(1)
Royal Commission on Espionage Act 1954
(Cth) excluded the
application of the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
to the Royal
Commission on Espionage although the provisions of both Acts were substantially
W Owen, R Philip and G
Ligertwood,
Report of the Royal Commission on Espionage
For example, in camera evidence of the
Director-General of Security, Deputy Secretary of the Department of Defence,
particular security
officers and the former Secretary of the Department of
External Affairs, Dr John Wear Burton: ibid, 8–9. See also National
Archives of Australia,
Series notes for series A6223—Printed copies of
Royal Commission on Espionage Official Transcripts of In Camera Proceedings
<www.naa.gov.au> at 18 June 2009.
National Archives of Australia,
Fact Sheet 130—The Royal Commission on
Espionage, 1954–55
(2006) <www.naa.gov.au> at 18 June 2009. The
final report was in one volume with four appendices including a printed copy of
Interim Report of the Royal Commission on Espionage
21 October 1954 (Appendix 2).
National Archives of Australia,
Series notes for series A6219—Annexure
to the Report of the Royal Commission on Espionage
, <www.naa.gov.au>
at 18 June 2009.
Commission on Intelligence and Security—First Report
See ‘Opening
Statement’—Appendix 1–B: Ibid,
History of the Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security
<www.naa.gov.au/collection/issues/stokes-rcis-history.aspx> at 4 August
G Brownbill,
RCIS—An Insider’s Perspective
(2008) National Archives of
http://www.naa.gov.au/collection/issues/brownbill-rcis.aspx
at 4 August
Royal Commission on
Intelligence and Security—Eighth Report
A Brief History
of the Royal Commission on Intelligence and Security
<www.naa.gov.au/collection/issues/stokes-rcis-history.aspx> at 4 August
Royal Commission on
Australia’s Security and Intelligence Agencies—Report on Term of
Reference (c)
G Samuels and M Codd,
Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Secret Intelligence
Service—Public Report
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 1 June 1995, 716 (G Evans—Minister for Foreign
G Samuels and M Codd,
Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Secret Intelligence
Service—Public Report
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 1 June 1995, 716 (G Evans—Minister for Foreign
This was because neither the
Inquiry nor the
Army was in a position to agree to the witness’s condition that expenses
of his senior and junior counsel be met:
Report of the Inquiry into
Australian Intelligence Agencies
Commissioner Cole issued written
reasons, dated 30 March 2006, for his decision: T Cole,
Report of the Inquiry
into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
(2006), Appendix 9, Figure
Inquiry into Certain Australian
Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-For-Food Programme,
584—Distillation of Secret Exhibit 4
<www.ag.gov.au/www/inquiry/offi.nsf/images/GOV.0002.0066.pdf> at 18 June 2009.
The Report of the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed
Ibid, Letter of
Transmittal.
Royal Commissions Act 1902
The power to make such
orders is currently found in
Royal Commissions Act 1902
The use of public interest
immunity claims to protect the disclosure of national security information is
considered later in this
chapter. The application of public interest immunity to
Royal Commissions and inquiries more generally is considered in Ch
Section 15XT is located in
Crimes Act 1914
deals with assumed identities
and was introduced in 2001:
Measures to Combat Serious and Organised Crime
(Cth). This provision, and others that may require consequential
amendment, are set out in Appendix 6 of this Discussion
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Protective Security Manual (PSM),
<www.ag.gov.au> at 19 June 2009.
The Report of the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
Ibid. The ALRC examined the
practice and procedure in the classification of sensitive material by government
agencies and made a
number of recommendations in Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), Chs 2,
The agencies that comprise the
Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) are: the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation (ASIO);
Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS);
Defence Signals Directorate (DSD); Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation
Defence Intelligence Organisation (DIO); and Office of National
Assessments (ONA).
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
12 May 2009; Australian Intelligence Community,
2 June 2009.
Government has announced that it will consider broadening the mandate of the
IGIS to enable its inquiries to be extended, at
the direction of the Prime
Minister, to Commonwealth agencies that are not members of the AIC: See
Australian Government,
Australian Government response to Clarke Inquiry into
the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
(2008), <www.ag.gov.au> at 19 June
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Another exception, in s
34(1A) of the Act, is where the IGIS believes on reasonable grounds that the
disclosure is necessary for
the purpose of preserving the well-being or safety
of a person.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Amendment Bill
, Department of the Parliamentary Library, Parliamentary Research
Services; Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives,
24 March 1994, 2073 (F Walker—Special Minister of
New s 34A was inserted by the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Amendment Act
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
12 May 2009.
The Ombudsman
is limited to investigating administrative action by a department or prescribed
authority. See,
Ombudsman Act 1976
The Committee is established
Intelligence Services Act 2001
(Cth). Predecessors of
the Committee include the Parliamentary Joint Committee on ASIO, ASIS and DSD;
Parliamentary Joint Committee
on the Australian Security and Intelligence
Organisation; and the Joint Select Committee on the Intelligence
Intelligence Services Act
The effect of
the Bill—which will repeal the power to issue conclusive certificates in
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) and the
Archives Act
(Cth)—is that the AAT may undertake full merits review of all
exemption claims.
Information (Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
(Cth), sch 1 item 25, sch 2 item
Explanatory Memorandum,
Information (Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), Recs 11–1 to
S Donaghue,
‘Reconciling Security and the Right to a Fair Trial: The National Security
Information Act in Practice’
in A Lynch, E MacDonald and G Williams (eds),
Law and Liberty in the War on Terror
Attorney-General’s
Department,
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings)
(Cth) <www.national security.gov.au> at 3 June
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
National Security Information (Criminal
and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth)—Practitioners’ Guide
S Donaghue, ‘Reconciling
Security and the Right to a Fair Trial: The National Security Information Act in
in A Lynch, E MacDonald and G Williams (eds),
Law and Liberty
in the War on Terror
(2007) 87, 91 citing
[2006] NSWSC 571
(2006) 163 A Crim
R v Benbrika
National Security Information
(Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
National Security Information (Criminal
and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth)—Practitioners’ Guide
Criminal Code Act 1995
S Donaghue, ‘Reconciling
Security and the Right to a Fair Trial: The National Security Information Act in
in A Lynch, E MacDonald and G Williams (eds),
Law and Liberty
in the War on Terror
(2007) 87, 91.
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
National Security
Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth)—Practitioners’ Guide
The protective orders made by
Bongiorno J in
R v Benbrika & Ors (Ruling 1)
[2007] VSC 141
example, comprised 45 paragraphs.
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
National Security
Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth)—Practitioners’ Guide
S Donaghue, ‘Reconciling
Security and the Right to a Fair Trial: The National Security Information Act in
in A Lynch, E MacDonald and G Williams (eds),
Law and Liberty
in the War on Terror
(2007) 87, 90.
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
In particular, ibid
; S Donaghue, ‘Reconciling Security and the Right to a Fair Trial: The
National Security Information Act in Practice’
in A Lynch, E MacDonald and
G Williams (eds),
Law and Liberty in the War on Terror
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
National Security Information (Criminal
and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth)—Practitioners’ Guide
(2008), 5–6.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Ibid, Ch 6, Recs 6–1,
11–10(c)(vii), 11–25.
Ibid, [6.103].
Ibid, [6.147], Rec
National Security
Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(2). Security
clearances are given in accordance with the
Australian Government Protective
Security Manual
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of
Classified and Security Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
[6.119]–[6.120].
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
National Security Information
(Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth)—Practitioners’
(2008), 28.
New Zealand
Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Ch 9.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Ibid, Question
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Law Council
of Australia,
19 May 2009.
The Report of the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
(2008), 17.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
Department of Immigration
and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Law Council
of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Intelligence Community,
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
This procedure is set out in
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
Australian Government
For example, the
Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
<www.haneefcaseinquiry.gov.au/> at 4 August 2009.
example, the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-For-Food Programme
(2006) <www.oilforfoodinquiry.gov.au/> at 4
August 2009.
National Security
Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
National Security Information (Criminal
and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth)—Practitioners’ Guide
(2008), 13.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Similar consequential
amendments are contained in the
Freedom of Information (Removal of Conclusive
Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
The Report of the
Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
14. Inquiries and Courts
Introduction
Judicial review
Introduction
Judicial review of inquiries
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Challenges to notices or summons
Referral of questions of law
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Concurrent legal proceedings
ALRC’s view
14. Inquiries and Courts
Introduction
14.1 In this chapter, the ALRC discusses the relationship between inquiries
established under the proposed
Inquiries Act
and court proceedings. Court
proceedings may affect inquiries in four ways. First, court proceedings may be
used to supervise the
legality of the establishment and conduct of an inquiry.
Secondly, court proceedings may be used to determine legal disputes arising
an inquiry. Thirdly, inquiries may be restrained from inquiring into matters
that are in dispute in related court proceedings
that are being conducted at the
same time. Fourthly, an inquiry may affect the conduct of subsequent legal
proceedings.
14.2 This chapter examines the interactions between inquiries and courts,
beginning with the supervision of inquiries through judicial
review, and the
determination of legal disputes through the referral of a question of law to a
court. It then briefly draws together
relevant parts of the Discussion Paper
that relate to the interaction of inquiries with concurrent and subsequent legal
proceedings.
Introduction
14.3 Judicial review can be described broadly as ‘the function or
capacity of courts to provide remedies to people adversely
affected by unlawful
government action’.
Importantly, the purpose of judicial review is to ensure the legality of
government action, rather than its
correctness.
As the High Court put
it, judicial review
is a means of assuring to all people affected that officers of the Commonwealth
obey the law and neither exceed nor neglect any jurisdiction
which the law
confers on them. … Such jurisdiction exists to maintain the federal
compact by ensuring that propounded laws
are constitutionally valid and
ministerial or other official action lawful and within
14.4 Judicial review of administrative action can be sought in the High Court
in the exercise of its original jurisdiction under the
Constitution
or in the Federal
Court under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) or the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
The principles governing
judicial review, however, remain to a large extent the product of common
14.5 A court may determine that administrative action is unlawful on a number
of grounds—for example, that it was not based
on any evidence or other
material; or that it was made in breach of the principles of procedural fairness
(as discussed in Chapter
If a court determines the administrative action is unlawful, it may make a
number of orders, such as quashing a government decision,
or compelling a person
to do, or prohibiting a person from doing, an act.
Judicial review of
14.6 While historically Royal Commissions were not subject to judicial
review, it is clear now that they are subject to such
For example, a Royal
Commission may be challenged on the basis that its conduct extends beyond its
terms of reference,
Royal Commissioner is biased or appears to be
or because there has been a
breach of the principles of procedural
In Australia, courts
generally have been reluctant to intervene in the conduct of Royal Commissions.
For example, as discussed below,
the courts take a liberal approach in
determining whether evidence is relevant to a Royal
Commission.
14.7 As the New Zealand Court of Appeal has observed, there are competing
considerations as to whether, and to what extent, judicial
review ought to be
available in the context of Royal
Commissions.
On the one hand, a
report is merely an expression of opinion and has no immediate legal effect.
This points towards a fairly limited
role for judicial review. On the other
hand, most Royal Commissions are of major significance in ‘practical,
public and other
They are appointed relatively rarely, they generally receive major publicity and
they impact on significant interests of
individuals.
considerations suggest that judicial review is an important safeguard in the
context of Royal Commissions.
Delay caused by judicial review
14.8 Judicial review proceedings may delay the proceedings of an inquiry, and
therefore increase the cost of an inquiry. For example,
several actions were
instituted in the Federal Court in respect of the Inquiry into Certain
Australian Companies in Relation to the
UN Oil-for-Food Programme
causing several months
14.9 In the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003) (Building Royal Commission), Commissioner Cole discussed
the difficulties
that arise as a result of judicial review:
[A]s the law currently stands the effectiveness of Royal Commissions can be
greatly hampered by the threat of court action. Court
action will inevitably
delay a Commission and involve very considerable time and expense. It can easily
derail an investigation.
This Commission naturally sought to avoid litigation.
That meant, however, that it was sometimes possible for baseless objections
frustrate an investigation, particularly where the person or organisation
concerned was prepared to fight a matter in the courts
largely irrespective of
its merits. The benefits of frustrating the Commission’s investigations
were, apparently, thought to
outweigh the costs of court action even though that
action was unlikely to be
successful.
14.10 There are three principal methods of addressing the issue of delay
caused by judicial review proceedings. First, a legislative
provision, commonly
known as an ouster or a privative clause, may state that courts cannot
judicially review a Royal
Commissions.
In the federal
context, however, a privative clause is not generally very effective because the
Constitution
entrenches the judicial review jurisdiction of
the High Court.
This means that
such clauses in federal legislation are either held to be constitutionally
invalid or are read very restrictively
in order to be compatible with the
Constitution
14.11 A second method of addressing the issue is to impose time limits on the
institution of judicial review
proceedings.
, a time limit of 28 days is imposed, although a court may allow an
extension of this period.
periods apply under the High Court and Federal Court’s original
A time limit,
however, also may be constitutionally invalid if it has the effect of curtailing
or limiting the right or ability of
a person to seek judicial review under the
Constitution
14.12 A third method would be to provide, by legislation or otherwise, that
the Federal Court or High Court must expedite matters
involving Royal
Commissions or the Official Inquiries proposed in this Discussion Paper.
Submissions and
consultations
14.13 In the Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
(IP 35), the ALRC asked whether there were any concerns about judicial
review in the context of inquiries
14.14 Submissions that addressed the issue all supported the existence of
judicial review, and argued against the introduction of
specific expedited
procedures. For example, the Law Council of Australia (Law Council) submitted
it is important that there is some level of oversight of Royal Commissions and
public inquiries. The availability of judicial review
means that Courts are able
to intervene when they consider it appropriate, and ensure that Royal
Commissions or other public inquiries
do not go beyond their terms of reference
or otherwise go off the rails.
14.15 The Law Council noted that the removal of other
safeguards—including the inability to sue Royal Commissions, discussed
Chapter 12, and the fact that the rules of evidence applicable in civil
litigation do not apply to Royal Commissions—made
judicial review more
important in this context. It observed that courts generally have been reluctant
to interfere with Royal Commissions,
and had mechanisms to prevent frivolous or
vexatious claims.
14.16 In relation to the possibility of a privative clause, the Law Council
Judicial review cannot be excluded under the Commonwealth
Constitution
usefulness of conventional privative clauses in limiting the scope for review of
decisions under Commonwealth legislation
now appears to be debatable at best.
Therefore it is unclear what use a privative clause, such as that included in
Royal Commission Act 1917
(SA), would serve, other than to further
confuse matters and to encourage arid jurisdictional
14.17 The Law Council also rejected the idea of a time limit, arguing that
there was insufficient justification to shorten the time
limit of 28 days under
, especially as the delays caused by judicial review were
usually determined by the speed with which the court could hear and determine
the case, not by the time for instituting the case. It also observed that
reducing the time limit further could cause constitutional
difficulties, as
noted above.
14.18 Liberty Victoria also rejected an expedited process, saying:
Liberty believes that the current mechanisms are adequate and should only be
reformed if there is a clear and demonstrable need to
14.19 In consultations, the overwhelming majority of stakeholders who
addressed this issue acknowledged that the process of judicial
review caused
delays, but felt that these did not justify or warrant an attempt to modify the
usual application of judicial review,
especially in light of the constitutional
difficulties involved.
14.20 Further, there was limited support for expediting the process. The
majority of stakeholders addressing the issue observed that
in the past, the
Federal Court had shown a willingness to expedite such cases, and that the case
management practices of the Federal
Court were sufficiently flexible to enable
cases to be heard rapidly.
14.21 Some stakeholders also observed that there were important practical
difficulties in accessing judicial review, especially for
less well-resourced
participants. These included the prospect of court fees and costs, and the fear
of challenging inquiry members.
14.22 The possibility of judicial review is an important check on the
legality of government action. Judicial review is an especially
important check
in the context of Royal Commissions and the proposed Official Inquiries for two
additional reasons. First, a number
of procedural safeguards that apply in court
proceedings do not apply to, or are relaxed in, Royal Commission proceedings.
apply equally to the proceedings of Official Inquiries. Further, as
temporary, independent bodies, Royal Commissions and the proposed
Inquiries are not subject to the supervision of a government department or a
body with oversight powers, such as the Ombudsman.
The absence of these other
safeguards makes it more important that inquiries be subject to judicial
14.23 The ALRC acknowledges that availability of judicial review may delay an
inquiry. The mere fact of delay, however, does not outweigh
the important role
judicial review plays in ensuring the legality of the proceedings of Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries.
14.24 The ALRC also does not propose that the Australian Government should
introduce an expedited process for the hearing of such
cases. As stakeholders
have noted, the Federal Court has shown a willingness to expedite appropriate
cases, and the case management
practices of the Federal Court are sufficiently
flexible to enable the Court to hear cases rapidly.
Challenges to notices
14.25 In the Building Royal Commission, Commissioner Cole recommended that
Royal Commissions Act 1902
to provide that no challenge may be made to a notice or summons on the basis
that the information sought does not fall within the
Terms of Reference of a
Royal Commission, except on the basis that the notice or summons is not a bona
fide attempt to investigate
matters into which the Commission is authorised to
14.26 Cole considered that this recommendation, if implemented, would codify
the common law.
He considered
that it was necessary to define the rules as precisely as possible to avoid the
delays caused by legal
challenges.
14.27 Coercive powers, such as the power to compel evidence, may be exercised
only for the purposes of a particular investigation.
If a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry is acting outside of its terms of reference, it may be
restrained from doing so. As noted
above, however, the courts have tended to
take an expansive view of the relevance of any information sought to be
compelled and the
subject of the inquiry.
14.28 For example, in
Ross v Costigan (No 2)
, the Full Court of the
Federal Court stated that ‘what the Commissioner can look to is what he
bona fide believes will assist
, the Privy Council stated:
If there is material before the commission which induces in the members of it a
bona fide belief that such records may cast light
on matters falling within the
terms of reference, then it is the duty of the commission to issue the
summonses. It is not necessary
that the commission should believe that the
records will in fact have such a result. …
[T]he decision of the commission should not be set aside unless it is such as no
reasonable commission, correctly directing itself
in law, could properly arrive
14.29 As Cole indicated, therefore, the common law position is that a
challenge to any decision made in good faith to issue a summons
or notice to
produce will not succeed.
14.30 There is, however, a subtle but important difference between an
expansive interpretation of the power of Royal Commissioners
to issue summonses
or notices by the courts, and a legislative provision that prohibits courts from
examining such cases. Although
the ultimate effect may be the same, the
exclusion of judicial review infringes an important constitutional
principle—namely
that it is the role of the courts to ensure the legality
of administrative action. Further, such a provision also may be constitutionally
For the reasons
discussed above in relation to judicial review generally, it is the ALRC’s
preliminary view that the recommendation
on this issue by the Building Royal
Commission should not be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act
Referral of
questions of law
14.31 The power to refer a question of law is commonly conferred on federal
tribunals and other federal
These provisions
typically provide that a tribunal may refer a question of law to the Federal
Court, either on its own motion or
at the request of a
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
(Tas) empowers a commission
of inquiry, or parties to that inquiry, to refer a question of law to the
Supreme Court of Tasmania.
provision also states that, while the Commission awaits the decision of the
court, it may either conclude its inquiry subject
to the decision, or adjourn
its inquiry until the decision is
14.33 A similar provision is contained in s 10 of the
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1908
A New Inquiries Act
, the New Zealand Law
Commission (NZLC) reported that s 10 had been used at least five times
since 1908.
It noted that while
such a procedure can cause delay, so can subsequent judicial review of an
inquiry member’s decision. In
the NZLC’s view, where there is a
genuine dispute about a proposed ruling in an inquiry, ‘it may be
preferable that the
inquirer seeks directions from the court on that issue,
rather than wait to see if judicial review will
NZLC’s recommendation, a similar section was included as cl 35 of the
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ).
14.34 The referral of a question of law may be a convenient way of ensuring
that legal disputes before a Royal Commission or an Official
Inquiry are
resolved, rather than relying on those participating in a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry to bring judicial review
proceedings. As noted earlier, those
participating in inquiries may be deterred from bringing judicial review
proceedings because
of the cost involved.
14.35 The referral of a question of law also may be a useful way of
determining claims of privilege or public interest immunity. Privileges
public interest immunity are discussed in Chapter 16. For example, if a person
wishes to claim that information is protected
from disclosure by a privilege or
public interest immunity, an inquiry could refer to the Federal Court the
question of whether the
information is subject to the privilege or public
interest immunity.
14.36 The power to refer a question of law, however, is subject to a
constitutional limitation, namely that federal courts cannot
give advisory
Mellifont v
Attorney-General
, however, the majority of the High Court held
that there were two critical concepts which identified an advisory opinion: an
question of law which did not involve the right or duty of any body or
person; and the making of a declaration of law divorced from
any attempt to
administer that law.
14.37 A court, therefore, may determine questions of law involving the rights
or duties of a person participating in an inquiry, such
as whether a Royal
Commission is validly established, and whether information is exempt from
disclosure because it is protected by
privilege or public interest immunity.
Further, a claim of a breach of procedural fairness in relation to a report with
consequences for the reputations of individuals or companies
‘involves no mere hypothetical
Submissions and
consultations
14.38 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether it was desirable to enable Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries to refer a question
of law to the Federal
Court during the course of an inquiry, and if so, how this could be achieved
within the limits of the
Constitution
14.39 Stakeholders generally supported a power to refer questions of law.
Liberty Victoria expressed similar views in its submission.
It is foreseeable that at various times, inquiries may be faced with legal
questions which are best determined by the courts rather
than seeking
tentative legal advice. A similar power to that of
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
(Tas) … has particular appeal.
To ensure constitutional validity and in keeping with [
Mellifont v
Attorney-General
)], it is suggested that any provision
require that the question be drawn up as a dispute between the parties. Where
there is only
one party, it may be possible for the Attorney‐General
or the Solicitor‐General to take the place of a second party.
supports a general power for inquiries to refer questions of law to
the Federal Court where those questions are formulated
as a determinative
dispute between one or more parties. Where a second party is required, it
may be possible to implement a similar
program to the Australian Tax
Office’s Test Case Litigation Program whereby the inquiry subsidises the
second party’s
costs of the litigation; particularly where the second
party is not a government
14.40 In the ALRC’s view, a power to refer a question of law to the
Federal Court would have several benefits. It would provide
a convenient
alternative to judicial review proceedings in ensuring the legality of the
conduct of an inquiry. In particular, this
is likely to be beneficial to inquiry
members who are not legally trained, and those participating in inquiries who
wish to challenge
a decision without incurring the costs of judicial review
proceedings. It also would be a useful mechanism for determining claims
privilege and public interest immunity. As noted above, while such a power may
cause delay, such delays would not be greater than
that caused by applications
for judicial review.
14.41 As these considerations are relevant to both Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries, the ALRC proposes that both should have
the power to refer a
question of law to the Federal Court, either on their own motion or pursuant to
the request of a participant
to an inquiry.
14.42 It is the ALRC’s preliminary view that it is unnecessary to
prescribe any procedural matters, or matters relating to the
recovery of costs,
in relation to the reference of the question of law. Such matters are best left
to be determined by the Federal
Proposal 14–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may refer a question of law to the
Federal Court, either on their own
motion or pursuant to the request of a
participant.
Concurrent legal
proceedings
14.43 A concern may arise in relation to Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries that may be investigating matters related to court
proceedings that
are being conducted at the same time (that is, where there are concurrent legal
proceedings). In such a situation,
a chairperson of an inquiry could suspend the
inquiry while these court proceedings are underway. This appears to be inherent
a chairperson’s broad discretion to conduct an inquiry in the way he or
she thinks fit.
14.44 Another question is whether the body that establishes an inquiry should
be able to suspend an inquiry while related court proceedings
are underway. A
provision of this kind is found in s 13 of the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK), which enables a minister, after consulting with the chairperson of an
inquiry, to suspend the inquiry by notice to the inquiry
pending the completion
of any other related investigation or related court proceedings. The ALRC is
interested in stakeholder views
on this matter.
14.45 Another issue arises when an inquiry into crime or misconduct is
examining matters that are being prosecuted in criminal or
penalty proceedings.
This may raise the question of whether the inquiry is in contempt of court.
Contempt of court is discussed in
Chapter 19. An inquiry may be in contempt of
court if there is a ‘real risk’ that its proceedings will interfere
the administration of justice in a particular
14.46 There are two main ways in which this issue could arise. First,
commissions could generate publicity through public hearings
or public reports
that prejudice pending trials. Secondly, inquiries could compel an accused to
reveal material which could tend
to incriminate a person in relation to an
offence which is being prosecuted in the
As discussed in Chapter
16, a person may be required to incriminate him or herself before a Royal
Commission (but not an Official
Inquiry), but is protected from disclosing such
material in a court. In that case, there is a real risk that compelling a person
to reveal such material may interfere with the criminal proceeding.
14.47 In the ALRC’s view, the issue of concurrent legal proceedings can
be dealt with in a number of ways. These are discussed
in other chapters of this
Discussion Paper.
14.48 The issue of prejudicial publicity is normally dealt with by conducting
inquiry hearings in private, and reporting in private
The power to restrict
public access to hearings and evidence is discussed in Chapter 15. In that
chapter, it is proposed that the
Inquiries Act
should provide that
members of Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries may prohibit or restrict
public access to hearings or publication
of certain information before an
inquiry because of, among other things, the potential for prejudice to legal
proceedings.
14.49 The second issue, concerning the use of incriminating evidence, is
discussed in Chapter 16 in relation to the privilege against
self-incrimination.
As noted in that chapter, the
Royal Commissions Act
presently provides
that the privilege against self-incrimination is abrogated, except if related
criminal charges or penalty proceedings
have begun, and have not been finally
disposed of.
14.50 The ALRC proposes in Chapter 16 that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should include a provision with a similar effect, although in different
terms. That is, the
Inquiries Act
should provide that a Royal Commission
must not require a person to answer a question, or produce a document or other
thing, about
a matter if a person is subject to concurrent legal proceedings in
respect of that matter.
notes, however, that a court may restrain an inquiry from examining a witness
even where a person has not been charged with
an offence, if in the particular
circumstances of a case such examination would amount to
14.51 Finally, it should be noted that a number of proposals in this
Discussion Paper relate to inquiries and legal proceedings that
are commenced
after an inquiry has concluded.
For example, in Chapter 16, the ALRC examines the scope of the immunity of
evidence from subsequent use in a legal proceeding. The
ALRC proposes that the
present position, in which direct use in subsequent legal proceedings of certain
evidence before a Royal Commission
is prohibited, but indirect use of that
evidence is permitted, should
The ALRC further
proposes that the scope of this immunity should be clarified in a number of
ways, including by making it clear that
the immunity applies to documents in the
nature of a disclosure, but not to pre-existing
Should the proposed
Inquiries Act
enable the body
establishing a public inquiry (the Governor-General in the case of a Royal
Commission, and a minister in the case
of an Official Inquiry) to suspend an
inquiry, pending a related investigation or related court proceedings?
Administrative Review Council,
Scope of Judicial Review
, Report No 47 (2006),
Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin
(1990) 170 CLR 1
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
In particular,
s 75(iii) and (v).
The jurisdiction
is limited to conduct, decisions, and failures to make
decisions ‘under an enactment’, so it may not be available in
of decisions that are not given force and effect by the
Commissions Act 1902
AWB Ltd v Cole
(2006) 152 FCR 382,
[168]–[174].
See generally P Hall,
Investigating Corruption and Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions of
Inquiry—Powers and Procedures
A finding of a Royal
Commission may be challenged on this basis: see
Mahon v Air New Zealand
[1984] AC 808; and, in the analogous context of a coronial finding,
Annetts v McCann
(1990) 170 CLR
Ross v Costigan
(1982) 59 FLR 184. See generally P Hall,
Investigating Corruption and
Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions of Inquiry—Powers and
(2004), 706–708.
Peters v Davison
(1999) 2 NZLR 164
AWB Ltd v Cole (No 6)
[2006] FCA 1274
(2006) 235 ALR 307
AWB Ltd v Cole (No 5)
[2006] FCA 1234
(2006) 155 FCR 30
Cole (No 4)
[2006] FCA 1050
AWB Ltd v Cole (No 3)
[2006] FCA 1031
AWB Ltd v Cole (No 2)
[2006] FCA 913
(2006) 233 ALR 453
AWB Ltd v Cole
152 FCR 382.
Final Report
of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
Special Commissions
of Inquiry Act 1983
Royal Commissions Act 1917
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Constitution
See generally
M Aronson, B Dyer and M Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(3rd ed, 2004), 840–860. See especially
Plaintiff S157/2002 v
Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476.
For example,
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 38 imposes a time
limit of 14 days for bringing such a proceeding, although a court may extend
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth), a period of two months applies to an order requiring a
judicial tribunal to do an act (r 25.07); and a period of six months
an order removing a judgment, order, conviction or other proceeding for the
purpose of being quashed (r 25.06). There
is no time limit governing orders
prohibiting a person from doing something. These time limits, however, may be
extended by a judge
of the Court: r 4.02. There are no equivalent provisions in
Federal Court Rules
(Cth). Time limits may be prescribed in specific
Acts: see, eg,
Migration Act 1958
Bodruddaza v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2007] HCA 14
(2007) 228 CLR
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Bodruddaza v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2007] HCA 14
(2007) 228 CLR
Liberty Victoria,
12 May 2009.
See Appendix 2
for a List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
Final Report of
the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
Ibid, vol 2,
Ross v Costigan (No 2)
[1982] FCA 73
(1982) 64 FLR 55
[1996] UKPC 8
[1996] AC 890
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
changed the law relating to privative clauses, was handed down in the same year
as the Building Royal Commission
Corporations Act
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Procedural matters,
such as whether a special case should be drawn up, may be prescribed in the
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), as is done in relation to native title
proceedings:
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) O 78, Div 3. Proceedings
in relation to a question referred to the Federal Court are exempt from court
Federal Court of Australia Regulations 2004
(Cth) Sch 3,
ss 2(e), 4(e).
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1995
This provision further states that a
question of law may be referred to the court in the form of a special case drawn
up by the parties
to the inquiry or, if there are no parties to the inquiry or
the parties cannot agree, by the Commission, and provides that a court
on a referral is binding on the Commission and any parties to the
New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), [11.39].
The NZLC noted a procedural issue. Stating a case to the High Court raises the
potential for parties to seek reimbursement
of their costs from the inquiry. The
NZLC suggested that the power should be rarely exercised: New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Re Judiciary and
Navigation Acts (Advisory Opinions Case)
[1921] HCA 20
(1921) 29 CLR
Mellifont v Attorney-General
[1991] HCA 53
(1991) 173 CLR 289
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice Commission
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Liberty Victoria,
Submission RC 1
, 6 May 2009.
The ALRC discusses these issues in detail in Ch
See S Donaghue,
Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Ibid, [10.13]–[10.14].
As noted there, the courts generally have placed great weight on the public
interest in public reporting.
Royal Commissions Act
Proposal 16–1(b).
Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
See Ch 5, which
deals with the relevance of the prospect of subsequent legal proceedings in
determining whether an inquiry should
be established; Ch 8, which considers
the transfer of custody and use of Royal Commission records; Ch 11, which
deals with the power
of a Royal Commission and Official Inquiry to communicate
information relating to contraventions of a law to an agency responsible
administering that law; and Ch 12, which discusses the protection from
subsequent legal liability of those involved in
Proposals 16–1,
Proposal 16–2.
15. Procedures
Introduction
Methods of inquiry
Processes of Royal Commissions
Measures to encourage flexibility
Statutory list of available procedures
Guidance on the selection of procedures
ALRC’s view
Procedural fairness
Aspects of procedural fairness
Guidance on procedural fairness
Extending procedural rights
Submissions and consultations
Right of reply
Correction of the public record
Examination and cross-examination
Leave to cross-examine a witness
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Procedural protections
Restricting public access
ALRC’s view
Authorisation of leave to appear
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Inquiries affecting Indigenous peoples
Language and physical communication barriers
Communication styles
Formality of proceedings
Effect of customary laws
Measures adopted in courts
Consultations
ALRC’s view
Rights to information
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
15. Procedures
Introduction
15.1 The types of procedures an inquiry member chooses to employ will be
extremely important to the effectiveness and efficiency of
an inquiry. When
choosing which procedures to employ, an inquiry member will need to consider a
range of matters, including: the
purposes of an inquiry; the types of
information needed to fulfil the terms of reference; the accessibility, quality
and means of
obtaining the information; and the impact of the methods of
information-gathering on affected parties. In particular, when an inquiry
required to investigate allegations of misconduct or serious mismanagement, an
inquiry member will have to balance the wider interest
in exposing wrongdoing
and ensuring transparency against the individual rights and interests that may
be affected.
15.2 In this chapter, the ALRC examines a number of issues relating to the
procedures adopted by inquiries. First, it examines the
available to conduct an inquiry. Secondly, it examines the requirement that the
procedures adopted comply with
the principles of procedural fairness, and
whether the obligations of procedural fairness should be extended, including in
to the right of reply and the ability to cross-examine. Thirdly, it
examines particular aspects of procedures which affect the interests
individuals participating in an inquiry, including: the use of public and
private hearings; the entitlement to appear before an
inquiry; the taking of
evidence from Indigenous witnesses; and the provision of information and
assistance concerning the procedures
adopted by an inquiry.
15.3 There are many possible methods of inquiring into a matter. The
Commissions Act
(Cth) itself does not prescribe any particular
method of conducting an inquiry. The
Royal Commissions Act
frequently uses terms such as witnesses, evidence, formal hearings,
cross-examination, and appointment of counsel assisting,
which may reinforce the
use of a court-like procedure.
15.4 Methods of conducting an inquiry include: the use of written
submissions; the conducting of informal and confidential interviews;
analysis of documentary information; meetings with stakeholders; expert reports;
and the use of public and private hearings.
These methods may be combined in one
inquiry and, in fact, most Royal Commissions have combined a number of these
15.5 For example, as well as requiring information by notice or summons and
conducting public hearings, the Royal Commission into
the Building and
Construction Industry (2003) (Building Royal Commission) invited written
submissions from stakeholders, met with
industry participants, researched and
published discussion papers for comment, and hosted a conference on workplace
health and safety.
Further, it obtained information from government agencies
through memorandums of understanding, received telephone interception
information
from other agencies, obtained ‘overview evidence’
intended to inform the Commission about issues in the building industry,
conducted private hearings.
15.6 Methods of inquiry often are categorised as adversarial or
inquisitorial. An adversarial procedure is the procedure used in courts
common law countries—that is, parties identify the issues and present the
case as they think fit, and the judge acts as
an umpire deciding between the
cases put by the parties. In an inquisitorial procedure, the person responsible
for making the decision
(or, in the case of an inquiry, the recommendations) is
in charge of identifying and investigating the issues and the evidence. Although
this distinction has its uses, in practice procedures tend to include elements
of both adversarial and inquisitorial methods.
Processes of Royal
Commissions
15.7 The processes of Royal Commissions and other forms of inquiry were the
subject of significant comment in
consultations.
As many stakeholders
observed, the public expectation and the usual practice is that Royal
Commissions are conducted in a manner
similar to courts, with public hearings
consisting of opening statements, examination and cross-examination of
witnesses, and closing
statements.
15.8 Some stakeholders observed, however, that such procedures may not be the
most appropriate or efficient method of investigation.
It may inhibit
cooperation from witnesses, and tends to encourage an adversarial rather than an
inquisitorial process, which is inappropriate
for an investigation such as a
Royal Commission. Court-like procedures are also time consuming and costly.
Further, such procedures
may cause significant and irreparable harm to the
reputations of witnesses who may endure a form of ‘trial by media’.
The specific issue of public and private hearings is considered later in this
15.9 In the opinion of many stakeholders, the undue focus on public hearings
and court-like procedures is the product of a number
of factors. These include:
public expectations as to the conduct of a Royal Commission; media pressure for
public hearings; the time
pressures experienced by Royal Commissions; and the
legal training of most Royal Commissioners. The cumbersome and costly nature
the typical Royal Commission is, in the view of many stakeholders, a principal
motivation behind the increased use of non-statutory
inquiries. This was so even
though nothing in the
Royal Commissions Act
itself requires adversarial
15.10 Stakeholders observed that the conduct of non-statutory forms of public
inquiries tended to be more inquisitorial. Such inquiries
tend to rely on more
flexible procedures such as meetings with stakeholders, analysis of
documentation, and written submissions.
This, it was suggested, resulted in more
efficient inquiries which were able to report quickly, and cost less than a
Royal Commission.
A number of stakeholders expressed concern that a statutory
structure may limit this procedural flexibility.
Measures to encourage
flexibility
15.11 Throughout this Discussion Paper, the ALRC proposes measures that
encourage greater flexibility in the appointment of inquiries.
As discussed in
Chapter 5, the ALRC proposes that there should be another form of statutory
inquiry, called an Official Inquiry.
15.12 The use of Official Inquiries is a key mechanism for increasing
flexibility. It is expected that Official Inquiries will be
able to use more
informal procedures than Royal Commissions, since the public expectations that
apply to Royal Commissions are less
likely to apply to Official Inquiries.
Further, the Australian Government may be more likely to appoint non-judicial
members to an
Official Inquiry, as is presently the case with non-statutory
inquiries. In Chapter 6, the ALRC proposes that the
Inquiries Act
provide for the appointment of an expert or experts in any field to assist
inquiry members.
As expert advisors
may be appointed to advise on legal matters, this may also encourage the
appointment of members with other types
of expertise to both Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries.
Statutory list of
available procedures
15.13 More flexible procedures also may be encouraged in two other ways. Some
stakeholders suggested that a legislative provision
emphasising the wide variety
of procedures available to inquiries may provide a degree of support for inquiry
members who wish to
adopt a different kind of procedure, and encourage inquiry
members to consider other forms of procedure.
15.14 In the report
A New Inquiries Act
, the New Zealand Law
Commission (NZLC) recommended the inclusion of such a provision to address
similar concerns about the appropriateness
of court-like
procedures.
Clause 14(3) of the
resulting Inquiries Bill 2008
(NZ) provides that inquiries ‘may
determine matters such as’:
(a) whether to conduct interviews, and if so, who to interview;
(b) whether to call witnesses, and if so, who to call;
(c) whether to hold hearings in the course of its inquiry, and if so, when and
where hearings are to be held;
(d) whether to receive evidence or submissions from or on behalf of any person
participating in the inquiry;
(e) whether to receive oral or written evidence or submissions and the manner
and form of the evidence or submissions; and
(f) whether to allow or restrict cross-examination of witnesses.
15.15 This clause is expressed as not limiting the general power of an
inquiry to ‘conduct its inquiry as it considers appropriate’,
subject to the Act, once passed, or the inquiry’s terms of
The NZLC considered that
such a provision would clarify the scope of the inquiry’s powers to
inquiry participants, inquiry
members, and the
15.16 In its submission to this Inquiry, the Law Council of Australia (Law
Council) supported a provision along the lines of the New
Guidance on the
selection of procedures
15.17 Another way to encourage flexibility is the use of a handbook on how to
conduct an inquiry. For example, the New Zealand Department
of Internal Affairs
produces a handbook on the running of an inquiry, which includes a section
discussing the selection of appropriate
procedures.
This section includes
guidance on: the issues inquiry members may need to consider in selecting
procedures; deciding who has an interest
in an inquiry; the treatment of
witnesses and evidence; the holding of hearings; a standard format for hearings;
and the requirements
of procedural fairness.
15.18 The ALRC proposes that a handbook for Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries (the
Inquiries Handbook
) should be developed and published, and
that this should address a range of
A number of
stakeholders supported the use of guidance in relation to matters of
15.19 In the ALRC’s view, a provision similar to cl 14(3) of the
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) should be included in the proposed
. Such a provision, indicating the variety of procedures that can be
adopted by an inquiry, may promote a move away from court-like
procedures where
these might not be appropriate. This would reinforce the fact that Royal
Commissions may adopt a wide variety of
procedures when conducting an inquiry.
Since procedural flexibility is desirable with respect to both Royal Commissions
and Official
Inquiries, such a provision should apply to both types of inquiry.
15.20 In addition, it would be useful for the
Inquiries Handbook
address the selection and use of different procedures. As noted above, the
decision as to which procedures are adopted in an inquiry
is critical to its
success. Since some inquiry members may not have conducted an inquiry before, or
may be unfamiliar with particular
kinds of procedures, it would be useful to
give some information as to which kinds of procedures may be appropriate in
contexts and how such procedures operate. This also may encourage
greater use of more inquisitorial methods of inquiry. The New Zealand
would be a useful model in this regard.
Proposal 15–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may conduct inquiries and gather
information as members consider appropriate,
subject to any other provisions in
the Act and the requirements of procedural fairness. For example, an inquiry
(i) conduct interviews;
(ii) hold hearings;
(iii) call witnesses;
(iv) obtain and receive information in any manner it sees fit; and
(v) allow or restrict the questioning of witnesses.
Proposal 15–2
Inquiries Handbook
should address the
suitability and use of different kinds of procedures that may be used by
inquiries. For example, the
Inquiries Handbook
may address the manner in
which hearings are conducted, the ways in which people may participate in an
inquiry, and how to accord
procedural fairness in the context of different types
of inquiry.
15.21 While the
Royal Commissions Act
does not impose any limitations
on the kinds of procedures that may be adopted, the common law imposes an
overall obligation that
these procedures be fair.
15.22 If an inquiry may operate to ‘destroy, defeat or prejudice a
person’s rights, interests or legitimate
expectations’,
required to observe the principles of procedural fairness. That is, it is under
a duty to observe fair procedures when making
decisions affecting those rights,
interests or legitimate expectations. Reputation, both personal and commercial,
is an interest
that attracts the protection of the principles of procedural
Therefore, any inquiry
that may affect the reputation of individuals and corporations, which would
include all inquiries investigating
misconduct, is obliged to observe the
principles of procedural fairness.
Aspects of procedural
15.23 There are two main aspects of procedural fairness: the requirement that
a person who is liable to be affected by a decision
must be given notice of the
relevant matters, and given an opportunity to put his or her case (the
‘hearing rule’); and
the requirement that a decision maker is not
biased, or seen to be biased (the ‘bias rule’). What these
principles require
in a particular case will depend on the circumstances
15.24 The principles of procedural fairness do not impose many limitations on
the procedures that may be adopted by
The main requirement
of procedural fairness is that an inquiry ‘cannot lawfully make any
finding adverse to the interests of
[a person] without first giving [that
person] the opportunity to make submissions against the making of such a
15.25 This requirement does not require an inquiry to give notice of any
possible adverse matter at the time it is
Typically, in a Royal
Commission, a person may be given sufficient notice of matters adverse to his or
her interests in a number
of ways. For example, counsel assisting may give
notice of adverse matters through the identification of issues and possible
findings in an opening and closing statement. Further, notice of adverse
matters may be provided through the publication of the evidence,
public hearings and the provision of transcripts of evidence to the person
affected. An important way of ensuring notice
is given of adverse findings is by
providing copies of draft adverse
15.26 A person may be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to these
matters if an adverse matter is put to them in examination,
or a person is
re-examined or given the opportunity to cross-examine. Further, the opportunity
to provide written statements and
submissions in response to evidence, closing
statements and draft findings may constitute a reasonable opportunity to
15.27 The bias rule has a more limited operation in the context of inquiries,
both because those conducting inquiries necessarily
begin with suspicions before
they commence their
investigations,
and because
inquiry members inevitably play an active role in investigating the
The bias rule test is
whether the conduct in the circumstances would give rise to a reasonable
apprehension or suspicion on the part
of a fair-minded and informed member of
the public that the inquiry member will not discharge his or her task
impartially.
Guidance on
procedural fairness
Royal Commissions Act
does not refer to the principles of
procedural fairness. Inquiry members usually are given no guidance on the
matter, although members
with legal training are likely to be aware of the
requirements of procedural fairness. One issue for this Inquiry is whether it
be useful to provide some guidance on the application of those principles.
15.29 Such guidance could be provided for by
For example, cl 17
of the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) provides that an inquiry must not make any
finding adverse to a person in a report
unless the inquiry has taken all
reasonable steps to:
(i) give that person reasonable notice of the intention to make the finding;
(ii) disclose to that person the contents of the proposed finding, the relevant
material relied on for that finding, and the reasons
on which it is based;
(iii) give that person a reasonable opportunity to respond to the proposed
15.30 Clause 17(b) also requires that the inquiry give proper consideration
to any response given. The provision in the Bill was included
recommendation of the NZLC, which considered that the rules regarding adverse
comment should be set out in statute to ‘give
clear direction to those
conducting and participating in
inquiries’.
Section 35A
Royal Commissions Act 1991
(ACT) goes further
than the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) by requiring that an inquiry provide a copy of
the proposed comment, together
with a written notice allowing for the party to
respond within a specified period of at least 14
15.32 Guidance could also be provided in a handbook, as discussed above. For
example, the New Zealand handbook includes a section
on procedural
Extending procedural
15.33 One issue in this Inquiry is whether the rights and interests of
affected parties are protected adequately by the common law
requirement of
procedural fairness, or whether additional safeguards should be introduced.
15.34 The issue of procedural protections in inquiries was considered in the
United Kingdom by the Royal Commission on Tribunals of
Inquiry (1966) (Salmon
Royal Commission), which recommended that six principles—now commonly
referred to as the Salmon Principles—should
be followed to protect the
interests of affected parties:
Before persons become involved in an inquiry, the Tribunal must be
satisfied that there are circumstances which affect those persons
and which the
Tribunal proposes to investigate.
Before persons who are involved in an inquiry are called as
witnesses, they should be informed of any allegations which are made
them and the substance of the evidence in support of the allegations.
Persons should be given an adequate opportunity of preparing their
case and of being assisted by their legal advisers. Their legal
expenses should
normally be met out of public
Persons should have the opportunity of being examined by their own
solicitor or counsel and of stating their case in public at the
If persons involved in an inquiry wish a material witness to be
called, that person should, if reasonably practicable, be heard.
Persons should have the opportunity of testing by cross-examination
conducted by their own solicitor or counsel any evidence which
common law requirement of procedural fairness does not generally require all of
these principles to be applied, although
they may be required in particular
circumstances. For example, in Australia, it does not appear that a person has
the right to call
additional evidence to answer contemplated adverse
15.36 The Salmon Principles were not intended to operate as statutory rules,
but rather as guidelines for the proceedings of
Nevertheless, they
have been given statutory form in the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
15.37 The Salmon Principles have been criticised for not satisfying a number
of other objectives of public inquiries. These include
the desirability of more
informal proceedings, the need for proceedings to be conducted as efficiently as
possible, and the need
for the costs of inquiries to be kept within reasonable
Submissions and
consultations
15.38 In IP 35, the ALRC asked what rights of witnesses, in addition to those
currently set out under the
Royal Commissions Act
, should be protected in
proceedings of Royal Commissions and other public
submission, the Law Council supported a statutory provision setting out the
common law requirement to give a person a reasonable
opportunity to respond to
draft adverse findings, in similar terms to the New Zealand Bill. It submitted
it is the compulsory nature of attendance before an executive body which gives
considerable force to this call for statutory protection
of witnesses. The
common law rules of procedural fairness, and particularly their content in any
given situation, are too discretionary
and uncertain to afford sufficient
protection to witnesses compelled to attend, give evidence, and be cross
examined by the executive
and its representatives, and then be subject of
possibly adverse comment or
15.39 The Law Council recognised the dangers of putting the obligations of
procedural fairness into statutory form and noted that
enacting general law principles into statutory form can risk shifting the debate
from the application of a principle to the construction
of an opaque phrase
(such as ‘reasonable opportunity’ to respond to an adverse finding
or assertion). There is also potential
for statutory provisions to interrupt
proceedings for non-compliance with a mandatory requirement even if no
unfairness results,
and conversely, the potential for unfair procedures to slip
through on the basis that formal compliance with a mandatory requirement
15.40 On balance, however, the Law Council endorsed the approach of the NZLC.
15.41 The Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) specifically supported the
inclusion of a provision similar to
Royal Commissions Act 1991
The Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) also supported a statutory
citing in support the
views of Dr Janet Ransley, who has stated:
[C]ontrols over commissions and their use of powers could be improved by clearly
imposing upon them, through legislation, general
duties of procedural fairness,
together with an obligation to base their findings on probative evidence. This
could be supplemented
by statutory guidelines as to appropriate procedures to
achieve such fairness. … These measures would spell out the legal position
of commissions, make them clearly amenable to review by the courts, and still
subject them to the dynamic development of the common
law doctrines of
procedural fairness …
15.42 The Law Council also discussed how the Salmon Principles could be used
in federal inquiries. It observed that the Salmon Principles
concepts of procedural fairness beyond the point that the common law has
reached’, referring specifically to
the requirements to put ‘any
allegations’ to a potential witness before they are called, the payment of
legal expenses
out of public funds, and the opportunity to call
15.43 It noted that it was most likely that these procedures would be
required by procedural fairness only in ‘exceptional cases’,
submitted that there was ‘therefore some force in the criticisms of the
Salmon Principles as being inconsistent with other
objectives of public
inquiries’.
principles, however,
might appropriately guide a Royal Commissioner when seeking to adequately
protect the interests of a particular witness, subject
to considerations
including the nature of the particular commission and its terms of reference,
the nature of the evidence given,
and the access of the witness to proper legal
representation.
15.44 The Law Council suggested that there was scope to include in
legislation a ‘guided discretion’, such as providing
that at any
stage of a Royal Commission, if a witness is able to make a case that his or her
reputation might be adversely affected,
certain balanced protective steps might
be taken, such as protecting information from publication until a certain date.
that while such a power already exists, ‘it is the linking of it
to the protection of reputation of witnesses that needs further
consideration’.
15.45 Most stakeholders expressed support for the position that, while the
ultimate discretion must be left to the inquiry member,
some guidance on the
application of the rules of procedural fairness in either legislation or in
guidelines was appropriate.
ALRC’s view
15.46 The rules of procedural fairness are critical to the lawfulness of the
conduct of an inquiry, and indeed to the legitimacy of
an inquiry. It is
desirable, therefore, that inquiry members be given guidance on the application
of those rules. This may benefit,
in particular, inquiry members who are not
legally trained, and provide those participating in inquiries with guidance as
15.47 It is difficult to generalise about what procedural fairness requires
in the conduct of inquiries, because of the diversity
of circumstances in which
issues of procedural fairness might arise. Further, the concept continues to
evolve. One clear obligation,
however, is the right to be given an opportunity
to respond before the making of adverse findings.
15.48 In the ALRC’s view, this obligation can usefully be set out in
legislation in similar terms to the provision in the Inquiries
Bill 2008 (NZ).
The provision in the Inquiries Bill is preferable to the provision in the
Royal Commissions Act 1991
(ACT), because the New Zealand provision sets
out the procedure for discharging the obligation in a more flexible way.
15.49 The ALRC proposes that the application of other matters relating to
procedural fairness should be dealt with in the proposed
. Matters that could be addressed include: the circumstances in
which issues of procedural fairness may arise; when and how prior
notice should
be given; what needs to be disclosed in order to allow a fair opportunity to
respond; the methods by which people can
respond to allegations; and the manner
in which such responses should be considered. Some of the specific issues
discussed later
in this chapter are also relevant to these matters. The New
Zealand handbook provides a useful model in this respect.
15.50 The ALRC does not propose, however, that there should be any statutory
extension of procedural rights along the lines of the
Salmon Principles. It is
concerned that any codification of the Salmon Principles would be too
prescriptive and fail to recognise
competing interests, such as the desirability
of flexibility and efficiency in the conduct of inquiries. The ALRC is concerned
any codification would promote an overly judicial approach to inquiries.
Nevertheless, the Salmon Principles may be useful in informing
the discussion in
the handbook concerning the application of procedural fairness.
Proposal 15–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that reports of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries should not make any
finding that is adverse to a person, unless
the inquiry has taken all reasonable
steps to give that person reasonable notice of the intention to make that
finding and disclose
to that person the contents of the proposed finding, the
relevant material relied on for that finding, and the reasons on which it
based. Further, the inquiry should take all reasonable steps to give that person
an opportunity to respond to the proposed finding,
and the inquiry should
properly consider any response given.
15.51 The proposed
Inquiries Act
could provide that responses to
adverse findings, or summaries of those responses, must be included in the
inquiry’s final report.
For example,
Commissions Act 1991
(ACT) provides that
A copy of a submission made, or statement given, in relation to the [adverse]
comment within the time allowed, must be included in
the commission’s
report of the inquiry.
Section 35A(5)
provides, however, that if
the board is satisfied on reasonable grounds that a submission made, or
statement given, in relation to the comment is excessively
long or contains
defamatory or offensive language, the board may include a fair summary of the
submission or statement in the report
of the inquiry instead of the submission
or statement.
15.53 These submissions or statements could be included in an inquiry’s
report by, for example, appending them to the report.
This would have the
advantage of putting on record the responses of individuals to the adverse
findings contained in a report.
15.54 In the ALRC’s view, the provision in
Commissions Act 1991
(ACT), requiring the inclusion of responses, or
summaries of responses, to adverse findings in reports appears to be desirable.
would provide a public record of a person’s objection, and would impose
little extra burden on inquiries as such responses
could be attached as an
appendix to the report. The ALRC is interested in stakeholders’ views on
this question.
Should the proposed
Inquiries Act
include a provision
requiring that, when an inquiry gives an opportunity to a person to respond to
potential adverse findings made
against him or her in a report, that response or
a summary of it should be included in the report?
Correction of the
public record
15.55 The fact that the outcomes of related proceedings subsequent to an
inquiry are not always reported was another issue that arose
in consultations.
If in a subsequent proceeding an adverse finding is found to be without merit,
the damage done by the adverse finding
is not countered by a correction of the
public record. The issue is likely to arise most frequently in the context of
administrative
and disciplinary proceedings, since court proceedings are held in
public and tend to be reported by the media if they are related
to a public
inquiry of significant importance,
15.56 The CPSU provided an example of this situation. Public statements had
been made on behalf of the Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry
that individual officers named in the Equine Influenza Inquiry (2008) would be
investigated for breaches of
the Australian Public Service Code of Conduct (APS
Code of Conduct).
Breaches of
the APS Code of Conduct are handled by the employing agency under agency
guidelines.
The subsequent
investigation found, however, that none of the officers had breached the Code of
Conduct. In consultations, the CPSU
stated that it was unaware of any media
release or other public statement that made it clear the individuals had been
subsequent disciplinary proceedings. The CPSU observed that
‘the reputations of those individual officers were, however, unfairly
harmed by the earlier public
15.57 The Australian Public Service Commissioner (APSC) provides detailed
guidance to agencies about the handling of investigations
into breaches of the
APS Code of Conduct. This includes advice on when the identity of a person
subject to such an investigation
In general, the
identity of such an employee is not released unless it is ‘necessary,
appropriate and reasonable’ to
The APSC advises that,
before disclosure is made, certain steps should be taken, including notifying
the affected person of the usual
disclosures that are
and seeking consent for
disclosure of information to third parties, if such information is not normally
disclosed to such parties.
15.58 The APSC also publishes advice on the best practice to be adopted by
agencies in handling investigations into breaches of the
APS Code of
It may be appropriate for the agency to take some action, where the employee has
suffered any loss of reputation because it became
known they were suspected of
misconduct if it is clear that no such misconduct occurred (e.g. with the
consent of the employee a
notice be sent to all relevant employees informing
them of the outcome).
15.59 The CPSU submitted:
In our view, the Government should not be allowed to make public
statements about the initiation of Code of Conduct proceedings.
only be appropriate for such public comment to be made after the Code
of Conduct investigation has been completed, and the
employee has had an opportunity to answer the allegations made against
15.60 The CPSU also suggested
that there should be a mechanism to allow correction of the public record in
such cases.
Options for reform
15.61 There are several ways this issue could be addressed. For example,
agency guidelines or best practice advice could state that
the identity of an
employee who is subject to an investigation for breach of the APS Code of
Conduct should not be disclosed. The
employee, however, may consent to
disclosure of his or her identity. This appears in line with the best practice
advice given by
15.62 Another option would be to ensure publication of the results of
subsequent investigations which are relevant to an adverse finding
in an inquiry
report. This could be done in a number of ways. For example, in Chapter 7 the
ALRC proposes that the Australian Government
should be required to table in
Parliament its implementation of an inquiry’s recommendations, if any are
accepted, and periodically
publish information about further implementation of
recommendations.
This proposal
could be extended to require the tabling or publication of the results of
subsequent proceedings, especially where
a person has been cleared in such
proceedings. Alternatively, a legislative requirement could be enacted to
require the Australian
Government to publish the findings of subsequent
proceedings related to an inquiry.
ALRC’s view
15.63 A real issue of fairness arises when prejudicial comments are made to
the media after an inquiry, and those named or identified
are subsequently found
not to have engaged in the imputed conduct.
15.64 The results of subsequent proceedings should be included, therefore, as
part of the requirement to report on implementation
activities, as proposed in
Chapter 7. This would provide an avenue for correcting the public record in a
way that makes those results
readily accessible to those reading the report of
the inquiry itself. The ALRC is interested in further comment from stakeholders
on this issue.
What mechanism, if any, should be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act
to address the harm caused to a person who, having been
named or otherwise being identifiable in a public statement as the subject
investigation flowing from an inquiry, is cleared in that subsequent
investigation, without any further public statement to
Examination and
cross-examination
15.65 One method of achieving procedural fairness is to enable a person to
cross-examine a witness who is giving evidence adverse
to the interests of that
person. Witnesses in a Royal Commission may be examined by a Commissioner or by
counsel assisting the Commission.
They also may be examined or cross-examined by
a legal practitioner who is authorised by the Commission to appear before it
representing
a party involved in the
Authorisation of leave
to appear is discussed below. The proposed Official Inquiries also may use the
procedures of examination and
cross-examination.
15.66 The procedures adopted for the examination or cross-examination of
witnesses can vary significantly according to the nature
of the Royal Commission
or Official Inquiry and the type of evidence being
In each Commission,
procedures for cross-examination may be determined by directions or guidelines
developed by the Commission, or
rulings of the Commissioner on applications to
cross-examine.
15.67 For example, the Building Royal Commission early in its inquiry
released a practice note outlining principles for examination
cross-examination. The note advised that any witness who was legally represented
would be first examined by counsel assisting
the Commission, and then allowed to
be examined by his or her own legal representative. That witness could then be
cross-examined
by or on behalf of any person considered by the Commission to
have sufficient interest in so doing. Re-examination by the person’s
representative or the counsel assisting the Commission would then be
15.68 A slightly different process was employed in the HIH Royal Commission
(2003). In that inquiry, if a witness was represented
or was connected with a
party who was represented, counsel for the witness or party was given leave to
lead the evidence from the
witness. The usual practice was for the
witness’s written statement to be adopted where one had been provided.
Counsel assisting
was then able to ask questions of the witness, with other
parties then able to cross-examine if given leave. Re-examination was then
allowed to occur, if
to cross-examine a witness
15.69 The directions given by a Royal Commission as to when cross-examination
may occur can be contentious and may raise issues of
procedural fairness. For
example, the question of when a party to an inquiry is entitled to cross-examine
a witness received significant
attention during the Building Royal Commission.
15.70 In a second practice note for the inquiry, Commissioner Cole indicated
that leave to cross-examine would be given only in limited
circumstances. In
particular, persons other than counsel assisting would not be permitted to
cross-examine a witness unless they
provided counsel assisting with a signed
statement of evidence advancing material contrary to the evidence of that
In practice, this meant
cross-examination could not occur except where there was direct evidence
challenging the witness.
15.71 The other guiding principles used by Commissioner Cole to decide when
leave to cross-examine would be given were as follows.
Cross-examination was
allowed if there was a disputed issue of fact relevant to a matter regarded as
material to any issue that had
to be determined and, overriding all other
considerations, if there were grave allegations against a person which may have
been diminished
or eliminated by an attack on the credit of the witness giving
evidence. Cross-examination was not allowed in relation to adverse
where that evidence was not denied; if the disputing evidence was a matter of
comment; or if the person wishing to contest
the fact stated he or she had no
recollection of a fact about which a person had given evidence, and there were
no surrounding circumstances
casting doubt upon the truth of that
15.72 In the final report of the Building Royal Commission, Commissioner Cole
expressed the view that ‘procedural fairness does
not usually, and
certainly does not invariably require Commissions to permit
cross-examination’.
In Cole’s view, this limitation on cross-examination allowed the inquiry
to proceed more efficiently, by identifying only issues
genuinely in
15.73 Counsel representing the unions under investigation by the Building
Royal Commission argued that these procedures impeded their
ability to fairly
represent their clients.
The Royal Commission … imposed extraordinary, restrictive limitations on
cross-examination of witnesses. When cross-examination
was allowed, it was often
days or even weeks after the damage in the media was done, and even then the
Royal Commission severely
restricted what could be the subject of
cross-examination. It is believed that the only other royal commission to impose
restrictions on cross-examination was the Victorian Royal Commission
into Communism which took place at the height of anti-communist
hysteria more
than 50 years ago.
15.74 The conditions on cross-examination were challenged by the CFMEU on the
basis that the rules of procedural fairness include
the right to cross-examine a
witness who is giving evidence adverse to an affected person’s
, Heerey J rejected this argument, holding that the direction on
cross-examination ‘on its face seems rationally and reasonably
the efficient performance of the obligations of the
Commissioner’.
He held that the
Royal Commissions Act
contemplated the imposition of
limitations on cross-examination, and this was not inconsistent with the rules
of procedural fairness.
While it did not allow a Commissioner an unfettered
discretion to impose any conditions he or she wished, conditions which had a
reasonable connection with the function of a Commissioner under the Act
or the Letters Patent were valid. In particular, Heerey J noted that there
was no authority for the proposition that there is a right
to cross-examination
under the principles of procedural
15.75 In the HIH Royal Commission, Commissioner Owen also sought to limit
excessive cross-examination, but these limitations were
less restrictive than
those in the Building Royal Commission. He issued a practice note indicating
that cross-examination would be
allowed only where ‘it would help …
ascertain the facts on which’ the final report would be
In his view, ‘although cross-examination might play a part in affording
people procedural fairness, it did not follow that
it constituted the only
opportunity to be heard’.
The Final Report of the Commission notes that leave was not withheld on any
Submissions and
consultations
15.76 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether any changes were required to the
powers available to a Royal Commissioner to examine and cross-examine
and whether public inquiries should have similar
It also asked whether a
party to a Royal Commission or public inquiry should have the right to
cross-examine a witness who is giving
evidence adverse to the party’s
15.77 The CFMEU stated:
First, legislative provision should be made that before any evidence can be used
to found an adverse finding, it may be the subject
of cross-examination by a
legal representative in the same way as in the courts. Cross examination in the
courts can be curtailed
if it is repetitive, unnecessary or oppressive.
Such limitations are sufficient in the interests of fairness in a royal
commission or inquiry.
15.78 The CPSU also supported a right to cross-examine if adverse evidence
was given. It observed that cross-examination ‘should
allow parties
represented in the proceedings to refute allegations made against them in a
timely way, but similarly not impede the
timely and efficient conduct of
proceedings’.
It noted the
concern of some of its members that they had been subject to unnecessarily
lengthy and repetitive cross-examination
in Royal Commission
proceedings. In the CPSU’s view:
where the party’s interests are affected by evidence, there should be
a right to cross-examine. Where a party’s interests
are not affected
by the evidence, the Commissioner should refrain from
allowing cross-examination by that party’s representatives.
For the reasons set out above, and in the interests of natural justice,
a party whose interests are adversely affected by a witness’
should have the opportunity to cross-examine that witness. To ensure
that proceedings are not unduly delayed, the Commissioner
should have
to make a finding that the party’s interests were adversely affected
and the cross-examination can only go to that
evidence deemed to be
detrimental to the party.
In the interests of fairness, this should occur as promptly as possible
so the injured party has an opportunity to correct the public
the party is not afforded this right and afforded it in a timely manner,
their interests will be harmed by the public
reporting of allegations made
against them without any fair opportunity to
15.79 Dr Ian Turnbull submitted that leave to cross-examine should not be
allowed, because such inquiries were inquisitorial and not
adversarial. Rather,
there should be an opportunity to provide written questions to counsel assisting
to put to the witness, at his
or her discretion, even where there was a signed
statement of contradictory
15.80 In its submission, the Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) doubted
whether ‘a Commissioner’s powers to determine
how a witness may be
examined and cross-examined should be further
prescribed’.
experience, the existing discretion had proven to be effective in practice.
15.81 In consultations, the majority of stakeholders suggested that normally
it would be appropriate to allow cross-examination where
evidence adverse to a
party’s interests was given. They noted, however, that inquiry members
must have the ultimate discretion
to control cross-examination for the efficient
conduct of the inquiry. Further, it was the majority view that no statutory
to cross-examination should be conferred.
15.82 While the opportunity to cross-examine may be an important method of
achieving procedural fairness, a statutory right to cross-examine
where evidence
adverse to a party is given would have a number of disadvantages. These include:
reducing the flexibility of inquiries;
reinforcing the tendency to use
court-like procedures in inquiries; encouraging the use of legal representation;
and encouraging
judicial review of procedural issues, resulting in delay to
15.83 While the ALRC makes no proposal in relation to examination or
cross-examination, it may be useful to address the issue in the
For example,
guidance in the
might address the importance of
cross-examination as a method of achieving procedural fairness and advise that,
if the inquiry is
to be conducted by way of hearings, there should generally be
an opportunity to cross-examine in a timely fashion if a person is
evidence adverse to the interests of another.
protections
15.84 This section of the chapter discusses other procedural measures that
afford protection to the interests of individuals participating
in an inquiry,
as well as the protection afforded to confidential or sensitive
information.
These measures
include: restricting public access to the hearings of, and information obtained
by, an inquiry; ensuring that procedures
are culturally appropriate, in the
context of inquiries affecting Indigenous people; and enabling affected parties
to understand
the nature of the inquiry, the procedures and their rights.
Restricting public
15.85 An issue of major importance in the protection of individual interests
is the degree of public (and media) access to the inquiry,
including access to
hearings and evidence. This issue is also raised where the information sought by
a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry may be confidential or sensitive in
nature, such as where it may prejudice national
Public interest in public access
15.86 Royal Commissions are usually conducted primarily in public, in that:
the hearings usually are held in public; most if not all
of the evidence is
published; and most if not all of the report is made publicly
15.87 There are strong reasons for conducting Royal Commissions (and, if
established, Official Inquiries) in public. Royal Commissions
established to investigate a matter of substantial public interest or concern.
Ascertaining the ‘truth’ of
a matter and making these findings
public is the fundamental reason for establishing a Royal Commission. Public
exposure of wrongdoing,
or publicly dispelling allegations, may be the most
important outcome of a Royal
Commission.
allegations concern the propriety of government conduct, the case for full
public access may be particularly compelling.
15.88 Further, conducting inquiries in public helps to instil confidence in
the integrity and independence of inquiry processes. It
also enables citizens to
access information that may be of significant public importance.
15.89 Mason J (as he then was) described the difficulties of holding an
inquiry in private in
Victoria v Australian Building Construction
Employees’ and Builders Labourers’ Federation
It shrouds the proceedings with a cloak of secrecy, denying to them the public
character which to my mind is an essential element
in public acceptance of an
inquiry of this kind and of its report. An atmosphere of secrecy readily breeds
the suspicion that the
inquiry is unfair or oppressive …
The denial of public proceedings immediately brings in its train other
detriments. Potential witnesses and others having relevant
documents and
information in their possession, lacking knowledge of the course of proceedings,
are less likely to come forward. And
the public, kept in ignorance of
developments which it has a legitimate interest in knowing, is left to speculate
on the course of
Interests of witnesses
15.90 On the other hand, there may be good reasons for restricting public
access to inquiries. Inquiries, particularly Royal Commissions,
can have an
intrusive impact on the lives of witnesses. For example, the reputation of a
witness can be damaged even if he or she
is subsequently cleared in the
inquiry’s final report. The mere fact of being called as a witness to a
Royal Commission may
damage that person’s reputation, even where that
person is not the subject of an inquiry.
15.91 These concerns about reputation are greater in the context of inquiries
than in judicial proceedings, since inquiries are investigatory
by nature. As
Lord Justice Scott wrote in an article concerning an inquiry he had
Unless a witness is known to have relevant evidence to give, there can be no
reason for exposing the witness to a public hearing
… it is worth asking
on what basis an investigative hearing ought to be a public hearing. The police
are not expected to conduct
their investigations in
15.92 These concerns may be magnified in the contemporary media landscape,
where ‘sound bites’ of untested allegations
or opening statements
may mislead viewers and can be transmitted instantly and globally.
15.93 Other kinds of harm to the individual interests of witnesses may
result. For example, a person may be required to disclose personal
or sensitive
information that may infringe a person’s privacy.
15.94 As was pointed out in
Independent Commission Against Corruption v
, however, an inquiry is not obliged to avoid or minimise publicity
in order to protect a person’s
reputation.
Rather, an inquiry
must balance the public interests served by an inquiry against the interests of
affected individuals.
Sensitive information
15.95 Chapters 13, 16, and 17 discuss a range of types of information that
may be exempted from disclosure because of their sensitive
or confidential
nature, such as information obtained for the purposes of legal advice or
information that may prejudice national
15.96 There are many types of sensitive or confidential information other
than those that may be exempted from disclosure. For example,
Royal Commissions Act
, allows a person to request that financial
information may be taken in private,
recognises the sensitivity of
financial and commercial information.
15.97 Chapters 13, 16 and 17 discuss different types of confidential or
sensitive information. For the reasons noted in those chapters,
view is that some of these do not justify an exemption from disclosure but may
justify a restriction on public
Prejudice to legal proceedings
15.98 The disclosure of information may also prejudice legal proceedings that
are being conducted at the same time as an inquiry,
or thereafter. As discussed
in Chapter 16, at common law an inquiry is unable to require a person to answer
questions that are directly
relevant to matters that are the subject of a
criminal proceeding or a proceeding for the imposition of a penalty that is
being conducted
at the same time. The ALRC proposes that a provision setting out
this limitation should be included in the proposed
15.99 An inquiry, however, may be able to inquire into matters that are
otherwise relevant to legal proceedings. For example, an inquiry
alleged malpractice in a particular industry may continue to conduct its inquiry
even though the matter ‘touched
and concerned a pending criminal
In such a case,
it may need to restrict public access to the hearings, evidence or report to
ensure it does not prejudice the related
proceeding.
15.100 An inquiry also may need to restrict public access to ensure it does
not prejudice any subsequent legal proceedings that may
contemplated.
For example, if it
is contemplated that a person may be prosecuted for matters that are the subject
of the inquiry, it may be necessary
to hear that evidence in private to avoid
influencing potential jurors.
Efficient and effective conduct
15.101 Another important reason for restricting public access is to
facilitate a more informal and inquisitorial process. This may
have several
benefits. More informal and confidential meetings may be more productive in
terms of ascertaining the truth, because
witnesses are more likely to be frank.
Public hearings in Royal Commissions often involve lawyers, which adds to the
formality and
cost of proceedings and tends to encourage an adversarial
15.102 Further, there is additional administration involved in organising
public hearings and the publication of evidence. Matters
such as finding
appropriate venues, producing transcripts of evidence, and accommodating the
public and the media inevitably require
additional time and expense.
Methods of restricting public access
15.103 There are three important methods of restricting public and media
access. First, information may be provided to an inquiry
Alternatively, if information is provided in a public hearing, some members of
the public or media may be excluded.
15.104 It is clear that Royal Commissions have the power to take evidence in
private. Under s 6D(2) of the
Royal Commissions Act
, witnesses may
request that their evidence be given in private if they are giving evidence
of any person, and the taking of that
evidence in public would be unfairly prejudicial to that person. Section 6D(5)
states that
this provision operates in ‘aid of and not as in derogation of
the Commission’s general powers to order that any evidence
may be taken in
private’. The Act otherwise gives no guidance as to whether hearings
should be held in public or private.
15.105 Secondly, the publication of certain evidence can be prohibited or
restricted. Under s 6D(3) of the
Royal Commissions Act
Commission may prohibit or restrict the publication of any evidence before it,
the contents of any document, a description of
anything produced to a
Commission, or any information that might enable a person who has given evidence
before the Commission to
identified.
15.106 Thirdly, an inquiry can exercise its discretion as to what evidence or
findings are made public, in a report or otherwise.
For example, in the Building
Royal Commission, Commissioner Cole submitted a confidential volume of his
report to the government.
15.107 This discretion extends to the decision of the inquiry to publish
material on the internet. In recent times, the practice has
been to establish
inquiry websites on which evidence, submissions and reports may be published.
The Victorian Bushfires Royal Commission,
which held hearings while this
Discussion Paper was being written, streamed these hearings over the internet.
This has the advantage
of increasing the accessibility, transparency and
accountability of inquiries. As discussed in Chapter 12, care needs to be taken
with electronic publications, because of the degree of the accessibility and the
difficulty of enforcing rules governing information
(such as rules relating to
Inquiries Handbook
should include guidance on the appropriateness of
electronic publication.
Presumption of public access to
15.108 The inquiries legislation of some jurisdictions requires that the
hearings of an inquiry should be public, subject to
exceptions.
One is s 18(1) of
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK), which states that, subject to any
restrictions imposed by the chair of an inquiry, or the responsible minister,
reasonable steps
must be taken to allow members of the public to attend inquiry
hearings and view evidence.
15.109 The NZLC, after considering this issue, concluded that such a
provision could encourage the inappropriate use of formal hearings.
While inquiries should be as open as possible, there will be cases where their
purposes are better served without formal hearings
and where witnesses can speak
freely without fear of public exposure.
15.110 The NZLC recommended instead that legislation should confer a specific
power to hold an inquiry or any part of it in private,
or otherwise restrict
public access to an inquiry or any part of
It also recommended that,
before making any such order, the inquiry should consider the following
(a) the risk to public confidence in the proceedings of the inquiry;
(b) the need for the inquiry to properly ascertain the facts;
(c ) the extent to which public proceedings may prejudice the security or
defence or economic interests of New Zealand;
(d) the privacy interests of any individual; and
(e) whether such an order would interfere with the administration of justice,
including the right to a fair
15.111 It is useful to consider also the experience of the Independent
Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) in this respect. The
Independent
Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
(NSW) originally provided that ICAC
hearings generally should be held in
In 1991, the section was
amended to allow ICAC to decide whether it would hold hearings in public or
Subsequent practice has
been for ICAC to make greater use of private hearings and other
information-gathering
15.112 In 2002, the Parliamentary Joint Committee that supervises ICAC
recommended that all initial investigations, including hearings,
conducted in private, followed by a public hearing if there is sufficient
evidence to justify making an adverse
This ‘reform
model … limits the risk of unnecessary damage to reputation, preserves the
Commission’s role in publicly
exposing corrupt conduct and emphasises the
need for the strategic use of other investigative strategies and methodologies
confidential investigation
15.113 This is similar to the model used in the Royal Commission on the
Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union
(1984), where
matters were usually explored in private sittings to ensure that ‘before
matters were put in a public sitting
there was a high degree of confidence that
they would be material to [the Royal Commissioner’s] enquiries and the
answers would be likely to be
Power to restrict publication
15.114 Section 6D(3) of the
Royal Commissions Act
enables a Royal
Commission to make a direction prohibiting or restricting publication of
evidence, the contents of any document or
description of a thing produced or
delivered to it, or any information that might enable a person who has given
evidence before the
Commission to be identified. The section does not set out
any limitations on this power, or indicate the grounds on which such a
be exercised.
provisions can be found in the inquiries legislation of other
15.115 In the HIH Royal Commission, Commissioner Owen indicated that the
exercise of the discretion to make an order should be guided
by the principles
used in courts.
The powers of
courts to restrict publication in a similar manner, through what are commonly
known as suppression orders, have been
reviewed recently by the New South Wales
Law Reform Commission
The NZLC also is
currently examining suppression
The ALRC considered
suppression orders in its 1987 report,
15.116 Suppression orders in courts involve a number of important
considerations, including the principle that ‘justice should
not only be
done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be
(the principle of
open justice), and freedom of
expression.
The principle of
open justice, however, may be in tension with the greater purpose of ensuring
that justice is done.
example, it may be necessary to make a suppression order to ensure that juries
are not unduly influenced.
15.117 The powers of courts to make suppression orders derive from the
common law and a variety of statutory
provisions.
At common law,
the principle of open justice cannot be departed from unless it is necessary in
the administration of
established categories in which suppression orders may be made at common law,
including in order to protect trade secrets
and other confidential information.
15.118 Some of the statutory provisions governing the making of suppression
orders by courts set out the grounds for making those
The grounds typically
relate to the interests of justice, including prejudice to a fair trial; the
interests of victims or witnesses,
including the safety of persons and the
adverse impact on victims of sexual offences in particular; national security or
and public morality or
Submissions and consultations
15.119 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether inquiries should be required to hold
hearings in public, and set out in their reports the
evidence on which their
decisions are based. The ALRC asked, if those requirements were to apply,
whether they should be subject
to specified exemptions and, if so, which
15.120 The ALRC also asked whether Royal Commissions or other inquiries
should be required to consider a list of factors before making
prohibiting the publication of evidence or matters identifying
such as the list
of factors recommended in the New Zealand provision concerning public hearings,
set out above.
15.121 Stakeholders agreed that the public interest in open hearings and
publication of evidence had to be weighed against other considerations,
the balance to be struck would vary from inquiry to inquiry. Stakeholders
differed on when that balance would favour a restriction
on access to a hearing
or a restriction on publication, with the exception of certain clear cases such
as information that would
prejudice national security.
15.122 Most stakeholders who made submissions supported the principle that,
in general, public inquiries should be open, and that
the power to take evidence
in private, while necessary, was an exception to that general rule. For example,
Liberty Victoria submitted:
In general, Liberty believes all public inquiries should be open, but recognises
that this must be weighed against the protection
of individual
15.123 The CPSU submitted that ‘public accountability and transparency
must be paramount in all forms of public inquiries’,
and expressed
concern that the credibility of inquiries conducted mostly in private ‘is
often compromised, fairly or unfairly,
by the way in which it was
conducted’.
that, in some circumstances, it would be appropriate for evidence to be taken in
private, such as where evidence might otherwise
fall within the scope of secrecy
provisions. The opportunity for evidence to be taken in private may influence
the level of information
willingly provided by the
It concluded:
It should therefore be open to a Commissioner to accept evidence
in private, however in deciding whether to accept evidence in private
the Commissioner should be required by the statute to balance the interests
of claim to privacy with the interests of the public
in having an open,
public inquiry.
The CPSU believes that it is important that Royal Commissions and
public inquiries should have public hearings and their reports
identify the evidence on which findings are made. Any evidence taken in
private should only be by necessity and should be
the exception to the
rule. The only exemptions should be where a party has a legitimate interest
in maintaining privacy and, on balance,
that legitimate individual interest
overrides the public interest in such matters being dealt with
openly. Wherever possible, the
Commissioner should merely de-identify
such evidence in its
15.124 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) similarly
considered that it would be useful to provide in legislation
that an inquiry
should hold a hearing in public. Such a provision, however, should allow an
inquiry to exclude the public from a
hearing (or from part of it) where an
inquiry decides that the public interest in holding the hearing in public is
outweighed by
other considerations. These other considerations could include the
consequences of possible disclosure of national security information,
to privacy, and the right of any person to a subsequent fair trial. DIAC also
noted that sensitive documents, such as documents
that could prejudice national
security, should not be set out in detail in an inquiry’s report.
15.125 DIAC considered that it may be useful to allow certain witnesses to
give evidence in private to avoid media scrutiny or public
attention—in
particular witnesses of ‘a junior level [who] have only had limited
involvement in, or responsibility for,
the issue being investigated by the
15.126 The Law Council submitted that any new legislation should include,
among other things, criteria to determine whether certain
information should be
prevented from public disclosure or publication. Such criteria could require
inquiry members to consider issues
such as personal privacy, national security
and the public interest in publication before determining whether to conduct
in private or restrict publication of certain
15.127 The IGIS submitted:
I would observe that the degree of openness with which an inquiry can be
conducted will be determined by the subject matter and consideration
sensitivities such as privacy and security. In the case of the IGIS Act,
inquiries must be conducted in private … This is
hardly surprising given
the nature of the material which will be involved. The experience of other
inquiries and Royal Commissions
which have dealt with intelligence and security
issues has been that most of the proceedings must be conducted in
15.128 The Commonwealth Ombudsman noted that his investigations were
conducted in private, and that reports of the investigations
usually did not
include identifying details. This approach, the Ombudsman suggested, could be
adopted where there was an inquiry
into events relating to identifiable
individuals, especially if they related to sensitive personal information, or
where an inquiry
deals with an inherently sensitive matter. The Ombudsman
suggested that, ‘while the default position might lean towards openness,
inquiries need to be given some legislative guidance about the circumstances
that may warrant such a
departure’.
15.129 The AGS noted that it was rare for a Royal Commission to take evidence
in private, but that ‘the power to take evidence
in private remains an
important option and we see no reason why that power should not be
maintained’.
submitted that it was ‘not aware of compelling arguments in favour of a
legislative
requirement
that Royal Commissions and other public inquiries
should hold hearings in
hearings might be necessary to protect, for example, national security
information, the identity of certain witnesses or
to prevent the disclosure of
matters which could interfere with the administration of justice. The AGS
considered that inquiries
should maintain a broad discretion to conduct their
proceedings as they consider appropriate, and noted that administrative
such as publishing edited or redacted forms of evidence, or summaries
of evidence, might be adopted if evidence was given in private.
15.130 Turnbull submitted:
A public inquiry does not require public hearings. Transcripts can be made
available on the internet, for example. The key to its
public nature is that the
final report be complete and thorough and contain or refer to all relevant
evidence (with identified
exemptions).
15.131 Most stakeholders who addressed this issue in consultations expressed
significant concern about the prejudice caused to reputations
hearings, particularly where witnesses were subsequently cleared or were not the
subject of an inquiry. These stakeholders
also emphasised the fact that there
was already strong pressure to hold inquiries in public, and expressed concern
that not enough
attention was paid to the legitimate interests of individuals
that might outweigh the public interest in an open inquiry.
15.132 Some stakeholders also indicated that inquiries held in private were a
much more efficient way to get to the truth. Such inquiries
were said to enable
a degree of informality that was more productive, minimise the need for legal
representation and greatly enhance
the flexibility of an inquiry. Stakeholders
echoed the concern of the NZLC that including a statutory requirement that
hearings normally
be held in public would lead to an undesirable degree of
formality in inquiry processes.
15.133 While stakeholders generally agreed that the control of proceedings
should be left to the head of the inquiry, there was support
for additional
guidance on these matters. Stakeholders differed, however, on the form such
guidance should take. Some were of the
view that codifying exemptions in
legislation would be too restrictive, although there was support by some
stakeholders for a non-exhaustive
list of circumstances in which it was
appropriate to restrict public access.
15.134 The power to conduct an inquiry in private or restrict publication of
material protects a range of interests, such as the reputations
participating in inquiries and the sensitivity of information. This power is
especially significant given that certain material
that is protected from
disclosure to a court may have to be disclosed to a Royal Commission or Official
15.135 The ALRC proposes that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries be
empowered to make directions: prohibiting or restricting
public access to a
hearing; prohibiting or restricting publication of any information that might
enable a person to identify a person
giving information to an inquiry; or
publication of any information provided to an inquiry. This power should be
formulated to ensure
that it extends beyond witnesses giving evidence at a
hearing to include less formal types of information-gathering processes.
15.136 In the ALRC’s view, the discretion to exercise the power should
not be constrained by a legislative requirement that,
in general, inquiries
should hold hearings in public and set out the evidence for findings in a
report. The pressure to hold inquiries
in public is already great.
15.137 There are three reasons why there may be a greater need to restrict
public access in an inquiry than in a court proceeding.
First, while the holding
of public hearings may instil confidence in the integrity of the inquiry’s
processes, inquiries are
not concerned with ensuring the integrity of the
judicial process. In this respect, the public interest in public hearings of an
inquiry is less compelling than the public interest in public court hearings.
15.138 Secondly, the wider range of information that is typically accessed by
an inquiry, the wider scope of its inquiry, and the
fewer evidential and
procedural safeguards that apply to disclosure may mean that greater
restrictions on disclosure may be appropriate.
For example, where Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries obtain information that could not be obtained
in a court—such as
by compelling the production of incriminating
evidence—it may be appropriate to restrict publication of such
15.139 Thirdly, inquiries differ from courts in that inquiries are
investigatory. Publication of material during the progress of an
investigation
may prejudice the success of the investigation. For example, publishing the
evidence of a witness may alert other potential
witnesses to the direction the
inquiry is taking. Publication of material during an investigation also may lead
to unfair damage,
because suspicions raised during the course of an inquiry may,
in the light of all of the evidence, turn out to be unfounded. Some
may be more efficiently and effectively conducted in private, or partly in
private. Many non-statutory inquiries are now
currently conducted largely or
entirely in private, as are statutory investigations such as those by the
Ombudsman. A requirement
that hearings should be held in public is likely to
encourage greater formality in these types of inquiries, which involves
time and cost.
15.140 Given the importance of the discretion to restrict public access,
however, there is significant value in giving greater guidance
as to its use.
The ALRC proposes that a non-exhaustive list of the grounds which might justify
a prohibition or restriction on public
access, or publication, should be set out
in the statute. It is not necessary to further provide that an inquiry should
balance these
interests against the public interest in an open inquiry. In the
ALRC’s view, such a requirement might have the same effect
legislative requirement that an inquiry should generally be held in public:
namely, it might further tilt the balance in favour
of an open inquiry, at the
expense of legitimate interests that may need protection.
15.141 There are a number of factors which are readily identifiable as
reasons why a restriction on access, either in the form of
restricting public
access to a hearing or restricting publication, might be desirable. These
include the prejudice or hardship caused
to an individual; the nature and
subject-matter of the information that may be involved; the potential for
prejudice to legal proceedings;
and the efficient and effective conduct of an
inquiry. The ALRC proposes that these should be the grounds for exercising the
to prohibit or restrict public access set out in the proposed
15.142 Consequently, there is no need for an equivalent of s 6D(2) of
Royal Commissions Act
, enabling a person to request a private hearing
in the case of prejudice to the financial position or profits of a person.
15.143 It may be useful for the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
more detailed guidance as to the circumstances in which it might be appropriate
to prohibit or restrict access or publication.
In particular, the
might emphasise the value of using private hearings as a strategic
investigative tool, and the value of assessing the likely quality
and relevance
of evidence, prior to holding public hearings.
Proposal 15–4
(a) The proposed
Inquiries Act
provide that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may make directions
prohibiting or restricting:
(i) public access to a hearing;
(ii) publication of any information that might enable a person to identify
a person giving information to the inquiry; or
(iii) publication of any information provided to the inquiry.
(b) The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that members of Royal
Commissions or Official Inquiries may exercise the power to prohibit or restrict
public access
or publication on the following grounds:
(i) prejudice or hardship to an individual;
(ii) the nature and subject matter of the information that may be
(iii) the potential for prejudice to legal proceedings;
(iv) the efficient and effective conduct of an inquiry; or
(v) any other matter that an inquiry considers appropriate.
Authorisation of
leave to appear
15.144 Another significant procedural issue that affects the participation of
interested parties is the power of a Royal Commission
to authorise a person to
appear before it, under s 6FA of the
Royal Commissions Act
section provides that any person authorised to appear before a Commission, or
any legal practitioner authorised to appear before
a Commission for the purpose
of representing a person, may, ‘so far as the Commission thinks
proper’, examine or cross-examine
any witness on any matter which the
Commission deems relevant to the inquiry.
15.145 Section 6FA does not identify, however, the factors that are relevant
to the decision of a Royal Commission to allow a person
to appear before
In contrast, in some
or groups should have the right
to appear. In the United Kingdom, the chair of
an inquiry may designate a person as a ‘core participant’ in the
having particular regard to whether:
(a) the person played, or may have played, a direct and significant role in
relation to the matters to which the inquiry relates;
(b) the person has a significant interest in an important aspect of the matters
to which the inquiry relates; or
(c) the person may be subject to explicit or significant criticism during the
inquiry proceedings or in the report, or in any interim
15.146 Core participants are entitled to have their legal representatives
designated as a ‘recognised legal representative’.
representatives are entitled to apply to the chair for leave to ask questions of
a witness giving oral evidence, and make opening
and closing
statements.
15.147 The NZLC recommended the adoption of a similar provision which would
entitle a core participant to give evidence and make submissions,
subject to any
directions of the inquiry in relation such
15.148 The provisions in the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) and the Inquiries
Bill 2008 (NZ) list factors which guide the exercise of the inquiry’s
discretion in determining who should
have the right to appear. In the Building
Royal Commission, Commissioner Cole suggested a similar list of relevant factors
for granting
an application for authority to appear before the
Additionally, Cole
noted that an application may be granted if a person would be in a better
position to assist the Royal Commission
in carrying out its inquiry if he or she
were authorised to appear. All general grants of authority to appear were made
a number of
conditions.
Submissions and
consultations
15.149 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether it was appropriate for a Royal
Commission to retain the discretion to authorise appearances
before it and, if
so, whether the
Royal Commissions Act
should outline the factors a Royal
Commission should consider before exercising this
discretion.
It also asked
whether public inquiries other than Royal Commissions should have similar
15.150 Liberty Victoria stated that all levels of inquiries ‘should
have a broad discretion … in how and what they obtain
as evidence’,
including the ability to authorise persons or organisations to appear before
The AGS noted that the
power to authorise leave to appear was generally
15.151 It would be useful to set out in statutory form the power of an
inquiry to determine who should be able to participate in the
inquiry and, in a
non-exhaustive list, the factors that are relevant to this decision. This would
provide clear guidance to both
inquiry members and participants.
15.152 The ALRC is concerned, however, that the language of ‘core
participants’ adopted in the United Kingdom and New
Zealand legislation,
as well as the present language of ‘authorisation to appear’ in
s 6FA of the
Royal Commissions Act
, may encourage court-like
procedures. Further, it is concerned that the designation of ‘core
participants’—which
emphasises the rights of a participant to legal
representation—is not ultimately helpful, since the inquiry exercises the
to designate who is, or who is not, a ‘core participant’.
15.153 Instead, the ALRC proposes that an inquiry member should be able to
allow any person or a person’s legal representative
to participate in an
inquiry, to the extent that the inquiry member considers appropriate. In making
that decision, inquiry members
may have regard to: any direct or special
interest a person may have in the matters relevant to an inquiry; the
probability that
an inquiry may make a finding adverse to that person’s
interests; and the ability of a person to assist an inquiry.
Proposal 15–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries may allow any person or a
person’s legal representative to participate
in an inquiry, to the extent
that inquiry members consider appropriate. In making that decision, inquiry
members may have regard
(a) any direct or special interest a person may have in the matters relevant
to an inquiry;
(b) the probability that an inquiry may make a finding adverse to that
person’s interests; and
(c) the ability of a person to assist an inquiry.
Inquiries affecting
Indigenous peoples
15.154 There have been a number of public inquiries that have affected
Indigenous peoples, although the last federal Royal Commission
primarily on Indigenous issues was the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths
in Custody (1991).
treatment of Indigenous witnesses in public inquiries was raised as an issue in
consultations. Some of these concerns may be
applicable to other minority
15.155 The issues that Indigenous witnesses may encounter in giving evidence
in court have been addressed in a number of reports by
the ALRC and other law
reform bodies.
These issues
include language and physical communication barriers; cultural factors that
influence communication; the formality of
court proceedings; and the effect of
customary laws on the giving of
There is a very
large number of Indigenous groups in Australia and the ALRC notes that the
observations below are general in nature
and may not apply equally to all
Indigenous peoples.
Language and physical communication
15.156 Many Indigenous peoples speak a number of languages other than
Standard Australian English, including traditional languages,
creoles, and Aboriginal
In the 2006 census,
12% of Indigenous people spoke an Indigenous language at home, and 19% indicated
they did not speak English well
Aboriginal English is a
dialect of Standard Australian English and is the first language for most
Indigenous people in Queensland.
It differs from Standard Australian English in
pronunciation, grammar, vocabulary and
15.157 As a result, some Indigenous witnesses, while speaking some English,
may not be fluent in Standard Australian English and may
encounter difficulties
in legal proceedings. They may not fully understand the questions which are put
to them, and their responses
may be misinterpreted because of the different
meanings of common English words in Aboriginal English or in one of the
Indigenous interpreting services have been established to address these
difficulties, most notably the Northern Territory
Aboriginal Interpreters
15.158 The Queensland Criminal Justice Commission, after considering the
issue of interpretation in the context of Indigenous peoples,
recommended that
Evidence Act 1977
(Cth) should include a provision that a
‘witness may give evidence about a fact through an interpreter unless the
witness can
understand and speak the English language sufficiently to enable the
witness to understand, and to make an adequate reply to, questions
that may be
put about the fact’.
further recommended that, if a court had any reason to doubt the capacity of a
witness both to understand and speak Standard Australian
English, proceedings
should not continue until an interpreter is
15.159 The uniform evidence laws in place in several Australian jurisdictions
permit a witness to give evidence ‘about a fact
through an interpreter
unless the witness can understand and speak the English language sufficiently to
enable the witness to understand,
and to make an adequate reply to, questions
that may be put about the
This applies to
court proceedings and other proceedings that apply the rules of
This provision was
based on a recommendation made by the ALRC in its 1985 Interim Report on
15.160 In some non-judicial proceedings, such as those before the Migration
Review Tribunal, a person is entitled to an interpreter
if the person is not
sufficiently proficient in English.
Section 366C
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) provides:
(1) A person appearing before the Tribunal to give evidence may request
the Tribunal to appoint an interpreter for the purposes
of communication between
the Tribunal and the person.
(2) The Tribunal must comply with a request made by a person under
subsection (1) unless it considers that the person is sufficiently
proficient in English.
(3) If the Tribunal considers that a person appearing before it to give
evidence is not sufficiently proficient in English, the
Tribunal must appoint an
interpreter for the purposes of communication between the Tribunal and the
person, even though the person
has not made a request under subsection (1).
Communication styles
15.161 A number of cultural factors may affect the way Indigenous peoples
communicate in formal proceedings. For example, interviews
conducted through
questions and answers are said to be ‘culturally alien to many Aboriginal
people, who are accustomed to a
less direct form of information
gathering’.
groups may build up complex information over a period of time, and through a
series of interactions. The appropriate response,
if one does not understand,
may be to wait for clarification through continued interaction as to
‘state that one does not understand
what has been said can be
humiliating’.
Indigenous person volunteers information about a matter, it can be intensely
embarrassing for him or her to have that knowledge
questioned.
15.162 Indigenous peoples may seek to avoid open disagreement or criticism.
Avoiding loss of personal dignity is central in dealing
with conflict, and a key
strategy to achieve this is to feign
disinterest.
witnesses are also susceptible to agreeing to a question rather than
disagreeing, particularly if the questioning takes
place in an oppressive
environment and over a long period of
15.163 Another feature of Indigenous communication styles is that silence may
indicate a number of different things. For many Indigenous
groups, silence is a
common and positively valued part of conversation that allows time for thinking.
In a courtroom, however, it
may imply that the person is not in control of, or
not comfortable with, the dialogue. It may also indicate a lack of authority to
speak about a matter, or criticism or disapproval if there is conflict within an
Indigenous group. Further, silence may indicate
a failure of the person
questioning to understand matters important to the Indigenous
Formality of proceedings
15.164 The Queensland Criminal Justice Commission reported that many of the
people it had consulted for its report on
Aboriginal Witnesses in
Queensland’s Criminal Courts
indicated that
feelings of intimidation, isolation, fear and disorientation are common among
Aboriginal people who gave evidence in our courts.
Those feelings are not
restricted to Aboriginal people, nor are they experienced by all Aboriginal
people. However, the [Criminal
Justice Commission] is satisfied that feelings of
alienation are sufficiently widespread among Aboriginal people to justify
to make courts more familiar and less
intimidating.
Effect of customary laws
15.165 The customary laws of Indigenous groups also may affect the ways in
which Indigenous participants in an inquiry provide
information.
For example, an
Indigenous person may not have the authority to speak on certain
matters—for example, issues related to specific
areas of land—or may
have the authority to speak only in conjunction with others who collectively
have such authority. Some
information may be secret, and an Indigenous person
may be subject to severe penalties for breaching that secret. In addition, it
needs to be considered whether an Indigenous person should be required to
disclose a violation of Aboriginal customary law that might
expose them to some
retaliation.
Measures adopted in courts
15.166 A number of measures have been developed to address these issues in
relation to courts, which may be relevant to inquiries.
For example, the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) allows a court to direct that evidence can be
given in narrative form.
Queensland Criminal Justice Commission recommended that a similar provision be
included in the
Evidence Act 1977
15.167 The Supreme Court of the Northern Territory has developed guidelines
to apply to the interrogation of Indigenous peoples by
police, known as the
Anunga Rules.
These address
matters such as the need for interpreters and legal assistance, the desirability
of a ‘prisoner’s friend’
or support person being present, the
need to ensure that the person understands the meaning of the right to silence,
and the need
to frame questions carefully and avoid cross-examination. If they
have been seriously breached, any confession is likely to be rejected
trial. These guidelines have been incorporated into standing police orders and
are applied in other jurisdictions, although
care clearly needs to be taken to
ensure their appropriateness in the particular
circumstances.
Consultations
15.168 In consultations, the ALRC asked whether any legislation, guidelines
or protocols were necessary or desirable to address issues
specific to
Indigenous witnesses in public inquiries. Stakeholders suggested that issues
affecting Indigenous peoples should be dealt
with in guidelines. Stakeholders
also noted, however, that guidance had to be tailored to the particular
Indigenous groups involved
in an inquiry.
15.169 Stakeholders commenting on this issue supported a broad legislative
requirement to consider Indigenous issues or to consult
with communities on the
relevant issues. For some stakeholders, this was felt to be necessary because
guidelines and protocols were
in practice not always
Other stakeholders
felt it would be difficult to frame a specific provision given the diversity of
Indigenous groups and the diversity
of circumstances in which inquiries might
15.170 Stakeholders also emphasised the importance of interpreters. There was
support for a statutory right to an interpreter, particularly
since such a right
could have implications in terms of funding. There was also strong support for
an Indigenous witness to have the
right to bring a person to an inquiry for
15.171 A number of stakeholders referred to the desirability of allowing
narrative evidence and group evidence, restricting unnecessary
cross-examination, and the need to ensure hearings were located near the
communities and in relatively informal settings. Finally,
some stakeholders
thought guidance was desirable in relation to types of culturally sensitive
evidence that might require protection,
including whether such evidence ought to
be heard in private.
15.172 In order to ensure that the special needs of Indigenous peoples
participating in an inquiry are addressed adequately by an
inquiry, the ALRC
proposes that, if a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry is inquiring into
matters that may have a significant
effect on Indigenous peoples, there should
be a legislative requirement to consult with Indigenous groups, individuals and
organisations
to inform the development of procedures for an inquiry. In the
ALRC’s view, such consultation is necessary to ensure the effectiveness
and the legitimacy of a public inquiry significantly affecting Indigenous
15.173 This duty to consult would arise only where the inquiry was likely to
have a significant effect on Indigenous peoples. This
duty would arise, for
example, if an inquiry focused upon Indigenous interests such as native title.
It would not arise, however,
merely because an Indigenous witness was called to
give evidence in an inquiry which otherwise had no special bearing on Indigenous
15.174 This broad duty to consult takes into account the concern expressed by
stakeholders that the appropriate procedures in a particular
inquiry will depend
on the groups affected by the inquiry as well as the nature of the inquiry. It
would be inappropriate to develop
a generalised set of guidelines about the
treatment of Indigenous participants because of the diversity of Indigenous
interests within those groups, and because of the diversity of the
inquiry. Another
reason for imposing a legislative requirement is the view of some stakeholders
that guidelines and protocols have
not generally proven effective.
15.175 The proposed legislative duty to consult, however, is not a duty to
ensure a particular outcome. It is a duty to consult a
particular group that is
significantly affected to inform the development of procedures. It does not
specify the level or type of
consultation that is required—as noted above
this will depend on the particular inquiry and the Indigenous peoples that are
likely to be affected.
15.176 The ALRC also proposes that there should be a statutory right to an
interpreter in inquiries for those not sufficiently proficient
in English. This
should be drafted in similar terms to the right to an interpreter before the
Migration Review Tribunal—that
is, a person may request an interpreter,
and must be given one if the inquirer considers he or she is not sufficiently
in English, even if the person has not requested one. The language of
this provision is preferable to that in the
Evidence Act
, as that relates
to questioning about specific facts and does not empower a person to request an
interpreter.
15.177 The factors prompting this proposal are also applicable to other
minority groups that may require interpretation services.
The proposal,
therefore, is not restricted to Indigenous witnesses and is framed in general
terms. It is also framed so that the
right to an interpreter exists in more
informal types of procedures such as interviews or meetings, as long as the
person has been
asked to provide information to an inquiry.
Proposal 15–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, if a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry is inquiring into matters that
may have a significant effect on Indigenous
peoples, the inquiry should consult
with Indigenous groups, individuals or organisations to inform the development
of appropriate
procedures for the conduct of the inquiry.
Proposal 15–7
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that an interpreter should be appointed if a person is asked to provide
information to a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry and the person is not
sufficiently proficient in English.
information
15.178 Providing guidance for participants in judicial and non-judicial
proceedings has become increasingly common in Australia. For
example, ICAC
provides a brochure which covers: the nature of the Commission; the nature and
legal effect of a summons; their entitlements
to legal representation and
expenses; the conduct and procedure of examinations and hearings; the recording
of examinations and hearings;
processes after an examination or hearing; and the
protection of witnesses.
15.179 It has also been customary for Royal Commissions, at least, to provide
directions and rulings for the conduct of its proceedings
at the beginning of,
and sometimes during, an inquiry. These typically cover the grant of leave to
appear (discussed earlier) as
well as procedures for the conduct of its
proceedings.
Submissions and
consultations
15.180 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether any other rights of witnesses should
be protected in proceedings of Royal Commissions or other
15.181 The CPSU addressed the issue of information about an inquiry in its
submission. It stated:
There is often uncertainty about what the proceedings involve and how an
individual’s interests may be affected by those proceedings.
impeded individual’s abilities to make informed decisions about their best
representation.
For example, members who have been involved in previous inquiries have advised
us whilst they were offered their own representation
they did not elect to take
up that option because they did not understand what would be involved in the
proceedings and if they were
offered the choice again they would probably make a
different decision. Royal Commissions, and other forms of public inquiries,
formal, legal proceedings, with which most APS employees would have had
no previous involvement.
Employees involved in these proceedings should be provided with very clear
information about what is likely to be involved in these
proceedings, including
the scope of the proceedings, and any potential consequences for them as
individual employees, if the report
makes adverse findings against them as
individuals. Such information could be provided centrally and should assist
employees in making
appropriate
15.182 The CPSU noted that in the Inquiry into Quarantine and Biosecurity
Review (2008),
transcript of the hearings was not made available to the CPSU or CPSU members.
Also, there was no publicly available information
was scheduled to appear, before the Inquiry and what evidence they had put
forward. In its view, ‘this
resulted in uncertainty about the focus of the
Inquiry, and concern about the weight being given to the evidence of the six
members who
15.183 In contrast, the CPSU reported that, prior to the Inquiry into the
Circumstances of the Vivian Alvarez Matter
which was undertaken
by Neil Comrie under the authority of the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Comrie
Inquiry), the CPSU had met with
the Commonwealth Ombudsman to discuss the
procedures of that inquiry and the protections available to its members. This
allowed the
CPSU to advise its members on what they should expect and what their
rights were.
15.184 The matters addressed in this meeting related in part to the nature of
the inquiry, such as the Ombudsman’s use of its
coercive powers, the
formality of proceedings, and the Ombudsman’s focus on systemic issues.
The meeting also addressed the
rights of those participating in the inquiry to
administrative support and advice, interview transcripts, and assistance in the
of a support person. Those participating could also contact the
Ombudsman’s office after an interview to clarify matters, and
the opportunity to respond to comments directly or indirectly critical to a
15.185 Providing sufficient information on the nature and conduct of an
inquiry has a number of benefits. For participants, it enables
understand the purpose of the inquiry and to prepare for it appropriately. It
also may serve to reduce their anxieties. This
is likely to facilitate the
efficient and effective conduct of inquiries. Further, the provision of
information by an inquiry encourages
inquiries to consider the impact of their
work on interested parties, and encourages the early development of procedural
strategies.
15.186 This information may be provided in a number of ways. For example,
inquiry members may meet directly with representative organisations
issues. Further, information may be provided through: directions and rulings;
the production of brochures or the creation
of a telephone hotline; and oral
communication with interested parties.
15.187 In the ALRC’s view, it is generally desirable that timely and
sufficient information about the nature and conduct of
an inquiry is available
to participants. The diversity of inquiries and the variety of approaches by
which such information may be
supplied, however, make it difficult to prescribe
either when or how such information should be provided. For example, there is
to be a gap between the establishment of an inquiry and the adoption of
procedural matters, and an inquiry may need to change its
procedures during the
course of its investigation.
15.188 A number of proposals in this Discussion Paper address the right to
information about the nature and conduct of an inquiry.
For example, the ALRC
proposes that the
Inquiries Act
should set out the powers available to
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, and the exemptions from disclosure
that will apply
The ALRC also
proposes that the protections available to inquiry participants should be set
out in the statute.
should assist inquiry participants in ascertaining their rights.
15.189 Other proposals may
an inquiry. For example,
the ALRC proposes that the
Inquiries Act
list factors relevant to the decision to authorise a person to appear, and
grounds for the exercise of the power to prohibit
or restrict public access to
hearings, or the publication of information relating to the
15.190 Finally, the ALRC proposes that an
Inquiries Handbook
published to provide guidance on a number of issues including what kinds of
procedures are available to inquiries, and when
and how different procedures
should be used.
This should
provide inquiry participants with information about the types of procedures an
inquiry might employ.
Royal Commissions Act
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
(2003), vol 2,
See Appendix 2 for a List of
Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Rec
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) cl
New Zealand Law Commission,
New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
New Zealand
Government Department of Internal Affairs,
Setting Up and Running Commissions
(2001), Ch 20.
Proposals 6–2, 6–5, 8–1, 9–1, 12–3,
Annetts v McCann
(1990) 170 CLR 596
v Criminal Justice Commission
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(1990) 170 CLR 596
the HIH Royal Commission
(2003), [1.4.2].
S Donaghue,
Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Karounos v Corporate Affairs
[1989] SASC 1437
(1989) 50 SASR 484
Carruthers v Connolly
Commissions
of Inquiry Act 1995
New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Rec 15, 71.
Further, as discussed
later in this chapter, the submission or statement in response, or a summary of
it, must be included in the
report. A similar provision is contained in the
Coroners Act 1997
New Zealand Government Department of
Internal Affairs,
Setting Up and Running Commissions of Inquiry
[20.12.1]–[20.12.3].
of funding for legal representation is discussed in Ch
Report of the Royal
Commission on Tribunals of Inquiry
(1966), Rec
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
vol 2, 56; cf
Mahon v Air New Zealand Ltd
[1984] AC 808,
of Inquiry and Royal Commissions
(2002), 63.
Commissions of Inquiry Act
‘Procedures at Inquiries—the Duty to be Fair’
Law Quarterly Review
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Community and Public Sector
22 May 2009.
Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union,
Taking Liberties—The Cole Royal
Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
J Ransley, ‘The Powers
of Royal Commissions and Controls Over Them’ in P Weller (ed)
Commissions and the Making of Public Policy
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Although the statement did not
include the names of the officers, the identity of the officers could be
ascertained readily by examining
the report of the Equine Influenza
Public Service Act
and Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Public Service Commissioner,
Circular No 2008/3: Providing Information on
Code of Conduct Investigation Outcomes to Complainants
(2008). This states
that ‘withholding a person’s name may not be sufficient to protect
that person’s identity.
Personal information can include any information
or opinion from which a person’s identity is apparent or may be
“reasonably
ascertained”’:
Ibid, [35].
Australian Public
Service Commissioner,
Handling Misconduct: A Human Resources
Practitioner’s Guide to the Reporting and Handling of Suspected and
Determined Breaches
of the APS Code Of Conduct
Community and Public Sector
22 May 2009.
Royal Commissions Act
Investigating Corruption and Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions of
Inquiry—Powers and Procedures
Final Report of the Royal
Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 2,
Report of the HIH Royal
(2003), [2.12.2].
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
(2003), vol 2, 39.
Slater and Gordon Lawyers,
Submission to Senate Employment, Workplace Relations and Education Committee,
Beyond Cole: The Future of the Construction Industry
Other aspects of the rules of
procedural fairness are discussed
Kingham v Cole
[2002] FCA 45
118 FCR 289
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission
(2003), [2.12.3].
Ibid, [2.12.3].
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 8–1.
Ibid, Question
Liberties—The Cole Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
For other matters relating to
the proposed
Inquiries Handbook
see: Proposals 6–2, 6–5,
12–3, 13–6.
See Chs 13,
16, 17 for a discussion of different types of confidential or sensitive
information.
National security
information is discussed in Ch 13. Chs 16 and 17 discuss other types of
confidential or sensitive information
which may enable a person to resist
disclosure.
Not all Royal Commissions
are conducted primarily in public. For example, the Royal Commission on
Intelligence and Security (1977)
conducted most of its hearings in
F Costigan,
Final Report
of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and
Dockers Union
(1984), vol 2,
Victoria v Australian
Building Construction Employees’ and Builders Labourers’
[1982] HCA 31
(1982) 152 CLR 25
R Scott, ‘Procedures at Inquiries—the Duty to be Fair’
Law Quarterly Review
Independent Commission Against
Corruption v Chaffey
(1993) 30 NSWLR 21
These include: national security
information; information otherwise subject to confidential professional
relationships privilege,
religious confessions privilege, or a privilege for
evidence relating to settlement negotiations; information relating to secret
processes of manufacture; and information otherwise subject to a secrecy
Commonwealth
(1982) 152 CLR 188
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
Failure to comply with such a
direction is a criminal offence: see
Final Report of
the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
Other examples include the
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1950
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Restrictions on public access may be imposed where it is in the public
interest, with particular regard to the risk of harm or damage
that could be
avoided or reduced; any conditions as to confidentiality by which a person
acquired information; and the effect on
the efficiency or effectiveness of, or
additional cost to, the inquiry:
Inquiries Act
s 19(3), (4).
New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
Ibid, Rec 27. This is now
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ),
New Zealand Law
Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Rec 28. This
is now Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ)
Independent
Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
, as originally
Independent Commission
Against Corruption (Amendment) Act 1991
(NSW) sch 1, cl 2. In
2005, public hearings of ICAC were renamed ‘public inquiries’ and
private hearings renamed ‘compulsory
examinations’:
Independent
Commission Against Corruption Amendment Act 2005
sch 1, cl 17.
Investigating Corruption and Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions
of Inquiry—Powers and Procedures
(2004), Ch 4,
Parliament of New South
Wales—Joint Committee on the Independent Commission Against Corruption,
Review of the ICAC Stage III: The Conduct of ICAC Hearings
Investigating
Corruption and Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions of Inquiry—Powers
and Procedures
(2004), [4.220].
F Costigan,
Final Report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the
Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union
(1984), vol 2,
A contravention of such a
direction is a criminal offence:
Royal Commissions Act 1902
This is discussed in
Special Commissions
of Inquiry Act 1983
Evidence Act 1958
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Commissions Act 1917
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Commissions Act 1991
Inquiries Act 1991
Commission: Reasons for Ruling No 04/02
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Contempt by Publication
, Report 100 (2003).
New Zealand Law Commission,
Suppressing Names and Evidence
, IP 13 (2008).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987), Ch
R v Sussex JJ ex p
[1924] 1 KB 256
New Zealand Law Commission,
Suppressing Names and Evidence
(2008), [1.1].
See generally A Kenyon,
‘Not Seeing Justice Done: Suppression Orders in Australian Law and
[2006] AdelLawRw 8
Adelaide Law Review
Scott v Scott
[1913] UKHL 2
[1913] AC 417.
Court Act 1986
(Vic) ss 18, 19.
See A Kenyon, ‘Not Seeing Justice Done: Suppression Orders in Australian
Law and Practice’
[2006] AdelLawRw 8
Adelaide Law Review
; New Zealand
Law Commission,
Suppressing Names and Evidence
, IP 13 (2008), Ch 2. In
November 2008, the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General agreed to develop
draft model provisions to enable
harmonised legislation governing suppression
orders, and also agreed to further development of a national electronic register
such orders: Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
November 2008, [16].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35
(2009), Question 8–11.
Question 9–4(a).
6 May 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Department of Immigration
and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
12 May 2009.
Commonwealth
Australian Government
I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
See Chs 16,
17. For example, a Royal Commission may compel the production of information
that would, in a court, be protected from
disclosure by the privilege against
self-incrimination, or which would be inadmissible in a court because it was
hearsay or opinion
These factors are framed
more broadly than statutory provisions empowering courts to make suppression
orders, and the equivalent
provision in the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ). They
capture a broader range of interests that might need to be protected, and take
account the fact that there may be a greater need to restrict public access
in the context of inquiries.
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
(2003), vol 2, 31.
Inquiries Rules 2006 (UK) r 5.
Ibid rr 6, 10(4), 11.
New Zealand
Law Commission,
Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Rec 16. This
is now Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ)
Final Report
of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
vol 2, 31–32.
Ibid, vol 2,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 7–3(c).
Question 7–3.
6 May 2009.
Government Solicitor,
Other public inquiries
include the federal Northern Territory Emergency Response Review Board (2008);
Board of Inquiry into the
Protection of Aboriginal Children from Sexual Abuse
(2007), established under the
Inquiries Act 1945
(NT); Commission of
Inquiry: Children on APY Lands (2007), established under the
Commission of
Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on APY Lands) Act 2004
and the Hindmarsh Island Bridge Royal Commission (1995), established under the
Royal Commissions Act 1917
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
, ALRC 31 (1986),
; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A
Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
, ALRC 89 (2000); Australian Law
Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Ch 5. See
also Criminal Justice Commission (Qld),
Aboriginal Witnesses in
Queensland’s Criminal Courts
(1996); New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
, NSWLRC 96 (2000), Ch 7.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
, ALRC 31 (1986), Ch
Criminal Justice Commission
Aboriginal Witnesses in Queensland’s Criminal Courts
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Population Characteristics, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australians, 2006
Criminal Justice
Commission (Qld),
Aboriginal Witnesses in Queensland’s Criminal
Ibid, 17–18. In
addition, the high incidence of hearing impairment in Indigenous groups may be a
physical barrier to communication:
Criminal Justice Commission (Qld),
Aboriginal Witnesses in Queensland’s Criminal Courts
Criminal Justice
Commission (Qld),
Aboriginal Witnesses in Queensland’s Criminal
(1996), Rec 5.1.
Evidence Act 1995
Other legislation makes
similar provision: see, eg,
Evidence Act
(ACT) s 63A;
Crimes Act 1958
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Evidence (Interim)
ALRC 26 (1985), [611]. See generally Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Multiculturalism and the Law
ALRC 57 (1992),
Criminal Justice
Commission (Qld),
Aboriginal Witnesses in Queensland’s Criminal
(1996), 19.
These issues are discussed in
Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary
, ALRC 31 (1986), vol 1, Ch
This may raise similar concerns
to those which justify the privilege against self-incrimination. See
Evidence Act
Criminal Justice Commission (Qld),
Aboriginal Witnesses in
Queensland’s Criminal Courts
(1996), Rec 4.1. It recommended,
however, that there should be no requirement that the court must make a
direction to this effect.
[1905] ArgusLawRp 117
(1976) 11 ALR 412.
These rules, or similar rules, have been incorporated into police orders or
otherwise apply as relevant guidelines in the
Northern Territory, Queensland,
South Australia, and Western Australia: see, eg,
[2002] NTSC 47
(2002) 132 A
[1988] 2 Qd R 308
Walker v Marklew
SASR 463 (FC)
Webb v The Queen
(1994) 13 WAR 257
, 259. See also D
Mildren, ‘Redressing the Imbalance: Aboriginal People in the Criminal
Justice System’ (1999) 6
Forensic Linguistics
1350; M Powell,
‘Practical Guidelines for Conducting Investigative Interviews with
Aboriginal People’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
This concern was
acknowledged in the context of privacy protocols in Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008), Ch 7.
Independent
Commission Against Corruption,
Information for
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35
(2009), Question 8–12. The issue of counselling for inquiry participants
is discussed in Ch 9.
Community and Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
This was an
independent review established by a minister into Australia’s quarantine
and biosecurity arrangements, including
the functions of the Australian
Quarantine and Inspection Service and Biosecurity Australia. It was undertaken
by an independent
panel of experts chaired by Mr Roger Beale AO, a Senior
Associate with the Allen Consulting Group.
Community and Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Commonwealth
Ombudsman and N Comrie,
Inquiry into the Circumstances of the Vivian Alvarez
, Report 3/2005 (2005).
Community and Public Sector Union,
DIMA Bulletin
(April 2006).
Proposal 5–2, Chs 11, 16,
Proposals 15–4,
16. Privileges and Public Interest
Introduction
Client legal privilege
Application to Official Inquiries
Privilege against self-incrimination
The privilege and use immunity under the
Royal Commissions Act
The privilege and use immunity in other jurisdictions
Options for reform
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Pending charges or penalty proceedings
ALRC’s view
Scope of use immunity
Scope of material
The exceptions
Parliamentary privilege
ALRC’s view
Public interest immunity
ALRC’s view
Statutory privileges
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
16. Privileges and Public Interest
Introduction
16.1 A fundamental purpose of many inquiries is to establish the facts of an
incident or issue, without the limitations on evidence
and procedure that apply
to courts. In Chapter 11, the ALRC discusses the powers of a Royal
Commission to compel a person to attend
or appear to give evidence, and produce
documents or other things. In that chapter, the ALRC proposes that similar
powers should
be conferred on a new form of statutory inquiry called Official
16.2 These powers to require information, however, may be subject to a number
of exemptions from disclosure. That is, a person required
to provide the
information may have a lawful claim for refusing to comply with the requirement.
Exemptions from disclosure exist
both to protect fundamental human rights or
important individual interests, as well as to serve broader public interests
national security. Such exemptions from disclosure, however, may impede
the investigative function of inquiries by suppressing relevant
hampering the effectiveness of investigations, and delaying or frustrating
investigations.
16.3 In this chapter, the ALRC discusses the common law privileges of client
legal privilege,
the privilege
against self-incrimination, and parliamentary privilege. It also considers
public interest immunity, which is distinct
from a privilege but also enables a
person to resist disclosure. Finally, it considers whether other statutory
privileges available
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) should apply. The
procedures by which such privileges may be claimed are discussed in
Chapter 18.
Client legal
16.4 Client legal privilege is a doctrine of both common law and statute
provides that, in civil and criminal cases, confidential communications passing
between a lawyer and her or his client, which have
been made for the dominant
purpose of seeking or being furnished with legal advice or for the dominant
purpose of preparing for actual
or contemplated litigation, need not be
disclosed in evidence or otherwise revealed. This rule also extends to
communications passing
between a lawyer or client and third parties if made for
the purpose of actual or contemplated
litigation.
16.5 As the ALRC stated in its 2007 report,
Privilege in Perspective
(ALRC 107):
the doctrine of client legal privilege is a fundamental principle of the common
law providing an essential protection to clients—both
individual and
corporate, enabling them to communicate fully and frankly with their lawyers and
those who may lawfully provide legal
advice. The protection of the
confidentiality of such communications facilitates compliance with the law and
access to a fair hearing
in curial and non-curial contexts, thereby serving the
broad public interest in the effective administration of
16.6 Before 2006 it was unclear whether client legal privilege constituted a
‘reasonable excuse’ for refusing to answer
questions or produce
documents under
Royal Commissions Act
The Act itself made no
reference to client legal privilege, unlike its references to the privilege
against self-incrimination. Nevertheless,
a number of commentators considered
that client legal privilege did apply to Royal
Commissions.
16.7 The ALRC’s recommendations in ALRC 107, concerning the application
of client legal privilege to Royal Commission proceedings,
are presently under
consideration by the Australian Government. While the Terms of Reference for
this Inquiry exclude consideration
of the application of client legal privilege
to Royal Commissions, it is useful to discuss briefly the recommendations made
16.8 In 2006, the
Royal Commissions Act
was amended to include
provisions relating to client legal
These provide that a
Royal Commission may require the production of documents even if they are
subject to client legal privilege.
Further, a claim of client legal privilege is not a reasonable excuse to fail to
produce a document to a Royal Commission, unless:
a court has found the document to be privileged; or
a claim is made to the member of the Commission who required
production of the document within the time required for its
production.
a claim of client legal privilege is made to a Royal Commission, the Commission
may require the document to be produced
for inspection in order for the
Commission to determine the claim of
If the claim is
accepted, the document is disregarded for the purposes of any report or decision
of the Royal Commission.
16.10 In ALRC 107, it was stated that:
The ALRC supports the doctrine of client legal privilege as a fundamental
principle of common law that facilitates compliance with
the law. The ALRC
agrees … that, in the course of ordinary enforcement and investigatory
activities, the importance of the
privilege in encouraging compliance overrides
the benefits of abrogation to the
16.11 The ALRC recommended that client legal privilege should apply to the
coercive information-gathering powers of federal bodies,
in the absence of any
clear, express statutory statement to the
Further, if Parliament
was to legislate to abrogate the privilege, it should consider the following
• the subject of the Royal Commission of inquiry, including whether the
inquiry concerns a matter (or matters) of major public
importance that has (or
have) a significant impact on the community in general or on a section of the
• whether the information sought can be obtained in a timely and complete
way by using alternative means that do not require
abrogation of client legal
privilege; and especially
• the degree to which a lack of access to the privileged information will
hamper or frustrate the operation of the Royal Commission
and, in particular,
whether the legal advice itself is central to the issues being considered by the
Commission.
16.12 The ALRC was of the view, however, that a strong case could be made for
abrogating client legal privilege in the context of
Royal Commissions. It
observed that
the discovery of the truth has been described as a prime function of a Royal
Commission. Royal Commissions are established only where
a particular area of
public concern has been identified for which the usual investigations and
proceedings would not suffice, and
their purpose is to determine factual
circumstances, report on the matters specified in the Letters Patent and make
recommendations.
16.13 Rather than simply abrogating the privilege, however, the ALRC
recommended that the Act should enable the Governor-General,
by Letters Patent,
to determine that client legal privilege should not apply, in relation to either
the whole inquiry or particular
aspects of the inquiry. This determination
should be guided by the same three factors, as set out above, that it considered
generally relevant to the determination that client legal privilege should
be abrogated—namely, the importance and impact of
the subject of inquiry;
the availability of alternative means of obtaining the information; and the
degree to which lack of access
would hamper or frustrate the inquiry.
16.14 The Australian Government has not yet responded formally to the
recommendations in ALRC 107. One issue for this Inquiry, however,
application of client legal privilege to Official Inquiries. It is therefore
necessary to explain the provisions in relation
to client legal privilege in the
Royal Commissions Act
, and the ALRC’s recommendations in ALRC
Application
to Official Inquiries
16.15 As noted above, the ALRC proposes in this Discussion Paper the creation
of another form of statutory inquiry, called Official
As discussed in
Chapter 5, there should be a number of distinctions between Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries to ensure that
each inquiry has the necessary
tools to carry out its investigation without inappropriately infringing on the
rights of persons involved
with, or affected by, its processes.
16.16 Importantly, Royal Commissions should have a wider range of coercive
powers than Official Inquiries. Royal Commissions should
be established to
consider matters of ‘substantial public importance’, while Official
Inquiries should be established
to consider matters of ‘public
importance’. The model proposed by the ALRC, therefore, envisages that
Royal Commissions
should be reserved for more serious matters that require the
full range of coercive powers. The issue is whether, in line with the
recommendation in ALRC 107 in relation to Royal Commissions, there should be a
power to abrogate client legal privilege in relation
to some or all Official
Inquiries. The ALRC notes that there was significant opposition to the
abrogation of client legal privilege
in the Royal Commissions context in many
submissions in ALRC 107.
ALRC’s view
16.17 In the ALRC’s view, Official Inquiries should not have the power
to abrogate client legal privilege. The model proposed
by the ALRC is designed
to ensure that an inquiry has the necessary tools to carry out its investigation
without inappropriately
infringing on the rights of those involved.
16.18 As discussed in Chapters 5 and 11, extraordinary coercive powers
should be reserved for Royal Commissions. Similarly, the abrogation
legal privilege should be reserved for Royal Commissions, given the importance
of the privilege to the protection of rights
and the administration of justice.
16.19 Client legal privilege
provides an essential protection to clients which facilitates compliance with
the law, and, in the course
of ordinary investigatory activities, the importance
of the privilege outweighs the benefits of abrogation to the
This conclusion also
applies to the investigatory activities of Official Inquiries. Finally, the ALRC
proposes that, in the event
that a lack of access to information is likely to
hamper or frustrate the operation of an Official Inquiry, an Official Inquiry
be converted into a Royal
Commission.
Privilege against
self-incrimination
16.20 The common law privilege against self-incrimination entitles a person
to refuse to answer any question, or to produce any document,
if the answer or
the document would tend to incriminate that
Although broadly
referred to as the privilege against self-incrimination, the concept encompasses
three distinct privileges: a privilege
against self-incrimination in criminal
matters; a privilege against self-exposure to a civil or administrative penalty
any monetary penalty which might be imposed by a court or an
administrative authority, but excluding private civil proceedings for
and a privilege against self-exposure to the forfeiture of an existing right
(which is less commonly
16.21 The privilege has been described by the High Court as a human right
‘which protects personal freedom, privacy and
It is also a
human right protected by the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Other rationales for the
privilege include: preventing the abuse of power and convictions based on false
confessions; protecting
the quality of evidence and the requirement that the
prosecution prove the offence; and avoiding putting a person in a position where
the person will be exposed to punishment whether they tell the truth, lie, or
refuse to provide the
information.
16.22 The privilege applies in non-judicial proceedings, such as inquiries,
unless it is expressly or impliedly abrogated by a governing
In Australia, the
privilege does not apply to
corporations.
Further, it
protects only against self-incrimination and cannot be invoked to shield others
from incrimination.
16.23 The privilege protects people from answering questions or producing
documents. It does not protect physical evidence that may
be obtained from a
person, such as fingerprints,
and does not prevent the document being otherwise obtained (for example, by a
16.24 It is increasingly common for the privilege against self-incrimination
to be abrogated by statute in order to assist regulators
and administrators with
investigation and enforcement. Commonly, the statute provides that while
individuals are not entitled to
refuse to answer or produce documents because of
the privilege, those answers or documents cannot be used in subsequent
proceedings
(typically referred to as a ‘use immunity’). Use
immunities tend to take one of three forms:
a ‘use’ or ‘direct use’ immunity: the
incriminating evidence itself is inadmissible in subsequent proceedings;
a ‘derivative use’ immunity: the incriminating evidence
and any evidence obtained as a result of that evidence is inadmissible
subsequent proceedings; or
a ‘transactional’ or ‘personal’ immunity: a
person who is compelled to testify about an offence may never
be prosecuted for
that offence, no matter how much independent evidence is
privilege and use immunity under the
Royal Commissions
Royal Commissions Act
provides that it is not
a reasonable excuse for a person to refuse or fail to produce a document or
thing, or to answer a question,
on the ground that doing so might incriminate
the person or make the person liable to a penalty. As discussed below, the
does not apply if the production or answer might tend to incriminate the
person in relation to continuing criminal or penalty
proceedings.
was introduced to ensure that the privilege against
self-incrimination was abrogated in Royal Commission
proceedings.
Although the
Royal Commissions Act
had long been interpreted as abrogating the
privilege, the High Court had cast doubt upon this interpretation in
v Commonwealth
Section 6DD
provides that statements or disclosures made by a person in
the course of giving evidence to a Royal Commission, or the production
document or thing in response to a summons or notice to produce, are not
admissible in evidence in ‘any civil or criminal
proceedings’ in any
Australian court, unless the proceedings are for an offence against the
Commissions Act
. A similar provision applies to evidence that is, pursuant
to s 7B of the Act, taken outside
Section 6DD therefore
provides a direct use immunity.
16.28 The effect of ss 6A and 6DD is that evidence otherwise subject to the
privilege against self-incrimination may be used in subsequent
proceedings in
certain circumstances. In particular, the evidence may be used as a basis for
further investigations; in proceedings
brought against another person; in
proceedings against a
corporation;
administrative or disciplinary
proceedings.
In the HIH Royal
Commission (2003), Commissioner Owen expressed the view that the immunity did
not extend to the documents themselves,
but only to the fact of the production
of those documents.
The privilege and
use immunity in other jurisdictions
16.29 The privilege against self-incrimination is likewise abrogated in the
legislation governing inquiries in all but two Australian
legislation governing standing crime
commissions.
These provide for a
direct use immunity only,
in ACT and Tasmania.
South Wales (NSW), the privilege is capable of being abrogated only in relation
to Royal Commissions chaired or constituted
by a judge or a legal practitioner
of at least seven years
16.30 The application of the privilege in relation to inquiries in overseas
Commission of
Ireland, Ireland has produced a bill that abrogates the privilege and provides
for a direct use immunity.
bill is currently being considered by the legislature. In contrast, the United
have not abrogated the
privilege against self-incrimination in legislation governing inquiries.
Options for
16.31 Several issues arise in this Inquiry in relation to the privilege
against self-incrimination. First, should the privilege against
self-incrimination be abrogated in all, or some, Royal Commissions and the
proposed Official Inquiries? Secondly, if so, what kind
of use immunity should
apply? Thirdly, what should be the scope of the use immunity?
Abrogation of the privilege
16.32 The Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC) examined the circumstances
which could justify the abrogation of the privilege against
self-incrimination
In its view, abrogation
could be justified if, among other things, the information to be compelled as a
result of the abrogation
concerns an issue of ‘major public importance
that has a significant impact on the community in general or on a section of
community’.
It cited, as
examples, inquiries or investigations into ‘allegations of major criminal
activity, organised crime or official
corruption or other serious misconduct by
a public official’.
additional consideration was the extent to which the information is likely to
benefit the public interest.
16.33 The QLRC also identified factors that, while not justifying abrogation
as such, were relevant to the decision to abrogate the
privilege. These
included whether there were alternative means of obtaining the information;
whether a use immunity was provided;
and whether there were procedural
safeguards. It was also relevant if the information was contained in a document
that was already
in existence, and if the extent of the abrogation was no more
than necessary to achieve the intended purpose of the
abrogation.
Direct use or derivative use immunity
16.34 As noted above, the
Royal Commissions Act
provides for a direct
use immunity rather than a derivative or transactional use
That is, evidence
given by a witness in a Royal Commission cannot be used as evidence in
subsequent legal proceedings, but may be
used to obtain further evidence. A
derivative use immunity would not allow the evidence to be used to obtain
further evidence. This
would make it much more difficult to prosecute a person
for offences that are disclosed during an inquiry. The primary argument against
a derivative use immunity, therefore, is that it would shield witnesses from the
proper consequences of their wrongdoing. Given that
Royal Commissions are
usually established because of the seriousness of the allegations involved, it
may seem particularly inappropriate
to shield witnesses of a Royal Commission
from the consequences of their misconduct.
16.35 A derivative use immunity may also limit the effectiveness of Royal
Commissions. For example, there have been many Royal Commissions
inquiries in which criminal prosecutions or regulatory action have been
considered an important aspect of their effectiveness.
As one submission to the
ALRC’s inquiry into client legal privilege put it:
It would make the work of commissions of public importance appear somewhat
futile if their findings could not be successfully acted
upon because material
available to them was not then admissible in subsequent court
proceedings.
16.36 The primary argument for a derivative use immunity is that it may be
more useful in discovering the truth than a direct use
immunity, because a
person’s fear of the consequences of disclosure would be diminished.
Further, a derivative use immunity
would also protect the same interests as does
the privilege against self-incrimination.
Submissions and
consultations
16.37 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether the abrogation of the privilege
against self-incrimination was appropriate in all circumstances,
and if so, what
protections should apply.
16.38 The few submissions that addressed this issue argued either against the
abrogation of the privilege, or submitted that, if abrogated,
there should be a
derivative use immunity.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) was the strongest
advocate of retaining the privilege, citing in support
the observations of
This section runs contrary to the most fundamental principles of natural
justice, by compelling persons to incriminate themselves
on oath, and the
protection given by
Section 6DD
[limited use immunity], is of no real
significance, for the reasons the High Court itself has pointed out. The reasons
for the abolition
Royal Commissions Act
compelling today as were the reasons in 1641 for the abolition of the Star
16.39 The Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) suggested that the
privilege against self-incrimination should apply, as
it would ‘assist in
ensuring the full co-operation of witnesses’, and ‘thus assist in
ensuring the effectiveness
16.40 The Law Council of Australia submitted:
The Law Council believes that witnesses appearing before a Royal Commission for
questioning should be able to refuse to answer a
question or provide information
to a Commissioner on the grounds that such information may incriminate the
person. If the privilege
of self-incrimination is not available under the
Royal Commissions Act
], the Law Council believes that the witnesses
should at least be entitled to both direct use and derivative use immunity in
to any evidence or information he or she
16.41 Liberty Victoria similarly considered that a derivative use immunity
should apply.
Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) acknowledged that it was probable the
abrogation would remain, it stated that
derivative use immunity should be
considered.
16.42 The Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security suggested another
option might be to require a graduated or proportionate
use of coercive
16.43 Nevertheless, in consultations with stakeholders, there was broad
support for the existing position in relation to Royal Commissions,
for investigatory or inquisitorial Royal
Commissions.
There was less
support for the extension to derivative use immunity.
ALRC’s view
16.44 It is the ALRC’s view that the present abrogation of the
privilege, coupled with a use immunity, strikes the right balance
in relation to
Royal Commissions. The function of Royal Commissions is to discover the truth,
without the evidential limitations
that apply to courts. Their purpose is to
conduct inquiries and make recommendations to the executive arm of government.
above, Royal Commissions are established only where a particular area
of public concern has been identified for which the usual investigations
proceedings would not suffice.
16.45 In the ALRC’s view, the importance of the public interest
involved in a Royal Commission outweighs the individual interests
protected by
the privilege—that is, ‘extraordinary circumstances justifies, and
indeed requires, the establishment of
a commission with extraordinary
circumstances, the public interest in compulsion generally outweighs the
individual interest that justifies the privilege.
16.46 Further, a derivative use immunity would render enforcement
impracticable and negate the purpose of the abrogation of the
Royal Commissions
should not be used as an obstacle to proper enforcement action, particularly
given the serious subject-matter of
most Royal Commissions.
16.47 Many Royal Commissions are likely to involve evidence that may
incriminate someone. Although this is most probable in the case
of investigatory
Royal Commissions, there is no bright line between policy and investigatory
into what has happened often flow into
policy recommendations, such as in the HIH Royal Commission. In light of this,
view is that the existing position should
continue—namely, that all Royal Commissions should have the power to
require a person
to disclose incriminating information. That power, however,
need not be exercised by all Royal Commissions.
16.48 Further, the abrogation of the privilege against self-incrimination
should not apply to the proposed Official Inquiries. The
abrogation of the
privilege should be reserved, in the two-tier model proposed in this Discussion
Paper, to cases of substantial
public importance in which the full range of
coercive powers is considered
Many inquiries
presently operate effectively without the abrogation of the privilege, and the
ALRC is not inclined to propose the
extension of the abrogation of the privilege
unnecessarily. As noted earlier, if the application of the privilege hampers or
an Official Inquiry, the Australian Government has the option of
converting an Official Inquiry into a Royal Commission.
Pending charges or
penalty proceedings
Section 6A(3)
Royal Commissions Act
provides that
the abrogation of the privilege against self-incrimination does not apply if the
answer, document or thing required
relates to an offence, where a person has
been charged with an offence, and the proceedings have not been finally disposed
Section 6A(4)
makes similar provision in relation to proceedings in respect
of a penalty.
16.50 These subsections were inserted ‘to make clear that the
[introduction of
abrogating the privilege against self-incrimination]
will not affect the actual ground of the High Court’s
Commonwealth
, the High Court held that an examination by a Royal Commission of
a person charged with an offence, in relation to the circumstances
surrounding
the alleged offence, would amount to a real risk of interference with the
administration of justice and therefore constitute
contempt of court. This meant
that the Royal Commission could not lawfully inquire into those matters. The
relationship between Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries, and contempt
of court in this context, is discussed in Chapter 14.
Subsections 6A(3)
and (4) are unusual provisions. The only similar
provision in state and territory inquiry legislation is provided in
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
(Tas). This provides:
A Commission must not require a person to give evidence about a matter if that
person has been charged with an offence in respect
of that matter.
Sections 6A(3)
and (4) of the
Royal Commissions Act
statute the effect of
Hammond v Commonwealth
. Setting out this important
limitation on the powers of Royal Commissions in the Act has the benefit of
clarity. The ALRC proposes,
therefore, that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should include a provision prohibiting Royal Commissions from requiring a
person charged with an offence or subject to penalty proceedings
evidence that might incriminate him or herself.
16.53 In the ALRC’s view, however, the Tasmanian provision sets out the
requirements of the common law more clearly than
and (4) of the
Royal Commissions Act
. The ALRC proposes that a provision similar to
Commissions of Inquiry Act
(Tas) be included in the
Inquiries Act
. For the reasons set out below in relation to the
scope of the use immunity, this provision should extend to a person who is
to penalty proceedings that have commenced and not been finally disposed
of, as is presently provided in
Royal Commissions
Proposal 16–1
(a) The proposed
Inquiries Act
empower Royal Commissions, but not Official Inquiries, to require a person to
answer a question, or produce a document or
thing, notwithstanding such answer
or production might incriminate that person or expose the person to a penalty.
(b) The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide that a Royal Commission
must not require a person to answer a question, or produce a document or other
thing, about
a matter if that person has been charged with an offence, or is
subject to proceedings for the imposition or recovery of a penalty,
of that matter.
Scope of use
16.54 A number of issues arise in relation to the scope of the direct use
immunity proposed by the ALRC. First, in what kinds of proceedings
use immunity be available? Secondly, what kind of material should be protected
by the use immunity? Thirdly, what exceptions
should apply to the use immunity?
proceedings
16.55 Presently, the use immunity in the
Royal Commissions Act
to civil and criminal proceedings in any Australian court. There are a large
number of use immunities in federal legislation,
which vary in their
application.
Some, such as the
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
(Cth) and the
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
(Cth), limit the immunity to criminal
proceedings and proceedings for the imposition or recovery of a
Others are restricted
to criminal proceedings only.
some Australian states and territories, the use immunity in relation to Royal
Commissions and similar inquiries extends to administrative
and disciplinary
proceedings,
such as proceedings
for breaches of the Australian Public Service Code of
16.56 As noted above, the purpose of the privilege is to protect a person
from self-incrimination in criminal matters, and from self-exposure
penalty. In its 2002 report,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
(ALRC 95), the ALRC found that some
civil and administrative penalties carry consequences that are just as serious
as traditional
punishments.
In that report, the
ALRC recommended that, in the absence of any clear, express statutory statement
to the contrary, the same protections
for individuals afforded by the privilege
against self-incrimination in criminal matters should apply in relation to the
of a civil or administrative
16.57 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether any use immunity ought to apply to
criminal proceedings only.
issue was not addressed by stakeholders in submissions or consultations.
ALRC’s view
16.58 The use immunity should apply to criminal proceedings and proceedings
for a civil or administrative penalty. This is consistent
with the rationale of
the privilege against self-incrimination, as well as in line with the views
expressed in ALRC 95. In the ALRC’s
view, an extension of the immunity to
other administrative or disciplinary proceedings is unwarranted, since this
extends beyond
the purpose of the privilege. The ALRC acknowledges, however,
that such proceedings may have serious consequences for individuals
impede full and frank cooperation with an inquiry. The ALRC is interested in
further stakeholder comment on this issue.
16.59 Presently, the use immunity applies to a statement or disclosure made
by a person in the course of giving evidence before a
Royal Commission; and the
production of a document or other thing by the person pursuant to a summons,
requirement or notice.
16.60 The ALRC has identified two issues in relation to the scope of the
material covered by the use immunity. First, should the use
immunity be extended
to oral or written statements provided to an officer of the Commission in
connection with, or in preparation
for, giving evidence to a Royal Commission?
This was recommended by Commissioner Cole in the report of the Royal Commission
the Building and Construction Industry
16.61 The second issue is whether s 6DD applies to the documents
produced by summons or notice, or only to the fact of the production
document. This is a matter of significant practical importance, as a great deal
of documentary evidence is often gathered in
Royal Commissions.
16.62 Section 6DD applies to ‘a statement or disclosure made by a
person in the course of giving evidence before a Royal Commission’,
of a document or other thing by the person’
(emphasis added). In contrast, the use immunity in some state and territory
legislation expressly extends to all documents (and sometimes all
‘information’).
other states and territories, the use immunities in other states and territories
explicitly exclude
16.63 Arguably, the distinction drawn in the
Royal Commissions Act
between a statement or disclosure and the production of a document indicates
that the documents so produced do not benefit from the
use immunity. On the
other hand, the phrase ‘statements or disclosures’ may be intended
to reflect the common law notion
of a ‘testimonial
disclosure’.
distinguishes ‘statements or communications made by the witness on the one
hand, and real or physical evidence [such as
fingerprints] provided by the
witness on the other’.
Evidence in Trials at Common Law
, it is stated that while
documents are not oral and are not ‘created by virtue of a testimonial act
or utterance—still
there is a testimonial disclosure implicit in their
production’.
16.64 Testimonial disclosures also may be distinguished from documents that
exist before a Royal Commission is established. In
Environment Protection
Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
and Toohey J explained the distinction as follows:
It is one thing to protect a person from testifying as to guilt; it is quite
another thing to protect a person from the production
of documents already in
existence which constitute evidence of guilt … [documents] are in the
nature of real evidence which
speak for themselves as distinct from testimonial
oral evidence which is brought into existence in response to an exercise of
investigative
power or in the course of legal
proceedings.
16.65 In the 2005 report,
Uniform Evidence Law
, the ALRC, NSW Law
Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission considered the issue of
the application of the privilege
against self-incrimination to pre-existing
documents. The issue was raised in relation to orders for compulsory information
assets or other information, or orders to permit premises to be searched.
The Commissions recommended, in that context, a use immunity
which did not
extend to pre-existing
This recommendation
is reflected in
s 128A(9)(b)
Evidence Act 1995
ALRC’s view
16.66 The ALRC supports the extension of the use immunity to preparatory
witness statements, as recommended by Commissioner Cole.
In Chapter 15, the
ALRC discusses information-gathering procedures used by Royal Commissions and
other inquiries. It may be appropriate
to gather information other than through
formal hearings in a variety of circumstances. In the ALRC’s view, similar
protections
should apply whether information is gathered informally or in formal
hearings. This would facilitate the information-gathering process
by minimising
the need for formal hearings.
16.67 The scope of the use immunity in relation to documents also should be
clarified. The scope of the use immunity should not extend
further than the
purpose of the privilege against self-incrimination warrants—that is, it
should extend only to protect a person
from being compelled to testify against
him or herself. An extension of the use immunity to all documents or information
to hamper the effectiveness of any subsequent legal proceedings,
without protecting the interests served by the privilege. Rather,
ALRC’s view that only documents that may be considered a testimonial
disclosure—for example, a written statement,
or a statutory declaration,
prepared in response to a question—should be protected. It follows that
the use immunity should
not extend to pre-existing documents.
16.68 The use immunity in s 6DD does not apply to ‘proceedings for
an offence against this Act’. For example, the use
immunity would not
apply to proceedings under the
Royal Commissions Act
for giving false or
misleading evidence to an
or bribing a
The exception, however,
does not extend to similar kinds of offences in either Australian state or
territory legislation or other
Commonwealth criminal legislation, such as the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) and the
Criminal Code
(Cth). This is so even
though the use immunity applies to all Australian courts.
16.69 This inconsistency had a significant impact in one case, where a Royal
Commission was jointly constituted by the Commonwealth
A witness was charged
with perjury under the Victorian legislation. Since the exception to the use
immunity was not available, the
evidence of the witness’s perjury was not
admissible and he had to be acquitted. The High Court noted in that case that it
seemed ‘likely that the draftsman failed to advert to the possible
operation of s 6DD in its application to evidence given
commissioner acting in a dual
16.70 The most relevant offences in the
are discussed further in Chapter 18. These include offences
against the administration of justice that are similar to the offences
Royal Commissions Act
, such as bribery of witnesses. These
offences already apply to Royal Commissions. In Chapter 18, the ALRC
proposes that the existing
offences in the
Royal Commissions Act
be removed, and reliance placed instead on the general offences under the
ALRC’s view
16.71 In the ALRC’s view, the present exception for offences
‘under the Act’ in s 6DD is framed too narrowly. The
underlying that provision is that evidence may be used to prove offences against
the obstruction of Royal Commission proceedings,
such as giving false evidence.
That policy is equally applicable to similar offences under an Australian state
or territory law.
Further, since the ALRC is proposing the removal of most of
the offences in the Act, and proposes instead to rely upon similar offences
Criminal Code
, it is necessary to ensure that the
evidence may be used to prosecute these offences in the
Criminal Code
16.72 In line with this, the ALRC proposes that there should not be a use
immunity that applies to any proceeding in a federal, state
or territory court
in respect of the falsity or the misleading nature of the evidence, or for
offences relating to the obstruction
of Royal Commission proceedings, such as
the bribery witnesses.
Proposal 16–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that statements or disclosures made by a person to a Royal Commission are not
admissible in evidence against that person
in criminal proceedings, or
proceedings for the imposition or recovery of a penalty, in any court of the
Commonwealth, of a state
or of a territory (‘use immunity’). This
use immunity should:
(a) apply to statements or disclosures to a Royal Commission, whether in
oral or written form;
(b) apply to the fact of the production of a document or other thing to a
Royal Commission;
(c) apply to information provided to an officer or member of a Royal
Commission in connection with, or in preparation for, giving
evidence to a Royal
Commission; and
(d) exclude pre-existing documents or things that were not created in order
to comply with a notice of the Royal Commission.
Proposal 16–3
The use immunity referred to in
Proposal 16–2 should not apply to a proceeding in a federal, state or
territory court:
(a) in respect of the falsity or the misleading nature of the evidence;
(b) for offences relating to the obstruction of Royal Commission
proceedings.
Parliamentary
16.73 Parliamentary privilege refers to
the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House collectively as a
constituent part of the High Court of Parliament, and by Members
of each House
individually, without which they could not discharge their functions, and which
exceed those possessed by other bodies
individuals.
16.74 The single most important parliamentary privilege is the privilege of
freedom of speech in Parliament.
This privilege provides legal immunity to Members of Parliament, and other
participants in parliamentary proceedings, for anything
they may say or do in
the course of parliamentary proceedings, or anything that is incidental to those
proceedings.
The source of the
privilege is art 9 of the Bill of Rights
which is incorporated into
Australian law by s 49 of the
Constitution
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
16.75 Since the privilege is that of the Parliament, it may not be waived by
individual members of the
Parliament.
It may be waived by
Parliament as a whole, although it has been suggested that legislation is
necessary to waive the privilege, and
that it is not sufficient to waive
privilege by a motion of
Parliament.
16.76 The power in the
Royal Commissions Act
to compel a person to
give or produce evidence is subject to parliamentary
The privilege of
freedom of speech may prevent Royal Commissions or the proposed Official
Inquiries from investigating allegations
of misconduct made in Parliament. In
practice, however, a number of inquiries have investigated such claims or
conducted investigations
touching on the proceedings of
Parliament.
Although courts have
differed on the issue, it appears that Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries
will infringe parliamentary privilege
if they inquire into the motives,
intentions or truthfulness of a speaker in Parliament, or allow witnesses to be
cross-examined
in relation to words spoken or documents tabled in
Parliament.
16.77 Claims of parliamentary privilege have impeded some Commissions, such
as the Western Australian Royal Commission into Commercial
Activities of
Government and Other Matters (1992). The Royal Commission wished to use the
testimony of persons called as witnesses
by related parliamentary committees,
but the Western Australian Parliament refused to waive the privilege. The Royal
Commission,
constituted by three members with judicial experience, criticised
this refusal, and recommended that the law be examined with a view
to permitting
proceedings in Parliament to be questioned in a court or like place while
preserving the principle of free speech in
Parliament.
16.78 In 1997, the issue of parliamentary privilege arose in the context of a
Special Commission of Inquiry in NSW. In Parliament,
a Member of Parliament
alleged misconduct by other members of Parliament. The NSW Parliament amended
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
(NSW) to enable a Special
Commission of Inquiry into these
allegations.
The amending Act
expired six months after its
commencement.
16.79 The validity of this amending legislation was challenged on a number of
grounds but was upheld by the NSW Court of Appeal, and
the High Court refused
special leave to appeal.
16.80 In the ALRC’s view, whether it is appropriate to modify the
application of parliamentary privilege in a Royal Commission
or Official Inquiry
should be a decision taken by Parliament itself in the context of the particular
inquiry, as was done in NSW.
It would be undesirable to empower an inquiry
established by the executive to override a privilege afforded to the whole
Parliament.
16.81 The ALRC therefore does not make any proposals modifying the
application of parliamentary privilege in relation to Royal Commissions
proposed Official Inquiries. It notes, however, that where the application of
the privilege is clearly foreseeable, it may
be desirable to clarify the
operation of the privilege in that context. The precedent set by the
Commissions of Inquiry Amendment Act 1997
(NSW) is likely to be a useful
16.82 In Chapter 18, the ALRC proposes that the kinds of ‘reasonable
excuses’ that might justify refusing to give or produce
evidence should be
spelt out in legislation.
protection of parliamentary privilege is included as a reasonable excuse in that
Public interest
16.83 Public interest immunity is a rule of substantive law that enables
documents or information to be withheld in the public interest
from a party to
criminal or civil proceedings. Pursuant to the rule, a court will not order the
production of a document, although
relevant and otherwise admissible, if it
would be injurious to the public interest to disclose
It is clear, however,
that public interest immunity is not confined to judicial or quasi-judicial
proceedings.
16.84 In essence,
public interest immunity
as a balancing test. Courts limit the disclosure of information or documents on
the basis that the public interest against
disclosure outweighs the need for
disclosure to ensure justice in a particular case. Public interest immunity
differs from a legal
privilege in that the immunity can be claimed by the state,
a non-governmental party, or by the court on its own motion; the immunity
and evidence
related to the relevant information, including secondary evidence held by third
parties, is excluded.
16.85 Claims for public interest immunity are made most commonly by the
government in relation to Cabinet deliberations, high-level
governments, communications or negotiations between governments, police
investigation methods, or in relation to the activities
of Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation officers, police informers and other types of
informers or covert
operatives.
16.86 Public interest
immunity is also commonly claimed in relation to national security information.
This is discussed separately
in Chapter 13. As noted in that chapter, past
inquiries have had difficulties in obtaining access to national security
information.
A claim of public interest immunity in relation to other types of
information in a Royal Commission, however, appears quite rare.
Royal Commissions Act
does not refer expressly to public
interest immunity. Most commentators agree, however, that it is likely to be a
‘reasonable
excuse’ for refusing to produce documents under
s 3 of the Act.
considerations of public interest underlying a claim for public interest
immunity apply equally to Royal
Commissions.
considerations apply in relation to the proposed Official Inquiries.
16.88 Most Australian and overseas legislation governing Royal Commissions,
and legislation governing standing crime and corruption
commissions, are
similarly silent on the application of public interest immunity. There are,
however, some Acts that do address the
application of public interest immunity
expressly. Some of these expressly provide for the operation of public interest
For example, in the UK the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) provides
that the law of public interest immunity applies to inquiries as it would in
civil proceedings.
Crime and Misconduct Act 2001
(Qld), which establishes the Queensland
Crime and Misconduct Commission, expressly provides that public interest
immunity is a ‘reasonable
excuse’ for non-compliance with certain
requirements.
16.89 In contrast, most other Australian legislation governing Royal
Commissions and standing crime and corruption commissions which
address public
interest immunity appear to abrogate public interest
16.90 For example, the
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
(Cth) provides that a person is not excused from answering a question or
producing a document or thing on the ground (among others)
that it ‘would
be otherwise contrary to the public
Royal Commissions Act 1923
(NSW) also appears to override
the immunity. A power can be vested in Royal Commissions, when constituted or
chaired by a judge or
legal practitioner of seven years standing, which prevents
excuses on the basis of the privilege against self-incrimination, ‘or
the ground of privilege or on any other
legislation relating to NSW standing crime and corruption commissions provides
it is not an excuse to refuse to disclose information at a hearing
on the ground of the privilege against self-incrimination, ‘or
ground of a duty of
or other restriction on
disclosure’.
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
(NSW) specifically
provides that prior to a hearing, a person must comply with requirements despite
an objection that disclosure of
the information ‘would otherwise be
contrary to the public
16.92 In its submission, DIAC stated that documents that may be protected by
public interest immunity should either not be disclosed,
or if disclosed,
protected from subsequent
publication.
16.93 In principle, there appears to be no reason to modify the application
of public interest immunity in relation to Royal Commissions
or the proposed
Official Inquiries. The rationale of the immunity—to protect the public
interest—applies equally to both
kinds of inquiries. As outlined above,
the immunity is not a blanket protection, but requires a balancing test to be
undertaken.
Accordingly, the public interest in full and frank disclosure to an
inquiry will be given due weight.
16.94 In this respect, public interest immunity is quite different from the
privileges discussed elsewhere in this chapter. As noted
earlier, the principal
concern with respect to public interest immunity is striking a balance between
the public interest in disclosure
to a public inquiry, and the specific public
interests protected by exemptions from disclosure. This balancing test is,
performed in the application of the test for public interest immunity
16.95 The ALRC notes that practical difficulties have arisen in relation to
public interest immunity in the context of national security
information. In
Chapter 13, the ALRC makes several proposals in relation to national security
information.
There is no
evidence, however, of practical difficulty in relation to any other kind of
information protected by public interest
immunity. The ALRC, therefore, does not
propose any modification to the application of public interest immunity.
16.96 It is desirable to clarify that public interest immunity does apply to
Royal Commissions and the proposed Official Inquiries.
In Chapter 18, therefore,
the ALRC includes public interest immunity as a ‘reasonable excuse’
for refusing to comply
with a notice to produce, or refusing to answer a
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) contains a number of privileges
beyond those available under the common law. These include:
confidential professional relationships privilege
protects a communication made by a person in confidence to a journalist. The
privilege is not absolute, and will protect
the communication only where the
court is satisfied that the harm that would or might be caused to the confider
if the evidence was
given outweighs the desirability of the evidence being
religious confessions privilege—
which allows a member
of the clergy (of any religion and religious denomination) to refuse to divulge
that a religious confession
was made, or the contents of the
confession;
exclusion of evidence of settlement—
which protects
communications made in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a
rationale for such privileges was canvassed in detail in the ALRC reports
concerning evidence law.
privileges give statutory recognition to the confidential nature of the
information in three specific contexts.
16.99 These privileges do not apply to Royal Commissions at present. The New
Zealand Law Commission, in its recent report on
, recommended that statutory privileges of a similar kind should also
apply to inquiries.
Submissions and
consultations
16.100 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether privileges established by
statute, such as religious confessions privilege and professional
confidential
relationships privilege (including journalists’ privilege) should apply to
Royal Commissions and other public
Stakeholders
expressed a variety of views.
Liberty Victoria argued for a consistent approach:
Consequently statutory and common law privileges should be protected, but
subject to waiver where there is an overriding public interest
in obtaining
the information required. In each case, the public inquiry must be
satisfied that there is no other reasonable way in
which to obtain the
information and that the public interest in waiving the privilege outweighs
the public interest in protecting
16.101 Other stakeholders expressed concern that these privileges would
encourage proceedings for judicial review, could stymie inquiries,
or would be
inconsistent with the abrogation of other privileges in relation to Royal
Commissions. Other stakeholders agreed with
Liberty Victoria that consistency
was preferable, and considered that, given the limited circumstances in which
such claims would
arise, the application of the privileges to Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries posed no real difficulty.
16.102 Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries are established to ascertain
the truth without the restrictions on evidence imposed
by courts. They are
investigatory bodies, rather than judicial bodies, and the restrictions on
evidence that are applicable to courts
are not necessarily applicable in the
inquiries context. Further, the addition of privileges is likely to reduce
flexibility, increase
formality, and increase the likelihood of legal challenge
of inquiry decisions.
16.103 As a number of stakeholders noted, inquiries can be expected to
recognise the importance of the interests protected by the
statutory privileges,
and exercise their discretion appropriately by, for example, not requiring the
information or taking the evidence
in private. It is the ALRC’s view,
therefore, that these privileges should apply to Royal Commissions or Official
but it would welcome further comment on this issue.
Proposal 11–1.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in
Federal Investigations
, ALRC 107 (2007),
[6.9]–[6.39].
This is also known as
legal professional privilege. The term ‘client legal privilege’ is
preferred here because it is
used in the
Evidence Act 1995
div 1, and it reflects the nature of the privilege as one belonging to the
client, rather than the lawyer: ibid,
[1.16]–[1.17].
‘Implications of the Human Right Rationale for Legal Professional
Privilege—The Demise of Implied Statutory
Abrogation?’ in P Mirfield
and R Smith (eds),
Essays for Colin Tapper
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
, ALRC 107 (2007),
Report of the HIH
Royal Commission
(2003), vol 1, [2.9].
See, eg, E Campbell,
Contempt of Royal Commissions
(1984), 27; S
Royal Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
The amendment was sought by the
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN Oil-for-Food
Programme (2006), as
a result of the decision in
AWB Ltd v Cole
152 FCR 382. See Explanatory Memorandum,
Royal Commissions Amendment Bill 2006
Royal Commissions Act
However, this section contains a note that under
client legal privilege might still be a reasonable excuse for
refusing to produce the document.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
, ALRC 107 (2007),
Proposal 5–1.
Law Reform Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in
Federal Investigations
, ALRC 107 (2007),
[6.108]–[6.111].
Ibid, [2.118],
Proposal 5–3.
Pty Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
(1983) 152 CLR
Environment Protection
Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR
Ibid, 498 quoting Murphy J in
Rochfort v Trade Practices Commission
[1982] HCA 66
(1982) 153 CLR 134
, 150. See also
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
Trade Practices Commission v
Abbco Ice Works Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1279
(1994) 52 FCR 96
Article 14(3)(g) of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides that in the ‘determination
of any criminal
charge against him, everyone shall be entitled to the following
minimum guarantees, in full equality … not to be compelled
against himself or to confess
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
The Abrogation of the Privilege Against Self-incrimination
(2004), Ch 3.
Pyneboard Pty Ltd v
Trade Practices Commission
(1983) 152 CLR 382
, 340–341, 344;
v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
Environment Protection
Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
Fashions Pty Ltd v Comptroller-General of Customs
(1996) 140 ALR 681
Trade Practices Commission v Abbco Ice Works Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1279
Controlled Consultants v
Corporate Affairs Commission
[1985] HCA 6
(1985) 156 CLR
Sorby v Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
Consultants v Corporate Affairs Commission
[1985] HCA 6
(1985) 156 CLR
See discussion in Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative
Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Ch
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 16 November 1982, 2337 (F
Chaney—Minister for Social Security), 2337. This amendment was part of a
number of amendments
to Royal Commission powers sought during the Royal
Commission into the Activities of the Federated Ships Painters and Dockers Union
(1984). The amendment was upheld as constitutionally valid in
Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281.
Hammond v Commonwealth
(1982) 152 CLR 188
Royal Commissions
Report of the HIH Royal Commission
Bercove v Hermes [No
[1983] FCA 301
(1983) 74 FLR 315.
Attorney-General (Vic) v Riach
[1978] VicRp 32
Report of the
HIH Royal Commission
(2003), [1.3.4]. As is discussed further below,
however, it is arguable that some documents could be characterised as a
‘disclosure’
protected by the use
Special Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1983
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 19C;
Commissions of Inquiry
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Inquiries Act
The privilege is not abrogated in the South Australia
or the Northern Territory: see
Royal Commissions Act 1917
Inquiries Act 1945
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
Commissions Act 1923
Evidence Act 1958
Commission of Inquiry (Children in State Care and Children on APY
Lands) Act 2004
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Inquiries Act
provides for a derivative use immunity, and Tasmania for a transactional
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Commissions Act 1991
Inquiries Act 1991
Royal Commissions Act
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act
. Special Commissions of Inquiry must be constituted by
a judge of a specified court in New South Wales, or by a member of the Workers
Compensation Commission, or by a legal practitioner of at least seven years
Special Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
Tribunals of
Inquiry Bill 2005 (Ireland) s 16. This section is similar in terms to
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), but the intention of
abolishing the privilege was stated in Parliament upon its introduction: see Law
Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals
, LRC 73 (2005),
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 22. However, the Attorney-General may give an
undertaking granting derivative use immunity, which would make it difficult for
an individual to refuse to answer: Explanatory Notes, Inquiries Bill 2005 (UK),
[56]. See also United Kingdom Department of Constitutional
Consultation Paper—Effective Inquiries
(2004), [77],
Commissions of Inquiry
(NZ) ss 4C(4),
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Abrogation of the Privilege Against Self-incrimination
Royal Commissions Act
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 8–7.
Department of
Immigration and Citizenship,
20 May 2009; Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009; Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union,
17 May 2009; Liberty
6 May 2009.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union,
17 May 2009, citing
A Casten QC, ‘Natural Justice in Commissions and
(Paper presented at the Australian Society of Labour
Lawyers Seventh National Conference, Melbourne, August
Department of Immigration and
Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
6 May 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
22 May 2009.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
12 May 2009.
See Appendix 2
for a List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
Investigating
Corruption and Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions of Inquiry—Powers
and Procedures
(2004), 597.
similar conclusion was reached with respect to client legal privilege in
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal
Privilege in Federal Investigations
, ALRC 107 (2007),
[7.143]–[7.145].
the ALRC discusses in detail the proposed new statutory framework for conducting
public inquiries.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 16 November 1982, 2337 (F
Chaney—Minister for Social Security),
Hammond v Commonwealth
(1982) 152 CLR 188.
See generally
Administrative Review Council,
The Coercive Information-Gathering Powers of
Government Agencies
, Report No 48 (2008), Appendix
Australian Crime Commission Act
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Trade Practices Act 1974
Royal Commissions
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 19C(2);
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Public Service Act 1999
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative
Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009)
Question 8–7.
Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), vol 2, Rec 1(d).
Commissions Act 1991
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Evidence Act 1958
Commissions of Inquiry
Thomson Reuters,
Laws of Australia
, vol 2 Administrative Law, 2.8, [43]
(as at 15 July 2009).
Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
Evidence in Trials
at Common Law
(3rd ed, 1961), vol 8,
Environment
Protection Authority v Caltex Refining Co Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 74
(1993) 178 CLR 477
Australian Law Reform Commission,
New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005),
Commissions Act 1902
Giannarelli v The
[1983] HCA 41
(1983) 154 CLR 212
, 227. See Royal Commission into the Activities of
the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union
Proposal 18–8.
Parliamentary Practice
(22nd ed, 1997), 65.
Parliament of
United Kingdom—Joint Committee of the House of Lords and House of Commons,
Parliamentary Privilege—First Report
(1999), 26.
Bill of Rights
1 Wm & M (England) s 2 c 2
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
E Campbell,
‘Investigating the Truth of Statements Made in Parliament: The Australian
Experience’
Hammond v Commonwealth
(1982) 152 CLR 188
For a list,
see S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
(2001) [6.12].
R Davis, ‘Parliamentary
Privilege—Parliament and the Western Australian Royal Commission’
Australian Law Journal
l Commissions
of Inquiry Amendment Act 1997
(NSW), inserting pt 4A. The circumstances are
discussed in E Campbell, ‘Investigating the Truth of Statements Made in
Parliament:
The Australian Experience’
Special Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1983
Arena v Nader
(1997) 42 NSWLR 427
Arena v Nader
[1997] HCATrans 321
(1997) 71 ALJR 1604.
The grounds
of appeal included that the legislation impaired the institutional integrity of
Parliament; the legislation breached
the right to freedom of expression, as
protected by implication in the
Constitution
; and that it
amounted to a retrospective change to the state’s Constitution which was
prohibited by the
Constitution
Proposal 18–5.
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
Commonwealth v John Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
Rogers v Home Secretary
[1973] AC 388
National Tertiary Education Union v Commonwealth
(2001) 111 FCR 585,
J Hunter, C Cameron and T
Litigation I: Civil Procedure
(7th ed, 2005), [8.102].
Investigating
Corruption and Misconduct in Public Office: Commissions of Inquiry—Powers
and Procedures
(2004), 619; S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions and Permanent
Commissions of Inquiry
(2001), [6.10]. It was assumed to apply in relation
to a Western Australian Royal Commission in
Halden v Marks
(1996) 17 WAR
Law of Privilege
(1992), 381.
Inquiries Act
Crime and Misconduct Act
(Qld) s 196(5).
Although public interest immunity differs from a privilege in that it is not a
right of an individual, it appears that it may be
abrogated by statute. See, in
A Metropolitan Borough Council v S (A Child by His Guardian)
[2003] EWHC 976
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
s 96(5)(e).
Commissions Act 1923
Police Integrity
Commission Act 1996
Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act 1988
New South Wales Crime Commission Act 1985
A similar blanket provision applies in the
and Crime Commission Act 2003
Independent
Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
Department of Immigration
and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Proposals 13–1 to
Proposal 18–5.
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) div 1A. On 19 March 2009, the Australian
Government introduced the
Evidence Amendment (Journalists’ Privilege) Bill
(Cth). The Bill amends div 1A to require the courts to consider whether the
information was passed contrary to a law (for example,
was passed on by a
whistleblower) and if there will be potential harm to the source or the
journalist if the information is given
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 38 (1987), Ch 16; Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005), Ch
New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Ch
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 8–9.
Appendix 2 for a List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
17. Statutory Exemptions from
Introduction
Secret processes of manufacture
ALRC’s view
Secrecy provisions
Secrecy provisions and inquiries
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
17. Statutory Exemptions from
Introduction
17.1 Royal Commissions have the power to compel a person to produce documents
or other things, and to give answers to
This general power to
compel disclosure is limited, to some extent, by legislative provisions that
exempt a person from the requirement
to disclose, as well as common law
privileges and public interest
17.2 In this chapter, the ALRC examines the limitations on the power to
compel disclosure that arise out of legislation. First, the
exemption from
disclosing secret processes of manufacture, which is provided by
Royal Commissions Act
(Cth), is discussed. Secondly, the
application of legislative provisions in other Acts—known as secrecy
provisions—that
generally prohibit or restrict public servants and others
from disclosing government information is examined.
processes of manufacture
Section 6D(1)
Royal Commissions Act
provides that
nothing in the Act makes it compulsory for a witness to disclose to a Royal
Commission any secret process of manufacture. This is
the only provision in the
Act that specifically exempts a person from disclosure before a Royal
Commission.
There are similar
provisions in a number of Australian state and territory Acts governing Royal
Commissions.
There is no direct
equivalent in more recent legislation establishing public inquiries, such as the
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
(Tas) or the
Royal Commissions Act
17.4 This exemption was inserted in 1912 on the premise that it would not be
fair to require business people to make disclosures that
may ‘injure them
in competing with rivals’.
The confidentiality of manufacturing processes is usually protected by the law
governing trade secrets as a type of confidential
information.
17.5 In the Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
the ALRC asked what types of information, if any, a witness should have the
right to refuse to disclose to a Royal Commission
or other type of
17.6 In response, the Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) noted that the
current legislative exceptions focus on commercial interests, but fail
to take account of circumstances in which information may
prevented from disclosure by other
17.7 The issue of secrecy provisions is discussed below.
17.8 In the ALRC’s view, s 6D(1) of the
Royal Commissions Act
should be repealed. The ALRC does not propose that any other category of
information should be completely exempt from disclosure.
In Chapter 13, the
ALRC proposes that the chair of a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry should
have the power to make directions
concerning the production or use of national
security information.
Chapter 15, the ALRC expresses the view that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide a general power to prohibit or restrict public access to
hearings and publication of evidence because of, among other
things, the nature
and subject matter of information that may be
The ALRC has not
received feedback in this Inquiry that suggests the absolute prohibition on
disclosures of secret processes of manufacture
is warranted, and should continue
to be elevated above other types of confidential information.
17.9 Further, while s 6D(1) may have had some historical political
importance, it now appears outdated—it has not been judicially
in the history of the Act, other than by passing mention in one High Court case
and has not been
considered critically in recent academic literature. Also, while this provision
typically was included in inquiries
legislation enacted in Australian states and
territories in the first part of the 20th century, it has not been included in
recent inquiries legislation such as that enacted in the ACT and Tasmania
in the 1990s.
17.10 In the ALRC’s view, rather than preserving s 6D(1) in the
Inquiries Act
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
should consider whether a participant will reveal secret processes of
manufacture, and whether
to exercise the discretion to prohibit or restrict
public access to hearings or publication of material.
Proposal 17–1
Section 6D(1)
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), which provides that a person may refuse to disclose a secret process
of manufacture, should be repealed.
17.11 Legislation often includes provisions which impose secrecy or
confidential obligations on public servants and others which restrict
disclosure of certain categories of
information.
The ALRC is
currently conducting an inquiry into Commonwealth secrecy
provisions.
The majority of the
provisions impose criminal penalties for breach. As the ALRC discusses in its
Discussion Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
(DP 74), a number of important
public interests are protected by secrecy provisions. For example, secrecy
provisions may be designed
to protect national security and defence, the
enforcement of the criminal law, the safety of an individual or the public, or
Secrecy provisions
and inquiries
17.12 If a statutory
obligation of secrecy applies, it may limit the power of a Royal Commission to
compel the production of information.
Sometimes, associated provisions afford
protection to a person from being compelled to give information to a Royal
Commission, rather
than prohibiting them from doing so. For example,
s 16(3) of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) provides that an
‘shall not be required to produce’ certain information in a court.
This has been interpreted by the High Court to mean
that an officer cannot be
compelled to produce that information in a court, but if the officer chooses to
give that information regardless,
the evidence is admissible in
Some secrecy provisions,
however, may prohibit a person from disclosing information to a
17.13 The applicability of some secrecy provisions to Royal
Commissions—and in some cases, Official Inquiries—is clear
the secrecy provision refers expressly to disclosure to Royal Commissions or
similar inquiries. In other cases, however,
the wording of a secrecy provision
is ambiguous. This leads to uncertainty as to whether the secrecy provision
applies to disclosure
to a Royal Commission, and if the ALRC’s proposal to
Royal Commissions Act
to enable the establishment of Official
Inquiries is accepted, whether the secrecy provision would apply to disclosure
to Official
17.14 Some secrecy provisions expressly permit the disclosure of information
to Royal Commissions.
Taxation Administration Act 1953
provides that:
Notwithstanding any taxation secrecy provision, the Commissioner may disclose
information acquired by the Commissioner under the
provisions of a tax law to an
authorised law enforcement agency officer, or to an authorised Royal Commission
officer, if the Commissioner
is satisfied that the information is relevant to:
(a) establishing whether a serious offence has been, or is being, committed; or
(b) the making, or proposed or possible making, of a proceeds of crime order.
17.15 Less commonly, a secrecy provision may enable the disclosure of certain
information to a Royal Commission to be prohibited.
For example,
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(Cth) provides that a Royal
Commissioner may order that a person not be required to disclose information
that could reasonably be
expected to reveal details of matters relating to
surveillance devices.
17.16 Associated provisions also may specify the relationship between the
obligation to keep information secret and another legal
requirement to produce
information. For example,
Age Discrimination Act 2004
(Cth) provides that:
A person bound by this section because of office, employment or authorisation
must not be required: …
(b) to produce in a court a document relating to the affairs of another
person of which the first mentioned person has custody,
or to which that person
has access, because of that person’s office or employment under or for the
purposes of this Act or
because of that person being or having been so
authorised;
except where it is necessary to do so for the purposes of this Act.
17.17 Section 60(2) defines ‘court’ as including ‘any
tribunal, authority or person having power to require the
production of
documents or the answering of questions’. This would include Royal
Commissions and (if established) Official
17.18 The clarity provided by the above provision can be compared with, for
example, s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth). Section 70 prohibits
‘Commonwealth officers’ from disclosing, without authorisation,
official information to ‘any
person’. Section 70 has been held not
to override a witness’s duty to provide information to a court, as the
word ‘person’
does not include a
A similar argument likely
could be made in relation to the duties of a witness before a Royal Commission
or Official Inquiry.
17.19 In many cases, however, it may be unclear whether a secrecy provision
protects a person from being compelled to disclose to
a public inquiry. For
example, s 159 of the
Excise Act 1901
(Cth) protects certain
information, and expressly permits certain disclosures. There is no power for an
agency head or minister to
authorise disclosure of information to persons other
than those specified, although there is an exception for disclosures in the
performance of the duties of official
employment.
It is unclear if
this exception would apply to the work of an inquiry. The section also prohibits
disclosure to a court (which is
not further defined), ‘unless necessary
for the purposes of an excise
It is difficult for
a person, reading that section, to determine whether a disclosure to a Royal
Commission or (if established) an
Official Inquiry would be permitted.
17.20 The exceptions to a secrecy provision can also impact on whether
disclosure is permitted to a Royal Commission or other inquiry.
Many secrecy
provisions provide an exception for disclosures that are authorised by the head
of an agency or minister.
Arguably, disclosure to a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry also may be
permitted as a disclosure ‘in the performance of’,
course of’, a person’s functions or duties, which is another common
17.21 Similar phrases have been considered in the context of taxation secrecy
provisions. As discussed in
Re Confitt Constructions Pty Ltd (in liq)
the exception in s 16(3) of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
that information may be disclosed if ‘it is necessary to do so for the
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions
of this Act’ has been
interpreted liberally.
held that, if a court orders that it is necessary to divulge information during
proceedings related to the validity of
a taxation assessment or payment, then
there is no breach of the secrecy
17.22 This reasoning may extend to the work of inquiries. For example, in an
analogous decision in New Zealand, a court held that
an inquiry into alleged
maladministration in the taxation department also could be treated as a
‘carrying into effect’
of the relevant taxation legislation, which
was an exception to the relevant secrecy
It may be, therefore,
that disclosure to an inquiry into maladministration in a field related to the
governing Act may be permitted
‘in the performance of’ a
person’s functions or duties.
17.23 Another method of regulating disclosure to public inquiries is
expressly to override secrecy provisions in the legislation governing
inquiry itself. While the
Royal Commissions Act
is silent on its
relationship to secrecy provisions, some more recent legislation addresses the
issue of secrecy provisions directly.
17.24 Three recent federal Acts governing standing commissions—the
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
(Cth), and the
Building and Construction
Industry Improvement Act 2005
(Cth)—provide that the power to compel
evidence generally overrides secrecy
provisions.
Certain types of
secrecy provisions may, however, continue to operate. For example, the provision
Australian Crime Commission Act
only overrides secrecy provisions
other than taxation secrecy provisions or provisions prescribed in
regulations.
17.25 Some state inquiries legislation also deals expressly with secrecy
provisions. The
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
(Qld) enables a
regulation to declare that a written requirement to provide information
overrides any oaths, affirmations and provisions
of an Act which otherwise might
afford a reasonable excuse for non-compliance with that
requirement.
17.26 In New South Wales, the legislation governing some standing commissions
expressly provides that a person is not excused from
answering a question or
producing a document or other thing on, among other grounds, the ground of
‘a duty of secrecy’.
This has been interpreted as excluding all legal and moral obligations of
confidence.
Submissions
and consultations
17.27 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether the powers in the
Royal Commissions
or in legislation establishing other public inquiries should override
secrecy provisions in federal legislation and, if so, whether
this should be
stated in the
Royal Commissions Act
or in the legislation containing the
secrecy provision.
17.28 Only a few submissions addressed the issue of the application of
secrecy provisions. Liberty Victoria submitted:
While a general prohibition is appropriate to ensure public servants do
not disclose confidential or private information inappropriately,
disclosures made to courts and formal inquiries (including public
inquiries) should be specifically excluded. Unfortunately there
many examples of disclosure prohibitions being used by governments to
stymie inquiries. Liberty believes that public inquiries’
obtain information should override secrecy and other prohibition provisions
to the extent required to obtain information
reasonable and necessary to the
inquiry and where adequate provision is made for the protection of that
information.
17.29 A number of stakeholders noted practical difficulties caused by the
uncertain application of secrecy provisions. For example,
the Department of
Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) noted that, in the Inquiry into the Case of
Dr Mohamed Haneef (2008), it had
been unable to submit information obtained on a
confidential basis from another agency because of a secrecy provision in the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). It was, however, able to answer questions
pursuant to an authorisation by the minister under that
17.30 It was suggested by DIAC that the ALRC consider whether the present
regime is the most efficient way of dealing with similar
documents. It
recommended, for example, that an inquiry body be empowered to request and
examine confidential material in its own
right, while respecting the condition
of confidentiality imposed by a relevant
17.31 The CPSU submitted:
In our view it is not currently clear whether the secrecy provisions
that exist in federal legislation or the requirement to give
evidence under
Royal Commissions Act
takes precedence. Whichever takes
precedence, the situation must be clarified in the legislation.
In the absence of a clear legislative intent to override the
secrecy provisions, a witness should have the right not to disclose
confidential information. To force a witness to disclose confidential
information, without clear legislation that allows for it,
would open the
public servant up to disciplinary proceedings and potentially criminal
prosecution.
17.32 The Australian Intelligence Community, however, submitted that the
secrecy provisions
Criminal Code
Intelligence Services Act
should remain paramount to any possible public
interest disclosure laws, including those provisions that relate to the
of the identity of ASIO and ASIS officers. The AIC therefore would
not support any proposal that would see the introduction of powers
Royal Commissions Act
or in legislation establishing other public
inquiries that would either override secrecy provisions in federal legislation
may provide additional exceptions or defences in secrecy laws applying
to national security classified
information.
17.33 In consultations, the majority of stakeholders that addressed the issue
were in favour of introducing into inquiries legislation
some provision to
enable the overriding of secrecy
provisions.
17.34 It is unsatisfactory that, in many cases, it is unclear whether a
secrecy provision prohibits a person from disclosing information
Commission—especially as a person could be subject to criminal sanctions
for either breaching the secrecy provision,
or refusing to answer or produce a
document as required by a Royal Commission. It is therefore desirable to clarify
the relationship
between secrecy provisions and the power of Royal Commissions
to compel evidence, where this relationship is not made clear by the
provision itself.
17.35 The ALRC also has
considered whether any distinction should be made between Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries with regard
to the application of secrecy provisions. As
discussed in Chapters 3, 5, 11 and 16, the ALRC proposes that Royal
Commissions should
have a wider range of coercive powers than Official
Inquiries, including the power to apply for warrants for entry, search and
and the apprehension and immediate delivery of persons who fail to
appear. In addition, the ALRC proposes that Royal Commissions
should have the
power to compel information that is potentially incriminating (that is, the
power to abrogate the privilege against
self-incrimination) or, if specified in
the Letters Patent, the power to compel information that is subject to client
legal privilege.
17.36 The nature of the interests which secrecy provisions are designed to
protect, however, differ from those protected by these
two privileges. Secrecy
provisions are designed to protect a wide variety of interests, some of which
may justify an exemption from
disclosure (such as national security) and others
of which may not (such as ensuring confidence in the handling of government
information).
Further, as many Official Inquiries may review the management and
operations of a particular agency or department, the application
provisions is likely to impede substantially the work of an Official Inquiry. In
the ALRC’s view, therefore, the
application of secrecy provisions to
Official Inquiries should be clear in the proposed
Inquiries Act
17.37 As discussed in Chapter 16, there is a strong public interest in
full disclosure to a public inquiry. The purpose of an inquiry,
particularly an
investigatory inquiry, is usually to ascertain all the facts. Exemptions from
disclosure impede this function. The
public interest in disclosure may be even
stronger where the purpose of the inquiry is to look into government management
and conduct.
17.38 The ALRC has reached the view that, in the majority of situations,
information that is the subject of secrecy provisions should
be compellable by
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. There are adequate alternative
mechanisms to protect against the potential
harm to the public interests that
are protected by secrecy provisions. These include: the taking of material in
private; a prohibition
on the publication of material; the removal of
identifying details from any material; and the receipt of material on a
confidential
basis. These measures are discussed in Chapter 15.
17.39 A blanket override of secrecy provisions, however, is inappropriate.
The balance between the public interest in disclosure to
Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries and the interests protected by secrecy provisions may be
struck differently depending upon
the nature of the interest sought to be
protected by the secrecy provision. For example, as discussed in
Chapter 13, the need to
protect national security information may outweigh,
in some circumstances, the desirability of disclosure to a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry. Further, the interests of a Royal Commission or an Official
Inquiry in the information that is sought will vary
from case to case.
Accordingly, a balance must be struck between the need of the inquiry to access
the information and the weight
of the interest protected by the secrecy
17.40 In the ALRC’s view, the proposed
Inquiries Act
include a general power to override a secrecy provision. There should be two
exceptions to this general power. First, there
should be an exception if the
disclosure of information to a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry is already
governed by a particular
secrecy provision, either by express reference to a
Royal Commission or similar inquiry that would include an Official Inquiry, or
by inclusion of Royal Commissions and similar inquiries in the definition of
courts or tribunals. The balance between the particular
interests protected by
that secrecy provision and disclosure to a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry
has, in that case, already
been struck by Parliament.
17.41 Secondly, there should be an exception if a secrecy provision is
prescribed by regulation under the proposed
Inquiries Act
. Where the
Australian Government considers that the interests protected by a particular
secrecy provision justify an exemption from
disclosure to a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry, it should be able to protect those interests by prescribing
the relevant provision.
This would have the advantage of flexibility.
17.42 This approach would require the Australian Government to balance the
public interest in disclosure with the specific public
interests that are
protected by secrecy provisions. One objection that could be raised is that the
person charged with balancing
the competing interests may be part of a
government whose conduct is being investigated by the Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry.
On the other hand, it is not desirable to place this
responsibility on an inquiry member or chair, since he or she may not be in
position to assess the potential harm caused by disclosure of the information
protected by the secrecy provision. Further, until
the inquiry chair or member
receives the information, he or she will not usually be in a position to assess
the sensitivity of the
information involved.
17.43 Finally, it is desirable that the proposed
Inquiries Act
clearly provide that where a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry overrides a
secrecy provision, a person compelled to answer
a question or produce a document
is not subject to any criminal, civil, administrative or disciplinary
proceedings as a result.
clearly would be unfair to require a person to disclose information subject to a
secrecy provision, and then penalise that person
for doing so. The extension to
administrative or disciplinary proceedings is necessary in this context as some
obligations of secrecy
arise under administrative or disciplinary
Proposal 17–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries may require a person to answer or
produce documents or other things, notwithstanding
any secrecy provision if the
inquiry specifies that the requirement is made notwithstanding that secrecy
provision. This power should
not apply in the case of:
(a) secrecy provisions that specifically govern the disclosure of
information to Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries;
(b) secrecy provisions as prescribed in regulations under the proposed
Inquiries Act
Proposal 17–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that if a person is required to answer questions or produce documents or other
things to a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry notwithstanding a secrecy
provision, that person is not subject to any criminal, civil, administrative or
disciplinary proceedings
as a result of providing that information.
Royal Commissions Act 1902
. These powers are discussed in
Common law privileges and
public interest immunity are discussed in
, a witness may
request that his or her evidence be given in private if the evidence relates to
the profits or financial position
of any person, if the taking of the evidence
in public would be unfairly prejudicial to the interests of that person. This
is discussed further in
Special Commissions of
Inquiry Act 1983
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Royal Commissions Act
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 31 July 1912, 1486 (J
Quick). Section 6D(1) was inserted by s 7 of the
Royal Commissions Act
Wright v Gasweld
(1991) 22 NSWLR 317.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Community and Public Sector
22 May 2009.
Proposal 13–2.
Proposal 15–4. Also note that, in Ch 7, the ALRC discusses
whether parts of a report may be excised by the executive before
the report is
tabled in Parliament.
Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
The ALRC has so far identified
507 secrecy provisions in Commonwealth primary and subordinate legislation:
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, DP 74 (2009),
That Inquiry focuses upon the
protection of government information balanced against the need to maintain an
open and accountable
government through providing appropriate access to
information. It does not consider the distinct issue of disclosure to courts and
tribunals: ibid [1.49]–[1.51].
Ibid, Ch 7.
Secrecy provisions often
regulate disclosures by ‘officers’ or ‘Commonwealth
officers’. Section 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
principal secrecy offence of general application to Commonwealth officers.
defines ‘Commonwealth officer’
for the purposes of s 70 as including those appointed or engaged under the
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth), employees of the Public Service of a
territory or Defence Force or the Service of a Commonwealth public authority;
Federal Police employees, Commissioners and special members; those
performing services for or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a territory
Commonwealth public authority; and employees or service providers and employees
of service providers for the Australian Postal
Corporation. These and other
other secrecy provisions.
See the discussion in Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, DP 74 (2009),
[8.2]–[8.59].
Tobacco Co v Stapleton
[1952] HCA 32
(1952) 86 CLR 1
, 7, 10–11.
Superannuation
(Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
s 63(2)(b).
Proposal 5–1. The ALRC has
identified a number of secrecy provisions which apply expressly to disclosure of
information to
Royal Commissions, and may need to be amended to apply expressly
to Official Inquiries. Appendix 6 contains these provisions in a
possible consequential amendments to statutory provisions and regulations that
may be required if Proposal 5–1 is
Australian Communication
and Media Authority Act 2005
(Cth) s 59C;
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989
Child Support
(Registration and Collection) Act 1988
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Health Insurance Act 1973
Income Tax Assessment Act
(Cth) s 16(4)(k), (4A);
Taxation Administration Act 1953
, (6A), 17C.
Canadian Tobacco Co v Stapleton
[1952] HCA 32
(1952) 86 CLR 1
, 6. See also L Hallett,
Royal Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural
(1982), 125.
Coombs and others,
Royal Commission on Australian Government
Administration
(1976), Appendix 4K,
Excise Act 1901
In Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, DP 74 (2009), the ALRC proposes that
one exception to the new general secrecy offence it proposes should be where the
is authorised by the relevant agency head or minister, and the agency
head or minister certifies that the disclosure is in the public
Proposal 9–1(b).
discussion in ibid, [9.13]–[9.27].
Re Confitt Constructions Pty Ltd
[1999] 2 Qd R 490
, [14] and cases discussed
Peters v Davison
2 NZLR 164.
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Building and
Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Crime Commission Act 2002
Australian Crime Commission
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Such a regulation would
have the effect of deeming a person not to have committed an offence, or be
subject to disciplinary action,
as a result of the
Police Integrity
Commission Act 1996
ss 27(3)(c)
Independent Commission
Against Corruption Act 1988
New South Wales Crime
Commission Act 1985
Independent
Commission Against Corruption v Cornwall
(1993) 38 NSWLR 207,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Department of
Immigration and Citizenship,
20 May 2009.
Community and Public Sector
22 May 2009.
Intelligence Community,
See Appendix 2 for a List
of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
Proposals 11–3,
11–6, 16–1 and Australian Law Reform Commission,
Privilege in
Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal Investigations
(2007), Rec 6–2.
See, eg, the
immunity provided in the
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
However, this does not extend to administrative or
disciplinary proceedings.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, DP 74 (2009), Ch 13.
18. Offences
Introduction
Civil or administrative sanctions
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Offences of non-compliance
Current offences of non-compliance
Need for offences in the proposed Inquiries Act
Strict liability
Scope of conduct
Notice requirements
Reasonable excuse
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Continuing offence
Contravention of directions
ALRC’s view
Interference with evidence or witnesses
Parallel offences in the
Crimes Act 1914
ALRC’s view
Offences relating to Commissioners or staff
Disclosures by Commissioners or staff
18. Offences
Introduction
18.1 This chapter examines whether the offences in the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) should be retained and, if so, whether similar offences should apply
to Official Inquiries.
penalties for these offences are discussed in Chapter 20.
18.2 There are four types of offence in the
Royal Commissions Act
offences that punish failures to comply with requirements of a Royal Commission
(offences of non-compliance);
offence of contravening a direction of a Royal Commission not to publish
specified material;
offences that
prohibit interference with evidence or
and an offence which
prohibits conduct that interferes with the work or authority of a Royal
Commission.
18.3 Although this chapter deals with the existing criminal offences in the
Act, the ALRC also considers the use of other methods
of punishing conduct by
law, such as the use of civil or administrative penalties. This chapter first
examines the possibility of
using civil or administrative penalties instead of,
or in addition to, offences of non-compliance.
18.4 Secondly, the chapter examines the scope of the offences of
non-compliance. Thirdly, it discusses the offences of interference
with evidence
or witnesses. Finally, it discusses whether any new offences should be included
that: prohibit or restrict disclosures
of information obtained in the course of
Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries; or prohibit interference with members
of inquiries, as well as legal practitioners assisting or appearing
before inquiries.
administrative sanctions
18.5 Under the
Royal Commissions Act
, it is a criminal offence to fail
to comply with a summons or notice of a Royal Commission, or to refuse to swear,
affirm or answer
questions when required by a Royal Commission or by those
authorised to appear before a Royal
Commission.
One issue for this
Inquiry is whether there is a role for civil or administrative penalties, or
infringement notices, instead of,
or in addition to, criminal offences in
punishing this kind of behaviour.
18.6 The ALRC discussed the distinctions between criminal, civil and
administrative penalties in detail in its report
Principled Regulation:
Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties in Australia
Criminal offences,
the most familiar form of sanction, usually are prosecuted by the relevant
Director of Public Prosecutions, who
must prove the elements of the offence
beyond reasonable doubt.
usually are punishable by imprisonment, and the consequences of criminal
convictions extend beyond the immediate penalty,
as criminal convictions may
affect a person’s eligibility for offices or may need to be disclosed for
the purposes of employment
18.7 Traditionally, criminal penalties have been justified by ‘the
repugnance attached to the [prohibited] act, which invokes
social censure and
This is not true
of many crimes created by statute, such as offences of failing to meet certain
licensing standards.
18.8 In modern regulatory systems, civil penalties have been used as another
form of punishment. Civil penalties are used extensively,
for example, in
relation to contraventions of pt IV of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), dealing with restrictive trade practices; and in relation to
contraventions of a significant number of provisions in the
Corporations Act
Civil penalties
differ from criminal offences in that: they usually are pursued by a
the procedures and
rules of evidence in civil cases, including a lower standard of proof, apply to
their enforcement;
penalties are fines.
18.9 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that:
It is particularly important that civil penalties be used in appropriate and
justifiable contexts. They are otherwise open to criticism
for being too soft
(in not carrying a criminal penalty) or for being too harsh (in not carrying the
safeguards of criminal procedure
such as a requirement for proof beyond
18.10 Taking into account the recommendations made in
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
nominates the
following criteria as relevant to whether a civil penalty provision is likely to
be appropriate and effective:
where criminal punishment is not warranted—contraventions of
the law involving serious moral culpability should only be pursued
by criminal
prosecution;
where the maximum civil penalty is sufficient to justify the expense
and time of court proceedings—the maximum penalty should
be at least
$5,000 and typically more; and
where the conduct involves corporate wrongdoing—given that
imprisonment is not available as a penalty, the financial disincentives
civil penalties offer may be
18.11 Administrative
penalties, broadly speaking, arise automatically by operation of legislation, or
can be imposed directly by an
This distinguishes
them from criminal and civil penalties, which may only be imposed by
For example, tax
legislation imposes specified additional charges for failing to pay tax on
18.12 In the case of an administrative penalty, the legislation determines
when a breach has occurred as well as the nature, imposition
and the amount (or
method of calculation) of the penalty to be imposed. The regulator has no power
before the penalty is imposed
to determine the level of penalty other than in
accordance with the legislation, nor to determine whether there are extenuating
circumstances
that might warrant a variation in its
imposition.
18.13 Another form of penalty is an infringement notice, typically used for
traffic or parking offences.
This is a notice authorised by statute setting out the particulars of an alleged
offence. It gives the person to whom the notice
is issued the option of either
paying the penalty set out in the notice or electing to have the matter dealt
with by a court. Infringement
notice schemes typically set penalties at 20% or
less of the maximum fine that could be imposed by a court. The major advantage
such schemes is that they can prevent minor cases from coming to court and
save time and money for the offender and the criminal
justice system.
18.14 Infringement notices are not administrative penalties. Rather, they are
an administrative device designed to dispose of a matter
involving a breach that
would otherwise have to be dealt with by a court—either by way of a
criminal prosecution or in civil
penalty proceedings. The ALRC has recommended
previously that an infringement notice scheme should apply only to minor
offences of
strict or absolute
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that an
infringement notice scheme ‘may be employed for relatively minor offences,
where a high volume of contraventions
is expected, and where a penalty must be
imposed immediately to be
effective’.
Choice of penalties
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
advises that the
choice between criminal sanctions or civil penalties is influenced by four
considerations:
the nature of the conduct that is sought to be sanctioned, including
the type of harm caused by the conduct;
the appropriateness of the criminal process for investigating and
dealing with the conduct;
the role of the provision in the legislative scheme, and consistency
within that legislative scheme and with other Commonwealth legislation;
the effectiveness of the provision in deterring the prohibited
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that ‘perhaps the
most important factor’ in deciding whether a sanction should be criminal
or non-criminal is the
effect of a criminal
conviction.
Submissions and
consultations
18.18 In the Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
35), the ALRC asked whether there is a role for civil or administrative
penalties as sanctions for breaches of legislation establishing
Commissions or other public
Stakeholders were
divided on whether there should be a role for civil penalties.
18.19 Liberty Victoria supported the use of both criminal and civil penalties
which could be applied depending on the circumstances
The Law Council of
Australia (Law Council) suggested the use of civil
A number of
stakeholders also expressed support for civil penalties. Some stakeholders noted
that civil proceedings could be instituted
more rapidly than criminal
proceedings, because there was often a delay while the Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions decided
whether to institute criminal
proceedings.
Other stakeholders
noted that civil penalties may be more effective in sanctioning corporations,
since the maximum civil penalty
could be higher than the penalty for an
equivalent criminal offence.
18.20 Some expressed the view that the penalties should remain exclusively
criminal. For example, the Australian Government Solicitor
stated that the use
of civil or administrative penalties would ‘downgrade’ the offences,
and ‘would run the risk
of lessening the authority and effectiveness of
such bodies.’
18.21 Inquiries are temporary bodies established by the executive for the
purpose of inquiring into an issue and recommending action
to government. The
primary argument for using civil or administrative penalties in this context is
that a failure to comply with
a requirement of such a body is not sufficiently
blameworthy to merit a criminal penalty, including imprisonment. Civil penalties
also may be seen as equally effective in coercing compliance—especially if
corporations are involved—and could be used
as a lesser penalty where
circumstances do not warrant a criminal conviction.
18.22 In the ALRC’s view, however, if a person fails to attend or give
evidence when required by a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry, a criminal
sanction should be available. In Chapter 6, the ALRC proposes that Royal
Commissions should be established to
inquire into ‘matters of substantial
public importance’, and Official Inquiries should be established to
inquire into
‘matters of public
importance’.
The coercive
powers of Royal Commissions are critical to its method of investigation, and a
failure to comply with the requirement
of a Royal Commission has the potential
to frustrate the purpose of a Royal Commission. This would apply equally to
Official Inquiries,
if established. Further, a person may have a strong
incentive to withhold information, since an inquiry might expose wrongdoing or
subsequent legal proceeding may be contemplated. Failing to attend an interview
or hearing of an inquiry, or withholding information
from an inquiry is, in the
ALRC’s view, sufficiently serious to warrant a criminal conviction.
18.23 Of course, the degree of culpability will vary greatly depending upon
the circumstances. These are, however, matters that are
more appropriately taken
into account in the exercise of the discretion to prosecute, in the setting of
the penalties, and in sentencing.
18.24 Further, the ALRC proposes, in Chapter 19, that Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries should have the power to apply to the
Federal Court for
enforcement of compliance with its notices and directions, as an alternative to
prosecution of such conduct.
This may provide a more timely and effective mechanism for ensuring compliance
than prosecution for an offence.
18.25 The ALRC has considered whether other forms of penalties should be
available, but is not presently persuaded that these would
be helpful, for a
number of reasons. First, failures to comply with the requirements of Royal
Commissions or Official Inquiries should
not be considered minor or low-level
not suitable for
an infringement notice scheme or administrative penalties
imposed by legislation.
18.26 Secondly, as discussed in
Principled Regulation
, these types of
penalties remove a number of important safeguards in the criminal process. For
example, both infringement notices
and administrative penalties impose fixed
penalties that do not take into account the individual circumstances of the
as any reasons for failing to comply or the nature of the inquiry or
the information.
18.27 Another procedural safeguard in the criminal process is the exercise of
the discretion to prosecute by the Director of Public
Prosecutions in the
relevant jurisdiction. Other types of penalties are usually pursued by the
regulator concerned. The issue of
infringement notices or the pursuit of a civil
penalty by an inquiry is likely to undermine the perception of the independence
the inquiry.
18.28 Thirdly, the procedural advantages of using these forms of penalty do
not justify their use in Royal Commissions or Official
Inquiries. Since the
conduct of failing to attend or failing to comply with a notice is not difficult
to prove beyond reasonable
doubt, there is no real advantage to using the lower
standard of proof in civil penalties. Such conduct does not require a complex
regulatory scheme, in which civil penalties typically arise. In Chapter 20,
the ALRC proposes that the maximum monetary penalty for
these offences should be
$3,300, which is too low to justify the expense and time of instituting a civil
18.29 Finally, the primary advantage of infringement notices or
administrative penalties is to manage a high volume of minor offences.
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries are not established frequently, the
volume of offences of non-compliance with these
inquiries is unlikely to justify
an infringement notice or administrative penalty scheme.
Offences of
non-compliance
Current offences of
non-compliance
Royal Commissions Act
creates several offences punishing
non-compliance with the requirements of a Royal Commission. First,
makes it an offence for a person to fail to attend a hearing or produce a
document in response to a summons or written notice, without
reasonable excuse.
It is a defence to a prosecution that a document required to be produced was not
relevant to the inquiry. This
is in addition to the general defences that are
available under Chapter 2 of the
Criminal Code
18.31 Secondly,
Royal Commissions Act
makes it an
offence for witnesses to refuse to be sworn or to make an affirmation, or to
answer any question relevant to the inquiry
put to the witness by a
Commissioner, or by a person authorised to examine or cross-examine
include any defences in addition to the general defences under the
18.32 Thirdly,
Royal Commissions Act
makes it an
offence to refuse or fail to produce a document which is required by a Royal
Commissioner in order to determine a claim
of client legal privilege, without
reasonable excuse.
The section
also makes it an offence to refuse or fail to produce a document required by a
Royal Commissioner after a Commissioner
has rejected a claim of client legal
privilege, without reasonable excuse. It is not a reasonable excuse to claim
that the document
is subject to client legal privilege, unless a court has found
the document to be subject to client legal
Royal Commissions Act
provides that where a
person has on any day done or omitted to do something which amounts to an
offence against
, and does or omits to do the same thing at any
meeting of the Commission held on some other day, each such act or omission
be a separate offence.
Need for offences in
the proposed
Inquiries Act
18.34 The powers of a Royal Commission to require attendance, production of
documents and the giving of evidence are discussed in
Chapter 11. The same
powers are proposed for Official
Indeed, the need for
similar coercive powers for inquiries other than Royal Commissions is a key
reason for proposing Official
18.35 The purpose of the offences of non-compliance is to give
‘teeth’ to the coercive powers discussed in
Chapter 11.
offences are common in federal legislation, particularly in relation to
investigatory bodies.
18.36 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether sanctions are required for Royal
Commissions, or other public inquiries, to operate
effectively.
Most stakeholders
supported the need for sanctions, with particularly strong support for sanctions
for non-compliance.
ALRC’s view
18.37 The power to compel evidence is critical to the functioning of an
inquiry. Typically, this is the primary way in which an inquiry
conducts its
investigation. If a person is able to refuse to comply without any legal
sanction, the very purpose of establishing
Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries may be frustrated.
18.38 Some legal sanction therefore is required to ensure compliance with the
critical information-gathering powers of an inquiry.
This need applies equally
to Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, since both have the same basic
powers to compel the production
or the giving of information. As discussed
above, the ALRC’s view is that this sanction should take the form of a
offence. The scope of the offences of non-compliance that should apply
to Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries is discussed in
Strict liability
18.39 The offences of non-compliance, with one exception, are strict
liability offences
is, they are offences where the prosecution is not required to prove that the
defendant had any particular mental state
when committing the
The defence of mistake
of fact, and the defence of intervening conduct or event, are available in
relation to strict liability
18.40 The offences were stated to be strict liability offences when they were
amended, in 2001, to be consistent with the principles
The Explanatory
Memorandum to the amending Act noted that these offences were ‘likely to
create strict liability offences given
the nature of the offences, the presence
of a defence of reasonable excuse and the relatively small penalties
18.41 Offences of strict liability depart from the premise that it is
generally neither fair, nor useful, to subject people to criminal
punishment for
unintended actions or unforeseen consequences unless they resulted from an
unjustified risk (ie
recklessness).
This principle is
reflected in s 5.6 of the
Criminal Code
, which provides that where
no fault element is prescribed in relation to conduct, the relevant fault
element is intention.
18.42 In 2002, the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills
(Senate Committee) reviewed strict liability offences in federal
legislation.
Committee recommended that strict liability should apply only where the penalty
does not include imprisonment, and where
the monetary penalty does not exceed
$6,600 for an individual and $33,000 for a body
The Senate Committee
also considered that strict liability may be appropriate in the following
circumstances: to ensure the integrity
of a regulatory regime; to protect the
general revenue; to overcome difficulties in prosecuting fault provisions; and
to overcome
arguments about the defendant’s knowledge of a legislative
provision which has been incorporated into the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
advises that a strict
liability offence is appropriate only if each of the following considerations
that the offence is not punishable by imprisonment and the monetary
penalty does not exceed the amount specified by the Senate Committee;
the punishment of offences not involving fault is likely to
significantly enhance the effectiveness of the enforcement regime; and
there are legitimate grounds for penalising persons lacking
‘fault’, for example, because they will be placed on notice
against any possible
contravention.
18.44 Federal
legislation governing other bodies with coercive powers generally do not provide
for strict liability in relation to
In its 1987 report
(ALRC 35), the ALRC recommended that there should be an
intention not to comply, or no reasonable attempt to comply, before these
offences are committed. Further, it suggested that punitive sanctions should be
only imposed where there is: an intention to disobey;
knowledge that the act or
omission constituted a breach of the summons or written notice; or reckless
indifference to the issue.
18.45 The New Zealand Law Commission (NZLC), in its recent review of
inquiries legislation in New Zealand, recommended that, for a
sanction to apply,
the acts of non-compliance should have to be committed
‘intentionally’.
This recommendation has been incorporated in the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ), which
is now before the New Zealand
Parliament.
18.46 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether offences of non-compliance should
continue to be strict liability
Only one stakeholder,
the Law Council, expressly addressed this issue. It noted in its submission that
‘the mental element
required for the offences in the [
Royal Commissions
] varies from strict liability to intention, without a clear rationale
for this variance’.
view, ‘greater consistency could be achieved by requiring a mental element
of intention for all offences contained within
ALRC’s view
18.47 In the ALRC’s view, there appears to be no reason to depart from
the general rule that the fault element of intention
should apply to the
offences of non-compliance. It usually would not be difficult to prove that a
person intended not to attend an
inquiry, or intended not to produce documents
or give evidence. Further, the justifications for a strict liability
offence—such
as improving the administration of a regulatory
scheme—do not apply to these offences. Finally, these offences are
by imprisonment. Applying strict liability runs counter to the advice
of the Senate Committee, and the advice given in the
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences
18.48 The ALRC proposes that the
Inquiries Act
should require that the
relevant acts or omissions in the offences of non-compliance to be committed
intentionally.
This proposal
also will allow a defendant to raise other defences under the
, such as that the person acted under duress in committing the
18.49 Rather than proposing an additional requirement that a person knew his
or her conduct constituted a breach or omission of a
notice or direction of the
the ALRC proposes that
notice of the consequences of non-compliance should be required, as discussed
below. This puts the burden
on the inquiry to inform a person of the
consequences of non-compliance, rather than putting the burden on the
prosecution to prove
18.50 Presently,
Royal Commissions Act
person to attend a hearing when required by a summons. The offence in
penalises ‘any person appearing as a witness before the Commission’
for refusing to swear or affirm, or answer a relevant
question. As discussed in
Chapter 15, it may be appropriate to conduct some inquiries more
informally, such as through the use of
meetings and interviews rather than
hearings. As a result, it is appropriate to extend the offences of
non-compliance so that they
apply to these more informal types of procedures.
Proposal 18–1, therefore, adapts the terminology in the current offences
for this purpose.
18.51 Another minor issue is that presently the offence of failing to produce
documents does not require that the person so required
has the capacity to
comply—for example, because they do not have possession of, or access to,
those documents. Although this
lack of capacity probably would be a
‘reasonable excuse’ for not complying, it is preferable to provide
that a person
does not commit an offence unless that person has ‘custody
or control’ of the documents or other things required. This
formulation is
used in other jurisdictions.
This is reflected in Proposal 18–1.
requirements
18.52 Under
Royal Commissions Act
, a written
notice to produce documents must specify the document or thing required, and the
time and place for production. There
are no other statutory requirements as to
what a summons or notice to produce should include. It appears, however, that a
who is ‘required’ to answer a relevant question must have
some notice of the consequences of not
18.53 For a person to be aware of their legal obligations, and to be able to
comply with them, a notice or summons needs to include
certain details. The
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
advises that notices for
attendance should include details as to whether the person may be accompanied by
a lawyer or other third
party. Notices for the production of documents or things
should identify how the information is to be provided. The period to comply
the production of documents, or attend a hearing, should be at least 14
18.54 This advice is similar to that given by the Administrative Review
Council (ARC), which recently reviewed the issue of notices
in the context of
the information-gathering powers of administrative
In addition, the ARC
recommended that all notices to produce information or attend hearings should
identify the legislative authority
under which they are issued, contact details
for further inquiries, and the recipient’s rights in relation to
18.55 The ARC also recommended that a notice should set out the consequences
for non-compliance. In some jurisdictions, this is required
by statute. The
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) provides that a notice to produce evidence must
‘explain the possible consequences of not complying with the
Commissions of Investigation Act 2004
(Ireland) requires a member of a
commission to provide a witness with a written statement specifying the powers
of the commission
and its intention to exercise those powers if the witness does
not co-operate.
Further, if a
witness is not legally represented, ‘the commission shall advise the
witness of his or her legal rights and obligations
while giving evidence on oath
or affirmation’.
18.56 This is similar to the requirement under s 137.1 of the
Criminal Code
, which prohibits the giving of false or misleading
information. This provides:
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply as a result of subparagraph (1)(c)(ii) if,
before the information was given by a person (the
first person
the person mentioned in that subparagraph (the
second person
second person did not take reasonable steps to inform the first person of the
existence of the offence against subsection (1).
(6) For the purposes of subsections (4) and (5), it is sufficient if the
following form of words is used:
‘Giving false or misleading information is a serious offence’.
18.57 In the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003) (Building Royal Commission), Commissioner Cole appended
to the report of
the inquiry an example of a notice to produce information. This identified the
legislative authority to compel production,
Commissioner Cole’s full name,
the terms of reference of the inquiry, the time and date for compliance and the
consequences
non-compliance.
18.58 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether there should be a requirement that the
defendant be given notice of the consequences of
non-compliance.
No stakeholders
addressed this issue in either submissions or consultations.
ALRC’s view
18.59 Before a person is subject to criminal sanctions, it is desirable that
a person is aware of their obligation to comply, their
rights in relation to
that obligation and how they can comply. This is an important procedural
safeguard. The proposed
Inquiries Act
, therefore,
should include
certain notice requirements.
18.60 In particular, a notice should specify: the consequences of
non-compliance; the reasons which could justify non-compliance (as
below); the time and date for compliance; and, in relation to the production of
documents or things, the manner of compliance.
In the ALRC’s view, there
also should be notice of the consequences of non-compliance when a person is
asked a question in
an inquiry which he or she is required to answer. These are
the most important matters of which the recipient of a notice should
and these requirements are reflected in Proposal 18–2.
Reasonable excuse
Royal Commissions Act
provides that it is not an offence to
fail to attend a hearing, or to fail to produce documents or other things as
required by a Royal
Commission, if the person has a ‘reasonable
Similarly, the
offences in
relating to legal professional privilege are not
committed if a person has a reasonable
The offence of refusing
to swear or affirm, or answer a question, however, does not allow for any
‘reasonable excuse’.
Royal Commissions Act
defines ‘reasonable
excuse’ as ‘an excuse which would excuse an act or omission of a
similar nature’ by a
witness before a court of law or, in the case of a
person served a written notice to produce, a person served with a subpoena in
connection with a proceeding before a court of
The Act also provides that
it is not a reasonable excuse to fail to produce a document on the ground of the
privilege against
self-incrimination,
of a claim of client legal privilege, unless a court or the Royal Commissioner
determines that the claim is
18.63 Apart from these provisions, however, the Act is silent on what other
circumstances would constitute a reasonable excuse. In
the report of the
Building Royal Commission, Commissioner Cole recommended that the Act should
provide further that it is ‘not
a reasonable excuse that the person needs,
wants, or asserts that it requires copies of the documents and that the
Commission has
refused to meet the cost of those copies; or that it has not yet
been reimbursed for the cost of
compliance’.
18.64 The High Court has made it clear that there is no exhaustive list of
what constitutes a reasonable excuse.
When legislatures enact defences such as ‘reasonable excuse’ they
effectively give, and intend to give, the courts power
to determine the content
of such defences. Defences in this form are categories of indeterminate
reference that have no content until
a court makes a decision. They effectively
require the courts to prescribe the relevant rule of conduct after the fact of
its occurrence.
18.65 It may be a ‘reasonable excuse’ if a person is physically
unable to attend a hearing, for reasons such as illness,
injury or inability to
travel. A witness also may be able to claim reasonable excuse on the basis of
practicality, for example: if
it is impracticable to produce the volume of
information requested in the time available; the witness is unable to locate
after making a reasonable effort to find them; or the witness has not
been paid travel expenses where he or she is entitled to
A reasonable excuse also
may be that the person is not obliged to produce a document or answer a question
because of another statutory
provision or the common
Clarifying ‘reasonable
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that the
phrase ‘section X does not apply if the person has a reasonable
excuse’ should not be used in the context
of Commonwealth offences,
because the phrase is ‘too open ended and places uncertainty in the way of
any prosecution as to
what defence might be
Framing Commonwealth Offences
encourages reliance instead on general
defences such as duress, mistake and ignorance of fact provided in the
Criminal Code
additional specific defences to be set out in
legislation.
18.67 The NZLC considered this issue in relation to the similar phrase
‘without sufficient cause’ in the
Commissions of Inquiry Act
(NZ). It noted that the phrase allowed a Commissioner to ‘take
into account a broad range of matters which might include the
impact on a
witness’s professional or personal reputation, or commercial interests,
but equally the interests of other individuals
and the public at large in seeing
the inquiry fulfil its
18.68 The NZLC considered that the phrase was too broad, and recommended the
adoption of a list of circumstances of lawful excuse
from s 121 of the
Coroners Act 2006
(NZ), which is now incorporated in cl 30(2)
of the Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ). This provides that a person can refuse to
comply with
a notice requiring the supply of documentation or information
(a) compliance would be prevented by a privilege or immunity that the person
would have as a witness or counsel, were that person
giving evidence or acting
as counsel in civil proceedings before a court; or
(b) compliance is prevented by an enactment, rule of law, or order or direction
of a court prohibiting or restricting disclosure,
or the manner of disclosure,
of any document, information, or thing; or
(c) compliance would be likely to prejudice the maintenance of the law,
including the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution,
or punishment
of offences, including the right to a fair trial.
Procedure for determining ‘reasonable
18.69 There is presently no procedure in the
Royal Commissions Act
that allows a claim of reasonable excuse to be examined by the Royal Commission,
except in the case of client legal privilege. This
may cause practical
difficulties. If a person refuses to comply because he or she believes the
information is protected by a privilege,
there are only two ways of resolving
the dispute. First, the person may be prosecuted for failing to comply and claim
privilege as
a ‘reasonable excuse’ for failing to comply. Secondly,
the person may seek judicial review of the decision in a
The same issues arise in
cases of other forms of reasonable excuses, such as an excuse that it is
impracticable to comply with the
Royal Commissions Act
sets out a procedure for examination
of claims of client legal privilege. Under
Commissions Act
a claim that a document is protected by client legal
privilege may be determined by the member of the Royal Commission who required
production of the document. The Royal Commissioner may ask for further documents
for the purpose of determining the claim, and may
decide whether to accept or
reject the claim. The section also allows a court to determine the claim of
client legal privilege.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that
‘only a court can resolve any dispute about privilege’, because it
is ‘neither appropriate for a person’s
claim of privilege to be
treated as definitive, nor for the Commonwealth to be able to make a binding
determination’.
Chapter 14, the ALRC proposes that an inquiry should have the power to
refer a question of law to a
This may be used, for
example, to determine whether a person has a valid claim for privilege.
18.72 Should there be a procedure in the proposed
Inquiries Act
examining reasonable excuses, similar to that in
Commissions Act
? For example, the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) provides
that a person may, upon receipt of a notice to produce, claim that he or she is
unable to comply with a notice under
the section, or it is not reasonable in all
the circumstances to require him or her to comply. This claim is to be
determined by
the chair of the inquiry, who may revoke or vary the notice on
that ground.
Submissions and
consultations
18.73 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether the defence of ‘reasonable
excuse’ in the
Royal Commissions Act
should be replaced with a list
of specific circumstances in which a witness may refuse to attend a hearing or
to produce a document
or other thing, and whether there should be a similar list
for other public inquiries.
18.74 The few stakeholders who addressed this issue unanimously supported
some clarification of the reasonable excuse provision. The
Community and Public
Sector Union (CPSU) stated:
The current formulation of ‘reasonable excuse’ is confusing. The
Issues Paper itself identifies a number of privileges
in respect of which
it is unclear whether they constitute a ‘reasonable excuse’ for
the purposes of the
Royal Commissions Act
. A comprehensive list of
the circumstances where the defence is available would provide far greater
certainty to witnesses and their
legal counsel.
In our view, there should be a similar list for other public
18.75 Other stakeholders considered that the list should be non-exhaustive
because it was difficult to foresee all the circumstances
in which it might be
reasonable to refuse to comply. No stakeholders in either submissions or
consultations expressed any views on
the desirability of a procedure to examine
reasonable excuses, although it was raised in consultations as a practical
Clarification of reasonable
18.76 As discussed in Chapters 16 and 17, it is desirable to clarify which
privileges and immunities, and which statutory exemptions
of obligations to
disclose information, would excuse a person for failing to produce a document or
thing required by a Royal Commission.
Similarly, it is desirable to clarify when
a person has a reasonable excuse for failing to attend a hearing. A person
should understand
in what circumstances he or she may refuse to comply without
being subject to criminal sanctions.
18.77 In the ALRC’s view, the phrase ‘reasonable excuse’
could be clarified by setting out a non-exhaustive list
of the circumstances
which constitute a reasonable excuse. The ALRC proposes a non-exhaustive list
because it is concerned that it
is difficult to foresee all the possible
circumstances in which it might be reasonable not to comply with a notice or
18.78 In the case of the offence of failing to attend a hearing, there may be
a range of physical or practical reasons, such as illness,
that might constitute
a ‘reasonable excuse’, in that these reasons make it impossible or
impracticable to attend.
18.79 In the case of the offence of failing to produce a document or thing,
the impossibility or impracticability of compliance would
likewise justify a
refusal to comply. The test of impossibility or impracticability would address
the recommendation made in the
Building Royal Commission that the costs of
compliance should not afford a reasonable
18.80 Further, it should be a ‘reasonable excuse’ to fail to
produce a document or thing if the document or thing is protected
by a privilege
or public interest immunity, or by a secrecy provision, as discussed in Chapters
Other reasons that
would justify a failure to produce a document or thing include that disclosure
of the document or thing is prohibited
by the directions or orders of a court,
or disclosure would have the tendency to interfere with the administration of
18.81 Similar reasons should apply to the offence of refusing to answer a
question when required by an inquiry. While there is not
presently a defence of
reasonable excuse, there does not seem to be a reason for not allowing such a
defence for refusing to answer
a question. It would seem that reasonable excuses
that would justify non-production of documents would equally justify
non-disclosure
of evidence given orally. There does not, however, appear to be
any reasonable excuse for the offence of refusing to swear or affirm,
specific defence is
Procedure for determining claims
18.82 In the ALRC’s view, a procedure to examine a claim of reasonable
excuse should be enacted, for two reasons. First, if
there is a valid reasonable
excuse, a person should be able to resolve the dispute without either risking
prosecution or instituting
court proceedings. Secondly, if there is a claim that
there is a reasonable excuse, in the interests of efficiency a Royal Commission
or Official Inquiry should be able to examine the reasons for the claim and
decide whether the document or other thing should still
be required.
18.83 The question of whether there is a ‘reasonable excuse’ is,
of course, a question of law, as is the question of whether
a document is
privileged. If there is a dispute between the chair and a participant as to
whether there is a reasonable excuse, the
participant can choose (as is now the
case) to seek judicial review of the decision. In Chapter 14, the ALRC
proposes that Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries should have the power to
refer questions of law to the Federal
Such a procedure also
could be used to determine whether there is a reasonable excuse, including a
valid claim of privilege.
18.84 It is a defence to a prosecution under
Royal Commissions Act
, and under
that the documents or
other things sought are not relevant to the matters into which the Commission is
Similarly, under
Royal Commissions Act
, a witness is only required to
answer questions that are ‘relevant to the inquiry’
reflects a similar requirement in relation to the refusal of witnesses in court
to answer question put to them.
18.85 As it is the role of a Royal Commission to undertake a broad
investigation, courts have been generous in defining what might
be considered
relevant to an inquiry. In
Ross v Costigan
, the High Court found that
Commissions will not be prevented from pursuing a line of inquiry unless they
are ‘going off on
a frolic of their own’:
[Where] there is a real as distinct from a fanciful possibility that a line of
questioning may provide information directly or even
indirectly relevant to the
matters which the Commission is required to investigate under its letters
patent, such a line of questioning
should … be treated as relevant to the
18.86 There has been no suggestion that this test of relevance causes
problems. In the ALRC’s view, it is clearly desirable
that a person should
be penalised only in relation to material or answers that are relevant to an
inquiry, liberally interpreted.
The ALRC therefore proposes that the
Inquiries Act
should provide that a question a person is required to
answer must be relevant to the inquiry.
Royal Commissions Act
provides that if a
person has on one day done or omitted to do something constituting an offence
under ss 3 or 6 of the Act, and does
or omits to do the same thing on a
different day, each act or omission is to be treated as a separate offence.
includes a general provision that
has a similar effect. It provides:
(1) Where, under a law of the Commonwealth, an act or thing is required
to be done within a particular period or before a particular
time, then, unless
the contrary intention appears, the obligation to do that act or thing
continues, notwithstanding that the period
has expired or the time has passed,
until the act or thing is done.
(2) Where a refusal or failure to comply with a requirement referred to
in subsection (1) is an offence against a law of the Commonwealth,
is guilty of an offence in respect of each day during which the person refuses
or fails to comply with that requirement,
including the day of a conviction for
any such offence or any later day.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
, referring to this
section, states that ‘continuing offences provide a strong incentive for
compliance with a continuing obligation
(eg to submit an annual report by a
specified day) in the aftermath of an initial
contravention’.
notes that, if this section is intended to apply, this should be made clear in
the legislation and the maximum penalty should
be set as a daily
penalty—that is, it should be set significantly lower than if the penalty
was a global maximum.
18.90 There has been no suggestion that
Royal Commissions
causes problems. In the ALRC’s view, such a provision has the
desirable effect of providing a continuing incentive to comply
with a notice to
produce information.
is, however, no longer necessary in light
, and the ALRC does not propose that a
similar provision be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act
Proposal 18–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide,
with respect to Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, that a person commits
an offence if the person, without
reasonable excuse, refuses or fails to:
(a) swear an oath or make an affirmation when required to do so by an
inquiry member;
(b) answer a question when required by do so by an inquiry member, or a
person authorised by an inquiry member to ask the question;
(c) comply with a notice requiring a person to attend or appear; or
(d) comply with a notice requiring a person to produce a document or other
thing, in the custody or control of that person.
Proposal 18–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that a notice requiring a person to attend or appear before, or requiring a
person to produce a document or other thing
to, a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry should include:
(a) the consequences of not complying;
(b) what is a reasonable excuse for not complying, as provided in the Act;
(c) the time and date for compliance; and
(d) the manner in which the person should comply with a notice requiring
the production of a document or other thing.
Proposal 18–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that the offence of refusing or failing to answer a question is committed only
if the person refuses or fails to answer
after being informed that it is an
offence to do so by the person requiring the answer.
Proposal 18–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that it is a reasonable excuse to refuse or fail to comply with a notice to
attend or appear before, or to produce
a document or other thing to, a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry if an inquiry member determines that it is
impossible or impracticable
for the person to comply, for example, for physical
or practical reasons.
Proposal 18–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that a reasonable excuse to refuse or fail to produce a document or other thing,
or answer a question, includes the
fact that the document, thing, or answer:
(a) is not relevant to the matters into which the Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry is inquiring;
(b) is protected by client legal privilege, the privilege against
self-incrimination, parliamentary privilege, or public interest
subject to the provisions of the proposed Act;
(c) is prohibited from being disclosed by the provision of another Act,
subject to the provisions of the proposed Act;
(d) is prohibited from disclosure by an order of a court; or
(e) would have the tendency to interfere with the administration of justice,
if disclosed.
Proposal 18–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, upon receiving a notice requiring attendance or production of documents or
other things, a person may make a
claim to a member of a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry that he or she is unable to comply, or has a reasonable excuse
complying. If the member considers that the claim has been made out, the
member may vary or revoke the requirement in his or her
discretion.
Contravention of
Section 6D(3)
Royal Commissions Act
empowers a Royal
Commission to direct that material should not be published, or not be published
except in the manner, and to such
persons, as the Commission specifies. This
material includes evidence given or produced, the contents of any document, a
description
of any thing, and any information identifying
Section 6D(4)
makes it an offence to make ‘any publication in contravention’ of
any such direction. The section does not include any
defences, although the
general defences under Chapter 2 of the
Criminal Code
18.92 Chapter 15 discusses the power to prohibit or restrict publication
in the context of restricting public access. The power to
prohibit or restrict
publication may be used to protect important public interests. For example, such
a power may be exercised to
protect the confidentiality of sensitive personal or
government information, to protect a witness from undue hardship or prejudice,
or to protect the administration of justice in a related legal proceeding.
18.93 In Chapter 15, the ALRC proposes that Royal Commissions and
Official Inquiries be empowered to make directions prohibiting or
restricting
public access to a hearing, publication of any information that might enable a
person to identify a person giving information
to the inquiry, or publication of
any information provided to the
In Chapter 13,
the ALRC proposes that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries be empowered to
make directions relating to the form
of production or use of national security
information.
These directions
may relate, for example, to: restrictions on who has access to national security
information; the way national security
information is disclosed; and the use,
reproduction and disclosure of national security information.
18.94 Four issues arise in relation to the offence of contravening a
direction of an inquiry not to publish certain material. First,
is there a need
for such an offence? Secondly, should an offence also be created in relation to
contraventions of directions prohibiting
or restricting public access to a
hearing? Thirdly, should an offence also be created in relation to
contraventions of directions
relating to national security? Fourthly, should
there be any requirement of knowledge of the direction before the offence is
18.95 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether any changes should be made to the
offence of publishing in contravention of a direction of
Commission.
No stakeholders
commented on this offence.
18.96 The breach of a direction not to publish has the potential to cause
serious harm affecting a wide range of interests in the
confidentiality or
sensitivity of information, and to cause hardship and prejudice to individuals
and interfere with the administration
of justice. The potential for harm is
identical to that which may occur in relation to the breach of a suppression
order of a court.
Further, if there was no serious legal consequence for
breaching such a direction, the authority of the inquiry would be undermined.
the ALRC’s view, contravention of non-publication directions should
continue to be deterred by a criminal sanction.
18.97 The same reasons justify a similar offence in relation to
contraventions of directions relating to public access to hearings.
The power to
prohibit or restrict public access to a hearing serves interests similar to
non-publication directions, and similar
contravention.
18.98 The justification applies with even greater force to directions
relating to national security information. Clearly, disclosure
of information
which has the potential to prejudice national security information may cause
serious harm.
The seriousness
of the potential harm warrants a criminal sanction to deter such breaches.
18.99 A person is only culpable of contravening these directions if he or she
is, or ought to have been, aware of a direction. There
are concerns about the
availability and accessibility of similar orders made by courts, and there is a
risk that a person may inadvertently
contravene a direction and be subject to
criminal sanctions.
concern is reinforced in the context of Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries
which, it may be expected, often may be held
in private, not sit in a regular
place or time, and not have a media liaison officer who can ensure media
organisations are aware
of directions not to publish or attend. The ALRC is
concerned that it would be unfair to impose criminal sanctions unless a person
knew, or ought to have known, of the direction. This seems preferable to making
the offence one of strict liability, as it places
the responsibility on the
inquiry to ensure that the media and other people have knowledge of the
Proposal 18–7
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that a person commits an offence by contravening a direction of a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry, where that
person knew or should have known of
that direction. The offence should apply to directions made under the proposed
Act concerning
national security information, the prohibition or restriction of
public access to a hearing, and the prohibition or restriction of
publication.
Interference with
evidence or witnesses
Royal Commissions Act
includes a number of offences that
prohibit interference with evidence or witnesses. It prohibits giving false or
misleading information
to a Commission and the destruction or alteration of
It also prohibits a
number of acts that would influence the evidence of witnesses, including:
preventing them from attending or giving
fraud, deceit or false
representations;
injury or disadvantage on
and dismissing
witnesses or prejudicing their
employment.
Parallel offences in
Crimes Act 1914
18.101 There are similar offences in the
that apply to
proceedings’.
‘Judicial proceedings’ are defined to include a proceeding before a
body or person acting under the law of the Commonwealth
in which evidence may be
taken on oath,
which would
include Royal Commissions.
18.102 The table below sets out the parallel offences under the
Commissions Act
respectively.
Table: 18.1 Offences
Royal Commissions Act
False or misleading information
Bribery of witness
Fraud on witness
Destroying documents or other things
Preventing witness from attending
Injury to witness
Dismissal by employers of witness
18.103 There are some differences between these parallel offences. The giving
of false or misleading evidence prohibited under
Commissions Act
would generally be punishable under
does not cover misleading evidence. The giving
of false or misleading information or documents, however, is also prohibited
ss 137.1 and 137.2 of the
Criminal Code
, although this
attracts a much lower maximum penalty (as discussed in Chapter 20).
18.104 The offence of destroying documents or other things in the
Commissions Act
is more easily proven than the equivalent offence under the
. This is because the offence under the
Royal Commissions
only requires that a person be reckless as to whether the document or
thing is or may be required in evidence and does not require
an intention to
prevent it being used in evidence.
18.105 The offence of injury to a witness under
Commissions Act
is also slightly different from its close equivalent in
, in that it extends to injuries caused as a
result of a person having given evidence or produced a document.
Section 36A
however, extends to injuries for or on account of a person having appeared as a
witness, or being about to appear as a witness.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that the
offences in the
Criminal Code
should not be
replicated because:
broadly framed provisions of general application were placed in the
to avoid the technical distinctions, loopholes, additional prosecution
difficulty and appearance of incoherence associated with having
slightly different provisions to similar effect across Commonwealth
, the ALRC also recommended the repeal of statutory
offences where the same ground was fully covered by the
The inquiries
legislation of the ACT simply provides that a proceeding of a commission is a
‘legal proceeding’ for the
purposes of the relevant chapter of the
Criminal Code
and includes a note indicating the offences included in that
18.108 Should the offences in the
Royal Commissions Act
where a parallel offence exists in either the
Criminal Code
? The Law Council was the only stakeholder to address the
issue. It questioned the need for 17 separate offences under the
Commissions Act
, and encouraged the ALRC
to review each of the offences contained in the [
Royal Commissions Act
to determine whether the conduct to which they are directed is already
adequately addressed in the
Criminal Code
whether each particular offence continues to be
18.109 Interference with evidence or witnesses is subject to offences in the
Royal Commissions Act
. The conduct is also covered by similar offences in
Criminal Code
. In the ALRC’s view,
there is no need for the proposed
Inquiries Act
to include these
offences, in light of the desirability for consistency and accessibility of the
criminal law. Instead, reliance should
be placed on the general offences in the
Criminal Code
18.110 The ALRC notes that there are a few differences between the offences
Royal Commissions Act
and the offences under the
. These differences, however, are not justified by reference to the
special context of inquiries, but appear to reflect different
legislative
choices made at an earlier time. For example, the slightly broader offence of
destroying a document or other thing in
Royal Commissions Act
requires recklessness, rather than intention as required under the
. The requirement of intention, however, is consistent with the general
principles under the
Criminal Code
that conduct should ordinarily be
penalised only if committed
intentionally.
differences, therefore, need not be retained.
18.111 The ALRC proposes that, for the sake of clarity, and in line with the
Royal Commissions Act 1991
(ACT), there should be a note in the
legislation alerting the reader to the offences that apply under the
Criminal Code
. This note may be inserted, for example,
underneath the offences of non-compliance in the proposed
Inquiries Act
There is, however, no need to provide that the proceeding of an inquiry is a
judicial proceeding for the purposes of the
Criminal Code
, as is done in
Royal Commissions Act 1991
18.112 There may, however, be a need to adapt some of the terminology in the
offences under the
. These offences refer to
‘witness’, ‘subpoena’ or ‘summons’ and
‘testimony’. This
terminology would be unlikely to capture the more
informal procedures which may be used by inquiries, as discussed in
Chapter 15.
This would have the undesirable effect of criminalising some
actions in respect of inquiries conducted formally, while not criminalising
same actions in respect of inquiries conducted more informally. The drafting of
these offences may need to be adapted to ensure
that more informal types of
inquiry procedures are included.
Offences relating to
Commissioners or staff
Royal Commissions Act
does not contain any offences dealing
with the bribery or corruption of Commissioners, staff or counsel assisting the
Commission.
Nor does it contain any offences prohibiting interference with
Commissioners, staff, and counsel assisting.
18.114 Such conduct may, however, be subject to
Criminal Code
relating to ‘Commonwealth public officials’. This term is defined
broadly in the Dictionary to the
Criminal Code
, and would include
individuals employed by the Commonwealth or contracted service providers to the
Commonwealth, or any individual
exercising powers or performing functions under
the proposed
Inquiries Act
18.115 The offences relating to Commonwealth public officials include:
and provision of
corrupting benefits;
public office;
causing harm,
or threatening to cause harm, to a Commonwealth public
making unwarranted
demands of a Commonwealth public
and obstruction of
a Commonwealth public
18.116 As discussed above, the ALRC is of the view that the proposed
Inquiries Act
should not duplicate any offences in the
. Instead, it proposes that these offences should
be referred to in a legislative note, extending the terminology where
appropriate.
For the same reasons, it proposes a legislative note be included in
the proposed
Inquiries Act
referring to the application of the offences
Criminal Code
prohibiting certain conduct in relation to
Commonwealth public officials.
Disclosures by
Commissioners or staff
18.117 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether there should be a specific provision
prohibiting disclosures of information obtained by the
Royal Commission, its
staff or counsel and solicitors assisting the inquiry, except for the purposes
of conducting the inquiry or
for purposes authorised under the
Commissions Act
. Such conduct usually will fall within the general provision
prohibiting disclosures by ‘Commonwealth officers’ in s
18.118 The ALRC currently is undertaking a review of secrecy provisions in
Commonwealth legislation and is examining, among other
things, whether s 70
should be repealed and replaced by an updated offence in the
. In the Discussion Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
(DP 74), the
ALRC proposes the replacement of s 70 of the
general secrecy provision that focuses on harm to specified interests. Under the
ALRC’s proposal, the general secrecy
provision would apply to
‘Commonwealth officers’, defined in a way that would include inquiry
members, legal practitioners
assisting an inquiry, and its
The ALRC further
proposes that Commonwealth secrecy offences should generally be repealed where
the scope of the offence substantially
replicates the proposed general secrecy
18.119 In light of these proposals, the ALRC makes no proposal in relation to
this issue in this Inquiry, except that a legislative
note referring to the
application of the secrecy offence in s 70 of the
new secrecy offence of general application to Commonwealth officers) should be
included in the proposed
Inquiries Act
for the sake of clarity.
This is in line with its other proposals that offences under the
Criminal Code
, where applicable in the context of Royal
Commissions or Official Inquiries,
should be indicated in the proposed
Inquiries Act
Proposal 18–8
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should include
legislative notes indicating that the following offences apply to Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries:
(a) offences under Part III of the
Crimes Act 1914
prohibit interference with evidence or witnesses;
(b) offences under Parts 7.6 and 7.8 of the
Criminal Code
prohibit certain conduct in relation to Commonwealth public officials; and
(c) offences in the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) that restrict the
disclosure of information by Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries.
In Ch 5, the ALRC proposes that the
Royal Commissions Act
should be amended to enable the establishment of
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries and renamed the
Proposal 5–1.
Royal Commissions Act 1902
is dealt with separately in
Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
Evidence Act 1995
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, IP 34 (2008),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Corporations Act 2001
See Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
The standard of proof in civil
cases is on the ‘balance of probabilities’, but the standard of
proof applied in a particular
case will depend on the type of order sought and
the gravity of the consequences:
Chief Executive Officer of Customs v
Labrador Liquor Wholesale Pty Ltd
(2003) 216 CLR
The maximum financial penalty
under a civil penalty provision can be higher than the maximum fine for a
parallel criminal offence.
This is justified on the basis that the adverse
effects of a criminal conviction should be taken into account when considering
relative severity of criminal and civil financial penalties. See Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and
Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Rec 26–3;
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties
in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Constitution
, and the doctrine of the separation of powers, only judicial
officers may exercise the judicial power of the Commonwealth, including
imposition of fines:
R v White; Ex Parte Byrnes
[1963] HCA 58
(1963) 109 CLR 665
669–670, or other punishment for an offence:
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Munro
[1926] HCA 58
(1926) 38 CLR 153
Taxation Administration Act
regulator may have a limited discretion whether to impose the penalty for the
breach or to withdraw the penalty if the facts
on which the breach is based are
incorrect, and can in many cases remit some or all of the penalties after they
have been imposed.
See Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative
Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Ch
Ibid, Recs 12–1,
12–2, 12–8. See also Recs 12–3 to 12–7. Australian
Government Attorney-General’s
Department,
A Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
also expresses the view that an infringement notice scheme should apply only to
offences which do not require proof of
fault and contain physical elements
readily capable of assessment by an enforcement
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 9–2.
Liberty Victoria,
6 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
The institution
of criminal proceedings is discussed in Ch
Australian Government Solicitor,
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
These include the defence
of mistake of fact and the defence of an intervening conduct or event:
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 6.1, 10.1.
Pursuant to
Royal Commissions Act
, which makes a witness examined or cross-examined by
an legal practitioner authorised under that section subject to the same
liabilities
as if he or she had been examined by a
Commissioner.
The Act uses the term
‘legal professional privilege’. The term ‘client legal
privilege’ is preferred here
because it is used in the
Evidence Act
, div 1, and it reflects the nature of the privilege as
one belonging to the client, rather than the lawyer: Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal
Investigations
, ALRC 107 (2007), [1.16]–[1.17].
Client legal privilege is discussed
Proposals 11–1,
See the discussion in
As the United Kingdom
Government noted: United Kingdom Department of Constitutional Affairs,
Consultation Paper—Effective Inquiries
See the discussion in Parliament
of Australia—Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Appropriate Basis for Penalty Provisions in Legislation Comparable to the
Productivity Commission Bill 1996
, Report No 8 (1998),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 9–1.
The exception is
the offence of refusing or failing to produce a document or other thing when
required by written notice (as opposed
to a summons):
Royal Commissions Act
It is not clear why this offence is not a strict
liability offence. The amending Act introducing the offence was introduced in
same year as the other offences were provided to be strict liability
Royal Commissions and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2001
(Cth) sch cl 4C.
Criminal Code
(Cth), the mental state required to commit an offence is
known as a ‘fault element’: ch 2, pt 2.2, div
Criminal Code
ss 6.1, 10.1.
Prime Minister
and Cabinet Legislation Amendment (Application of Criminal Code) Act 2001
(Cth) sch 1, cll 20, 22, 26.
Explanatory Memorandum, Prime Minister and Cabinet Legislation Amendment
(Application of Criminal Code) Bill 2001
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Application of Absolute and Strict Liability Offences in Commonwealth
Legislation
, Report 6/2002 (2002).
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987), [522]–[526],
New Zealand Law Commission,
A New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Rec
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) cl 30(b).
The Bill is discussed in detail in other chapters of this Discussion
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 9–3(a).
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
Proposal 18–1 does not
specify intention, but this would be the effect of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 5.6(1).
As recommended in Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987), [522]–[526],
Royal Commissions
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Hammond v Aboudi
[2005] WASCA 204
(2005) 31 WAR 533
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Administrative Review
The Coercive Information-Gathering Powers of Government
, Report No 48 (2008), 33–38.
Ibid, Principle 14,
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 21(3).
Commissions of Investigation Act
Final Report
of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
vol 2, Appendix 9.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35
(2009), Question 9–3(c).
Royal Commissions Act 1902
definition was extended after the decision that the definition in
not extend to persons required to produce a document by written notice:
Ltd v Cole (No 5)
[2006] FCA 1234
(2006) 155 FCR 30
Royal Commissions Act
The privilege against self-incrimination is discussed
(5). This is discussed in Ch 16.
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
(2003), vol 2, 80.
Taikato v The Queen
[1996] HCA 28
(1996) 186 CLR 454
S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions
and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Criminal Code
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
New Zealand Law Commission,
New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008),
S Donaghue,
Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 21(4).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Community and Public Sector
22 May 2009.
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
(2003), vol 2, 80.
Chapters 16–17 discuss the circumstances in which privileges, public
interest immunity and secrecy provisions may apply to
information compelled by
an inquiry. The ALRC proposes that the privilege against self-incrimination
should not apply to information
compelled by a Royal Commission (although such
information could not be used directly in subsequent criminal or penalty
proceedings),
and proposes that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries should
not be able to override a secrecy provision, subject to two exceptions:
Proposals 16–1, 16–2, 17–2, 17–3.
This is discussed in Ch
The general defences in pt 2.3 of
Criminal Code
(Cth) (such as lack of capacity, mistake of fact, and
duress) would continue to apply.
Proposal 14–1.
Commissions Act 1902
Attorney General v
[1963] 2 QB 477
Attorney General v Lundin
(1982) 75 Crim
(1982) 59 FLR 184, 335. See S Donaghue,
Royal Commissions and
Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
(2001), 46. This issue is also discussed in
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Section 6D(3)
applies only to evidence once it has been given or produced:
[1989] VicRp 16
[1989] VR 177
include defences of lack of capacity, defences of mistake of fact, and defences
involving external factors:
Criminal Code
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 9–4. The issue relating to the enumeration of factors to be
considered before issuing such
a direction is considered in Ch
National security information
is discussed in Ch 13.
New Zealand
Law Commission,
Suppressing Names and Evidence
, IP 13 (2008),
[7.14]–[7.15]. The Australian Standing Committee of Attorneys-General are
proposing, however, a national register
of suppression orders: Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General,
Breach of a suppression
order in a court may be justified as a strict liability offence, because of the
difficulty of proving the
knowledge of the media organisation: New South Wales
Law Reform Commission,
Contempt by Publication
, Report 100 (2003), Ch
Royal Commissions Act
Crimes Act 1914
. These offences were reviewed in Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Criminal Code—Chapter 7: Administration of Justice Offences
The recommendations of the Model Criminal Code Officers Committee have not yet
been implemented by the
Commonwealth.
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) ss 137.1, 137.2, which apply to false or misleading
information.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
Criminal Code
Ch 7. This includes offences against the administration of justice similar
to those provided for in the
Criminal Code
Royal Commissions Act
Inquiries Act 1991
Law Council of
19 May 2009.
(Cth) s 5.6.
Criminal Code
(ACT) s 701, the definition of ‘judicial
proceeding’ in s 31 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) does not
provide that a legal proceeding means, inter alia, a proceeding that a law
declares to be a legal proceeding for the
purposes of those
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 141.1.
s 142.1. This differs from bribery of Commonwealth public officials in that
there is no need for intent to influence the
Ibid s 142.2. This
prohibits them from using their position, or influence or information acquired
because of it, with the intention
of dishonestly obtaining a benefit or causing
detriment to another.
ss 147.1, 147.2.
ss 139.1, 139.2.
Commonwealth officers
are defined as those appointed to an office, or employed by the Commonwealth,
and also include those outside
this definition who perform services for the
Commonwealth:
Crimes Act 1914
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, DP 74 (2009), Proposals 6–1,
Proposal 12–1(a).
19. Contempt
Introduction
Contempt of court
Sentencing powers
Application of contempt to public inquiries
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Other ways to sanction conduct
Contempt sanctions
Statutory offences
Court enforcement orders
Other issues
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
The prohibited conduct
Contempt in the face of a Royal Commission
Insults and false and defamatory words
Residual contempt
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
19. Contempt
Introduction
19.1 In this chapter, the ALRC examines the offence created by
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth). Other offences created by the Act
are dealt with in Chapter 18. The offence created by s 6O requires
separate consideration
because of its relationship with a distinct branch of the
law, the law of contempt of court.
19.2 In this chapter, the ALRC commences with an explanation of the law of
contempt of court, and its relevance to
Royal Commissions
. It then considers whether the law of contempt should be applied to
inquiries established under the
Inquiries Act
proposed in this Discussion
Paper, namely, Royal Commissions and Official
Finally, the ALRC
considers whether any of the conduct prohibited by s 6O should be
prohibited by the proposed
Inquiries Act
19.3 In its 1987 report,
, the ALRC considered in detail the
law of contempt of court, including the relationship between Royal Commissions
and contempt of
report’s recommendations were not
implemented.
In the following
section, the ALRC sets out the aspects of contempt of court that are relevant
for the purposes of this Inquiry.
Contempt of
19.4 Contempt of court is a body of rules and procedures which are designed
to protect the authority and processes of courts. This
body of legal rules and
procedures is of ancient origin.
The concept of contempt is unique to the common law, and has several unusual
19.5 There are three broad categories of conduct that may constitute contempt
First, contempt of court
may involve conduct that amounts to interference with proceedings, including:
interference with the progress
of proceedings (known as ‘contempt in the
face of the court’); interference with participants in proceedings; and
interference
with evidence in proceedings. For example, it may be contempt to
disrupt a court room, bribe a judge, or destroy a vital document.
19.6 Secondly, certain publication of material may amount to ‘contempt
by publication’. Most commonly, publication is
prohibited because it may
influence the deliberations of a jury in a criminal trial. For example, the
publisher of a newspaper article
that expresses views on whether a person is
guilty during a trial may be in contempt of court. Another form of contempt by
publication
may occur when a publication casts imputations on the integrity or
propriety of judicial conduct (known as ‘scandalising the
such as by alleging that the judge is acting for ulterior purposes.
19.7 Thirdly, it may be contempt of court to fail to comply with an order
made by a court, or an undertaking given to a court. A failure
to comply with
court orders or undertakings differs from the other types of contempt because
traditionally this has been considered
a ‘civil’ rather than a
‘criminal’ contempt. This distinction is increasingly becoming less
important. Unless
indicated otherwise, the following discussion refers to both
civil and criminal contempt.
19.8 Much of the conduct that constitutes contempt may also constitute a
separate criminal offence. For example, bribery of witnesses
and destruction of
evidence constitute offences under
Crimes Act 1914
As discussed in
Chapter 18, the
Royal Commissions Act
includes a number of criminal
offences that cover similar conduct in relation to Royal Commissions, such as
failing to comply with
notices to attend or produce evidence. The Act also
contains a number of provisions prohibiting interference with evidence or
19.9 The procedure by which contempt is punished is its most unusual feature.
An ordinary criminal offence is dealt with in one of
two ways: either by trial
on indictment before a judge and, usually, a jury; or a summary trial by a
magistrate or magistrates. The
latter is described as summary because it is
faster and more informal than the procedure on
indictment.
19.10 Contempt also is punished by a procedure referred to as
‘summary’, because the procedure is speedy and informal.
contempt procedure differs from other summary proceedings, however, principally
because cases of alleged contempt are dealt with
by a judge or judges sitting
without a jury. The contempt procedure does not involve any preliminary
proceedings—such as committal
proceedings before a magistrate—which
usually precede a trial on
indictment.
19.11 The evidence used in the contempt procedure is different from that used
in an ordinary criminal trial. In cases of ‘contempt
in the face of the
court’, what the judge saw or heard is the primary source of
‘evidence’. In other contempt proceedings,
the evidence is presented
in the form of affidavits (written statements of evidence which are sworn or
affirmed), and the persons
so swearing or affirming may be cross-examined.
19.12 A criminal contempt may be punished by a fixed term of imprisonment, a
fine or an order to give security for good behaviour.
Although the sentence must
be for a fixed term of imprisonment, there is no upper limit on the term that
may be stipulated. This
is in contrast to ordinary criminal offences in which a
maximum penalty generally is set out in the
19.13 Civil contempt may be punished by: a sentence of imprisonment with no
fixed limit, but which is specified to last until the
person obeys the order or
undertaking or indicates a willingness to do so; or a fine that increases during
the period of disobedience.
A fixed term prison sentence or a fine may be
imposed in respect of past
disobedience.
Application of
contempt to public inquiries
19.14 In the following section, the ALRC considers whether the proposed
Inquiries Act
should contain a provision that prohibits conduct amounting
to contempt of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries and, if so, what
such a provision should take. The types of conduct that may be covered by such a
provision are considered later in this chapter.
Section 6O of
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Royal Commissions Act
is unusual in that,
while it is expressed in the form of an ordinary criminal offence, it draws on
both the content and the procedure
of the law of contempt of court.
provides that:
Any person who intentionally insults or disturbs a Royal Commission, or
interrupts the proceedings of a Royal Commission, or uses
any insulting language
towards a Royal Commission, or by writing or speech uses words false and
defamatory of a Royal Commission,
or is in any matter guilty of any intentional
contempt of a Royal Commission, shall be guilty of an
19.16 This prohibits a range of conduct that, if done in court, would
constitute contempt in the face of court, and scandalising the
court. Further,
as it prohibits ‘any intentional contempt’ of a Royal Commission,
the scope of the offence partly depends
on the scope of the law of contempt of
Section 6O(2)
provides that, if the President or Chair of a Royal
Commission, or a sole Royal Commissioner, is a judge:
he or she shall, in relation to any offence against subsection (1) of this
section committed in the face of the Commission, have
all the powers of a
Justice of the High Court sitting in open Court in relation to contempt
committed in face of the Court, except
that any punishment inflicted shall not
exceed the punishment provided by subsection (1) of this section.
19.18 This paragraph seeks to confer on certain Royal Commissioners the power
to punish a person for contempt in the same manner as
a judge of the High Court,
but only in relation to contempts in the face of the Royal
Commission—namely, intentional insults
and disturbances of a Royal
Commission, or interruptions of a Royal
Commission.
Other ways to
sanction conduct
19.19 There are several ways of sanctioning the kind of conduct currently
sanctioned by
Royal Commissions Act
. First, the conduct
could continue to be sanctioned as contempt. Secondly, it could be sanctioned
solely through the enactment of
statutory offences. A third option is for the
Inquiries Act
to include both statutory offences and a power to
apply to a court to punish conduct as contempt of court.
19.20 In many Australian states and territories, the legislation governing
Royal Commissions allows for punishment for contempt of
Commissions.
For example, in New
South Wales (NSW), disobedience of any order or summons issued by a Royal
Commissioner, as well as acts that
would constitute contempt of court if done in
a court, constitute a contempt of a Royal
Commission.
This is punished by
the Royal Commission certifying the matter to the Supreme Court, which hears the
matter and punishes the person
in the same way as if that contempt had been
committed in the court.
that may constitute a contempt of a commission also may constitute one of the
specific offences set out in the
Royal Commissions Act 1923
19.21 The appropriateness of contempt powers for inquiries was considered by
the ALRC in
more recently by the New Zealand Law Commission (NZLC) and the Law Reform
Commission of Ireland (LRCI) in their reports on
the ALRC recommended that s 6O of the
Royal Commissions Act
be repealed and replaced by a statutory
As noted in the
reports of the NZLC and LRCI, there are a number of disadvantages in sanctioning
contempt in the context of Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries.
The contempt procedure
19.22 There are disadvantages to using the unusual procedure for punishing
contempt of court. As the ALRC noted in
, the contempt powers
enable a judge to act as complainant, prosecutor, witness and
This is in tension with
three fundamental principles of criminal law: that a judge should be free from
bias; there should be a presumption
of innocence; and there should be a power to
confront a witness. Further, as it is difficult to define the limits of the
that may constitute contempt of court, contempt also conflicts with the
principle that criminal offences should be defined with sufficient
precision to
enable all citizens to understand what types of conduct will incur criminal
Contempt in the context of public
19.23 It may be inappropriate to apply the concept of contempt to
non-judicial bodies such as Royal Commissions and other public inquiries.
Contempt is based on the concept of an interference with the administration of
justice. This is not readily applicable to Royal Commissions
and other public
inquiries, which are inquisitorial in nature and established by the executive
arm of government in a political
19.24 As Dean J observed in the Supreme Court of Victoria:
The problem is, how to apply to a Royal Commission which is not concerned in the
administration of justice at all, doctrines designed
solely to prevent
interference with the administration of justice. … The very touchstone
whereby the question of contempt or
no contempt is to be judged has been
withdrawn … Difficulties will arise in forcing the old doctrines to new
Punishing for contempt
19.25 A further difficulty arises in the context of the
Royal Commissions
Section 6O(2) of that Act purports to put certain Royal
Commissioners in the same position as that of a judge in determining some
of contempt, subject to the imposition of a maximum statutory penalty. There is
a strong argument that this subsection is unconstitutional
because it is
inconsistent with the separation of powers in the
Constitution
The issue has
been succinctly stated by Professor Enid Campbell:
A jurisdiction to try and punish offences created by federal law clearly
involves an exercise of the judicial power of the Commonwealth,
and under the
Constitution
this power is exercisable only by the courts listed in
19.26 Section 71 of the
Constitution
provides that the
judicial power of the Commonwealth shall be vested in various courts. As noted
by the High Court in
Attorney-General for Australia v The
the power to punish
contempt can only be conferred on a ‘court’ within the meaning of
19.27 The power of a Royal Commissioner to punish for contempt also may
violate art 14 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
(ICCPR), which provides, in part, that:
All persons shall be equal before the courts and tribunals. In the determination
of any criminal charge against him, or of his rights
and obligations in a suit
at law, everyone shall be entitled to a fair and public hearing by a competent,
independent and impartial
tribunal established by law.
19.28 If, as s 6O(2) provides, a Royal Commissioner determines the guilt
of a person charged with contempt, it can be argued that
the offender has not
received a fair hearing by an ‘independent and impartial tribunal’
as required by art 14 of the
19.29 In any event, it seems highly undesirable to confer a power to imprison
a person on someone who, while a judge in one capacity,
is not acting in that
capacity. It is notable that, although the constitutional issue does not arise
in relation to Australian states
territories,
only the South
Australian and Queensland inquiries legislation confers upon Royal Commissioners
a power to punish similar
In Queensland, a chair
of a Royal Commission who is not a judge of the Supreme Court may only impose a
maximum penalty of $200, and
is not empowered to imprison the
Other Australian states
and territories require a Royal Commission to refer the matter to the relevant
Supreme Court, which examines
the evidence and exercises its inherent powers to
punish for contempt of court.
, the ALRC also noted practical difficulties with the
power of a Royal Commissioner to punish contempt in the face of the Commission.
In particular, the sentence of imprisonment imposed could expire after the Royal
Commission had concluded. It is clearly preferable
for the body which convicted
the offender to be in existence and approachable during the term of a
19.31 Notwithstanding the above, there may be some value in retaining a
statutory procedure, such as that set out in s 6O, in the
Inquiries Act
The summary procedure used by courts to punish contempt of
court has two major advantages over ordinary criminal procedure.
19.32 First, the conduct can be sanctioned much more rapidly, which arguably
makes it a more effective deterrent. In practice, an
ordinary federal criminal
offence—such as an offence in the
Royal Commissions Act
prosecuted if the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions decides it is in
the public interest to prosecute the
This process can lead
to significant delays. For example, in the Royal Commission into the Activities
of the Federated Ship Painters
and Dockers Union (1984), the prosecution of
union members who refused to comply with orders of the Royal Commission took, on
eight months.
contrast, a person aggrieved by the failure of another person to comply with
orders may instigate contempt proceedings in a court.
Such proceedings usually
proceed more rapidly than criminal proceedings.
19.33 The effectiveness of the contempt procedure to punish for
non-compliance has been considered recently in the context of the
Crime Commission (ACC). Like the
Royal Commissions Act
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
(Cth) includes offences for refusing
to attend, produce evidence, or answer questions. These offences are prosecuted
in accordance
with standard criminal procedure.
19.34 In 2001, the Australian Government proposed to empower the forerunner
to the ACC, the National Crime Authority, to apply to
the Supreme Court of a
state or territory for the court to deal with specified conduct as if it were
contempt of court.
The proposal,
however, was defeated in the Senate.
19.35 In 2007, Mark Trowell QC conducted an independent review into the
effectiveness of the
Australian Crime Commission Act
(Trowell Inquiry).
The report of that inquiry (Trowell Report), recommended that the ACC should be
empowered to apply to a court to
deal with conduct as if it were contempt of
The Trowell Report
concluded that such a power was desirable because:
The existing process is just too slow. It fails to give sufficient weight to the
need, when circumstances require, of an immediate
or at least proximate response
to a refusal to submit to the legislative requirements of an ACC examination.
Given the ACC uses the
examination process as an investigative tool, it makes no
tactical sense to deprive an examiner of the power to respond quickly and
effectively in circumstances where it is obviously necessary to do so. The
inability to respond immediately devalues the inquisitorial
capacity of the ACC
to effectively deal with organised or serious
19.36 The Trowell Report noted that stakeholders generally supported the ACC
having the power to apply for a court to deal with acts
At the end of 2008,
the Parliamentary Joint Committee on the ACC agreed with this aspect of the
Trowell Report. The Committee recommended
Australian Crime
Commission Act
be amended to include a statutory definition of contempt and
a power of referral to a
19.37 Secondly, as the procedure for punishing contempt allows a judge to
sentence a person to imprisonment until they agree to comply
with the order of
the court, it may be more effective than a criminal prosecution in coercing
compliance. For example, in
the court considered
a court order for contempt was ‘necessary in order to prevent a witness
avoiding his obligation to answer
merely by paying the
Court enforcement
19.38 An alternative approach is to empower a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry to apply to a court for enforcement of its notices
or directions. The
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC), for example, has a
power to apply to the Federal Court
for the enforcement of its orders.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
(Cth) (ASIC Act)
(1) This section applies where ASIC is satisfied that a person has, without
reasonable excuse, failed to comply with a requirement
made under this Part
(other than Division 8).
(2) ASIC may by writing certify the failure to the Court.
(3) If ASIC does so, the Court may inquire into the case and may order the
person to comply with the requirement as specified in
19.39 ASIC submitted to the Trowell Inquiry that it frequently considered the
use of this power since it generally aims to secure
compliance rather than
impose punishment.
The effect of
the provision is that, if the court orders the person to comply with the
requirement, a failure to obey may be punished
as contempt of court.
19.40 The provision in the ASIC Act is similar to inquiries legislation in
other jurisdictions. The LRCI, in its 2005
Report on Public Inquiries
Including Tribunals of Inquiry
, recommended that the dual approach in Irish
legislation should be retained. While specified conduct was prohibited in the
criminal offences, this approach enables a tribunal of inquiry to apply
to the High Court for an order enforcing an order of the
tribunal which has not
been complied with.
noting the Irish provision, recommended that new New Zealand inquiries
legislation should include a similar provision enabling
the Solicitor-General to
initiate proceedings in the High
19.41 Similarly, the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) provides for specific
criminal contempt offences, and enforcement by a court:
(1) Where a person —
(a) fails to comply with, or acts in breach of, a notice under section 19
[restricting public access] or 21 [requiring production
of evidence] or an order
made by an inquiry, or
(b) threatens to do so,
the chairman of the inquiry, or after the end of the inquiry the Minister, may
certify the matter to the appropriate court.
(2) The court, after hearing any evidence or representations on a matter
certified to it under subsection (1), may make such order
by way of enforcement
or otherwise as it could make if the matter had arisen in proceedings before the
19.42 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
advises that it may
be appropriate to include a mechanism for enforcement of contempt by a court if
there ‘is a strong incentive
to withhold information because releasing
information may expose a person to a large penalty for their substantive
misconduct’.
mechanism may be more easily justified if:
• the enforcing agency serves a critical regulatory or enforcement
function which will be frustrated if a strong incentive
to withhold information
• access to information via a notice is likely to be critical to
successful prosecution of substantive misconduct;
• defendants typically have significant financial resources at their
disposal, and
• the public interest requires that persons be prevented from frustrating
criminal investigations by withholding information
to defeat the interests of
19.43 The procedure of applying to a court to enforce an order for compliance
differs, in a subtle but important way, from the procedure
used in some state
and territory legislation of applying to a court to punish conduct as a contempt
of court. The approach of applying
for enforcement avoids using the concept of
contempt in the context of Royal Commissions and other public inquiries. Rather,
scope of the conduct that may be referred to the court is limited to a
failure to comply with notices or directions of the tribunal
or inquiry.
19.44 In contrast, some state and territory legislation typically includes
conduct other than non-compliance with orders, and may
rely on the scope of
contempt of court itself to define the conduct that may be referred to a court.
Further, while some state or
territory legislation deems the conduct contempt of
the Royal Commission itself, in the application for enforcement of an order,
contempt lies in the failure to obey the order of the court.
Evidentiary certificates
, the ALRC considered whether Royal Commissions
should have the power to certify facts to a court and, if so, what evidentiary
such a certificate should
While a clear majority of
stakeholders thought a person presiding at a tribunal should be required to
furnish to a court a certificate
or affidavit setting out the tribunal’s
understanding of the relevant facts, they were divided as to whether such a
certificate
should be treated as prima facie correct unless positively rebutted.
The ALRC decided not to recommend the use of such a certificate,
since it had
not recommended such a provision in relation to
19.46 The provision in the ASIC Act that empowers ASIC to apply for
enforcement of orders does not provide that a certificate by ASIC
is proof of
the facts within it. Dr Stephen Donaghue has suggested that ASIC’s
power was not ‘designed to ensure rapid
compliance with these orders
… since the court must inquire into the case itself before ordering
compliance’.
He observed
that, in the interests of efficiency, it would be desirable for a certification
procedure to be introduced, but noted
that the section prevented ASIC
‘from being judge of its own cause and restricts the power to impose
potentially draconian
coercive sanctions to
concluded that ‘the costs in terms of efficiency may therefore be
outweighed by the benefits of a fair contempt
procedure’.
19.47 In relation to evidentiary certificates, the
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences
states that:
Evidentiary certificate provisions are only suitable where they relate to formal
or technical matters that are not likely to be in
dispute but that would be
difficult to prove under the normal evidential rules, and should be subject to
appropriate safeguards.
19.48 Another issue is which court or courts should exercise the power to
punish contempt, on an application from an inquiry. The
Trowell Report
recommended that the Federal Court should have jurisdiction to hear such an
application, in addition to the Supreme
Courts of the Australian states and
territories.
It noted that
several provisions in the
Australian Crime Commission Act
provided for applications to a judge of the Federal Court, and that federal
criminal law had developed significantly in recent
Double jeopardy
19.49 The Trowell Report also recommended that the
Australian Crime
Commission Act
should provide that a person should not be liable to be
prosecuted both for contempt and an offence under the
Equivalent provisions are
also provided in state and territory inquiries legislation, which enable the
same act or omission to constitute
either contempt or an
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
advises that
it is important to ensure that if a person is dealt with by way of a contempt
order, then that person is not also liable to be prosecuted
for a non-compliance
offence for the same conduct, and vice
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
also notes that
, which protects against double punishment in relation
to two or more offences, does not apply to contempt proceedings, because they
are not included in that
Submissions and
consultations
19.52 In its Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
(IP 35), the ALRC asked whether a person should be subject to
proceedings for contempt of a Royal Commission or other public inquiry,
so, what the appropriate procedures should
The ALRC indicated that,
while it was interested in stakeholder views, it remained inclined to the view
that, at a minimum, s 6O(2)
should be amended to provide that sanctions for
contempt should be imposed by a competent court, rather than by a Royal
Commission.
19.53 Several of the stakeholders who addressed this issue in consultations
and submissions expressed concerns about applying the
concept of contempt to
executive bodies.
For example,
one stakeholder submitted:
I much favour the ALRC view on contempt. The term ‘contempt’ whilst
highly appropriate to a court proceeding does not
sit well with the term
19.54 Other stakeholders who considered a contempt power to be undesirable
noted the need for precision in criminal offences, and
expressed concern about
the unusual features of the contempt procedure. The Law Council of Australia
(Law Council) stated that
the powers invested in Royal Commissioners under subsection 6O(2) create the
perception of a ‘star chamber’, as they
empower a commissioner to
act at once as informant, prosecutor and
19.55 It also was noted in consultations that, where there was non-compliance
with the summonses or notices of Royal Commissions,
the existing criminal
sanctions were largely ineffective. This was partly due to the inadequacy of the
penalties, but also because
of issues of timeliness in commencing
proceedings.
19.56 In relation to s 6O(2)—which confers on suitably qualified
Royal Commissioners the power to punish contempt—most
stakeholders were of
the view that this provision was unconstitutional and highly
undesirable.
Contempt sanctions
19.57 In the ALRC’s view, the concept of contempt should not be applied
to bodies established by the executive arm of government.
The law of contempt
was developed to protect the administration of justice, and is not directly
applicable to public inquiries. Applying
the concept of contempt to Royal
Commissions and other public inquiries confuses the role and functions of the
judiciary with the
role and functions of public
19.58 There are several undesirable features of contempt procedures, in
particular, the judge’s power to act as complainant,
prosecutor and
arbitrator. Section 6O(2) of the
Royal Commissions Act
these features into the Royal Commission context. The ALRC remains of the view
that s 6O(2) may be unconstitutional and,
in any event, is undesirable from
a policy perspective. It does not propose, therefore, that a similar provision
be included in the
Inquiries Act
19.59 This does not mean, of course, that inquiries do not need powers to
protect the integrity of their proceedings and ensure compliance
notices and directions. The prosecution of the offence of non-compliance may not
assist an inquiry because the process
of criminal prosecution takes too long.
Prosecution also may be an ineffective deterrent in some cases because, if an
inquiry has
concluded, it may no longer be in the public interest to prosecute.
Dual approach
19.60 An attractive model for enforcement of orders is the dual model
contained in the United Kingdom and Irish inquiries legislation,
and in the ASIC
Act. This model allows behaviour to be prosecuted as a criminal offence, or upon
application by an inquiry, by a
court exercising its power to enforce its own
orders. The ALRC sees advantages in empowering a Royal Commission to apply to a
for enforcement of its notices and directions. This would apply in
addition to criminal offences of refusing to comply with such
requirements.
ALRC’s view, the policy justification for this approach—namely, the
need for a more timely sanction for non-compliance—applies
Official Inquiries.
19.61 The ALRC’s proposal to allow a court to enforce orders made by
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries is consistent
Framing Commonwealth Offences.
In many public inquiries, there may be a
strong incentive to withhold information—for example, where it may expose
serious misconduct
or criminal behaviour, or expose the person to subsequent
legal proceedings. It is inconsistent with the public interest in holding
inquiry if a person can frustrate the purposes of that inquiry by withholding
information.
19.62 The procedure proposed by the ALRC, however, should be limited to
ensuring compliance with notices or directions. In the ALRC’s
would not be useful for a court to enforce orders in relation to disruptions and
interruptions to a hearing, or the use
of insulting language. If done in a
court, this conduct could be dealt with promptly by the court itself. On the
other hand, a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry would have to refer the
matter to a court. As such, there would be no real advantage in terms of speed.
19.63 The ALRC proposes that a provision similar to s 36 of the
Inquiries Act 2005
(UK) be included in the
Inquiries Act
in this Discussion Paper
Such a provision would enable a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry to apply to a court for enforcement of its
notices to attend
or produce evidence, or to enforce a requirement to answer a
question. The ALRC does not propose that s 36 of the
Inquiries Act
(UK) be replicated in full, however—in particular, it does not seem
necessary to enable the certification of a matter after
a Royal Commission or
Official Inquiry has concluded.
Other issues
19.64 In line with the procedure in the ASIC Act, the ALRC proposes that
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries should be able to
apply to the Federal
Court for enforcement of their notices or directions.
19.65 In the ALRC’s view, members of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries should be able to initiate such an application
by certifying the
relevant facts. This is a convenient method of providing evidence in such an
application, and it avoids the need
for inquiry members to give evidence orally
in court. This certificate, however, should not be prima facie evidence of the
Rather, the power to determine the facts should be exercised
independently of the Royal Commission or Official Inquiry. In determining
facts, the Federal Court will give such certificates due weight in their
consideration.
19.66 As noted above, the ALRC proposes in Chapter 18 that it should be
a criminal offence to refuse or fail to comply with a notice
to attend or
produce evidence before a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry, or a requirement
to answer a question asked in a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry. The
Inquiries Act
, therefore,
should provide that a person is
not liable to be punished twice for the same act or omission, if the act or
omission would constitute
both an offence under the proposed Act and, if
enforced by the Federal Court, contempt of court. This is an important
safeguard to ensure that a person is not liable to be prosecuted
twice for the same conduct.
Proposal 19–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, where a person fails to comply with a notice or a direction of a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry, or threatens
to do so, the chair of the inquiry
may refer the matter to the Federal Court of Australia. The Court, after hearing
any evidence
or representations on the matter certified to it, may enforce such
a notice or direction as if the matter had arisen in proceedings
Proposal 19–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that a person is not liable to be punished twice for the same act or omission,
if the act or omission would constitute
both an offence under the proposed Act
and, if enforced by the Federal Court of Australia, contempt of court.
The prohibited
19.67 In the previous section, the ALRC proposed that, if there was a failure
to comply, or threat to fail to comply, with a notice
or direction of a Royal
Commission or Official Inquiry, the inquiry should have the power to apply to
the Federal Court to enforce
that notice or direction. A second question arises
as to whether any of the conduct currently punishable under s 6O of the
Royal Commissions Act
should continue to be punished by way of a criminal
Contempt in the face
of a Royal Commission
19.68 Section 6O prohibits a person from intentionally disturbing, or
interrupting, a Royal Commission. These forms of conduct would,
court, constitute ‘contempt in the face of the court’.
19.69 The provision can be justified on the basis that Royal Commissions,
like courts, need to protect against the disruption of their
proceedings.
Although the proceedings of a Royal Commission tend to be less formal, the
political controversy that can accompany
Royal Commissions often makes it more
likely that their proceedings will be
19.70 The ALRC recommended in
that it should be an offence to
cause substantial disruption of a hearing of a tribunal or commission, if the
disruption was intended
or recklessly
It further recommended
that this should extend to behaviour outside the premises which disrupted the
19.71 The ALRC also recommended that Royal Commissioners should have the
power to expel people from a hearing if the Commissioners
believed, on
reasonable grounds, that the person would otherwise disrupt the
proceedings.
The power should be
exercised only after an inquiry member had warned the person and adjourned the
proceeding, and the expulsion
should last only as long as necessary to ensure
the inquiry could proceed without
disruption.
19.72 The ALRC’s recommendations are consistent with the subsequent
recommendation in the
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building
and Construction Industry
. In that inquiry, Commissioner Cole recommended
that Royal Commissioners should be empowered to expel persons, and that officers
be protected from the legal consequences of using any reasonable force necessary
to give effect to such a
Section 15A
Royal Commissions Act 1968
provides an example of such a power:
(2) A Commission may order that a person who under subsection (1) is in
contempt of the Commission at an inquiry be excluded from
the place where the
inquiry is being conducted.
(3) An officer of the Commission, acting under the Commission’s order,
may exclude the person from the place and may use necessary
and reasonable help
and force to do so.
Insults and false
and defamatory words
19.74 Section 6O prohibits a person from ‘insulting’ a Royal
Commission, and using insulting language to, or false and
defamatory words of, a
Royal Commission.
similar provisions in some of the older legislation governing public inquiries
in Australian states and
territories.
19.75 The language of s 6O indicates a distinction between
‘insulting’ a Royal Commission, and using insulting language
a Royal Commission. The former appears to refer to insults directed at members
of a Royal Commission during a hearing, based
on a form of contempt in the face
of the court.
‘insulting language towards a Royal Commission’, on the other hand,
appears to refer to insults outside of a hearing,
based on the form of contempt
of court traditionally known as ‘scandalising the
As they raise
similar issues, however, they are discussed together in this section.
19.76 The rationale for the prohibition on ‘scandalising the
court’ is that public faith in the administration of justice
undermined if the respect and dignity of courts and their officers were not
maintained.
This form of
contempt, however, is controversial. It has been argued that public criticism of
judges is part of a healthy democratic
discussion and acts as a form of
accountability,
prohibiting such criticism unduly restricts freedom of
expression.
Further, critics
have suggested that such a prohibition is largely ineffective, because one
cannot coerce respect through the use
of the criminal law. As Henry Burmester
has suggested, the prohibition ‘resembles some antique weapon which will
probably do
more harm to those who use it than to those against whom it is
These objections
led the ALRC to recommend in
that the common law liability in
respect of this conduct in relation to courts should be abolished, and replaced
with a limited statutory
19.77 Can this form of contempt be justified in relation to Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries? In
, stakeholders were divided on this
issue. Some submissions strongly urged that Royal Commissions should not be
protected from public
debate, given the political context in which they operate.
On the other hand, other stakeholders submitted that some form of remedial
action seemed justified when imputations were made against the integrity of a
Royal Commissioner.
19.78 As the ALRC noted in
, the very different functions of a
Royal Commissioner, and the inherently political nature of their appointment,
make it unlikely
that an attack on a particular Royal Commissioner would affect
respect for Royal Commissions as a whole. The objects of Royal Commissions
should not be divorced from their political contexts, and the establishment and
membership of Royal Commissions are political decisions
which should not be
removed from public debate.
, therefore,
the ALRC recommended that this form of
conduct should not be prohibited in relation to Royal
Commissions.
19.79 The prohibition on insults directed to a Royal Commission during a
hearing rests on the rationale that a Royal Commission should
have the power to
control proceedings.
Nevertheless, insults directed to the Commission in a hearing raise similar
issues concerning freedom of expression. For example,
in one case based on this
provision, a trade unionist was convicted of insulting a Royal Commission when
he attacked the decision
to establish a Royal Commission to inquire into the
activities of a union as part of a political attack on unions and their members.
The Federal Court, upholding his conviction, considered that such an attack
amounted to an attack upon the Royal Commission
, the ALRC concluded that there should be no offence
in relation to insulting behaviour during proceedings of a Royal
Commission.
The ALRC stated
The central concern in this context is the efficient and effective running of
government. It is even more inappropriate to use the
criminal law to try to
induce respect for Commissions and tribunals than for the judicial system. If
insults and disrespectful conduct
during a hearing do not actually interfere
with the operation of such bodies, the law should not step in to punish
19.81 Section 6O also prohibits any other kind of ‘intentional
contempt’. This part of the section makes it an offence
to commit any
other form of intentional contempt which is not otherwise set out in s 6O
(that is, it is a residual contempt provision).
For example, it may prohibit an
intentional refusal to comply with notices to produce. The reference to
intention is somewhat unclear.
Inquiries legislation in four Australian states include similar provisions that
equate the powers of contempt of a Royal Commission
to that of a
Royal Commissions
(NSW) however, restricts this power to Royal Commissions chaired or
constituted by a superior court judge, where the letters patent
specify these
additional powers apply.
19.82 The primary argument against a residual contempt provision is its
breadth. Conduct may be punished even though it does not fall
specifically prohibited
Further, as discussed
above, it ‘is difficult to “transplant” the technical notion
of contempt from its judicial
context to the executive context of Royal
Commissions’.
19.83 Another difficulty with a residual contempt provision is that it would
seem that an act that would be prohibited by a specific
offence under the
Royal Commissions Act
would appear to be punishable also as an
intentional contempt under
Finally, such a
provision means those dealing with Royal Commissions, and Royal Commissioners
without legal training, may not have
a clear idea of what behaviour is
unacceptable.
19.84 For these reasons, the ALRC recommended in
should be no such general provision. Rather, specific offences should be
This recommendation
was in line with the ALRC’s approach to courts. Similarly, Campbell
considered it preferable that the
Royal Commissions Act
exhaustively the acts and omissions punishable under the
On the other
hand, Dr Leonard Hallett thought such a residual clause was desirable because
‘it is not possible to envisage
all the actions which might prejudice an
inquiry’, and considered it would not be unduly unfair to defendants since
be used rarely.
Submissions and
consultations
19.85 In general, the proposition that interruptions and disruptions to Royal
Commissions and other inquiries should be sanctioned
was strongly supported by
stakeholders who addressed this
19.86 There was also support from stakeholders for the earlier recommendation
by the ALRC that Royal Commissions and, by analogy,
Official Inquiries, should
have the power to expel persons from a hearing room. For example, the Law
Council, after referring to
the ALRC’s earlier recommendation in
, stated that it
share[d] the ALRC’s view that a wide-ranging contempt power such as that
contained in section 6O of the [
Royal Commissions Act
] may not be
necessary provided there are alternative means of preventing interference with
the conduct of the inquiry.
19.87 Very few stakeholders addressed the issue of whether the other forms of
conduct prohibited by s 6O should continue to be prohibited.
Council, in its submission, expressed concern that the prohibition on false and
defamatory words was unduly restrictive of
freedom of speech, and noted that the
ALRC had recommended the removal of similar provisions in relation to
It also submitted
that the residual provision was unnecessary, given that conduct amounting to
intentional contempt—such as
failing to attend a hearing when required by
a summons—amounted to a specific offence under the
Royal Commissions
19.88 Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries require powers to deal with
substantial disruption of their proceedings. The ALRC supports
its earlier
recommendations in
that it is desirable to create an offence of
causing substantial disruption, with an intention to cause, or reckless as to
the likelihood
of, substantial disruption. The same considerations apply equally
to Official Inquiries. Although it is anticipated that Official
Inquiries may be
conducted in a more procedurally flexible manner than Royal Commissions,
Official Inquiries may hold public hearings
that would justify similar
prohibitions and powers.
19.89 The ALRC’s view is that Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
should be empowered to expel a person from the place
in which it is conducting
its inquiry. This power should apply if a person is disrupting an inquiry, and
not merely where members
of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries believe a
person might disrupt an inquiry. The power should allow an officer, or a person
duly authorised by a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry, to use reasonable
force and help as necessary in order to expel the person.
This power will
protect those responsible for expelling people from an inquiry from the legal
consequences of using reasonable
The ALRC proposes,
therefore, that a provision similar to
Royal Commissions
(WA), set out above, should be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act
19.90 A specific prohibition on the use of insults, insulting language, or
false and defamatory words should not be included in the
. Such a prohibition is likely to restrict freedom of expression in
relation to matters that are properly the subject of political
19.91 In the ALRC’s view, a residual provision making it an offence to
commit any other form of intentional contempt is unnecessary.
Such a provision
is not sufficiently clear for the purposes of imposing punishment, and overlaps
with existing criminal offences.
Proposal 19–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that it is an offence to cause substantial disruption to the proceedings of a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry,
with the intention to disrupt the
proceedings, or recklessness as to whether the conduct would have that
Proposal 19–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that if a person is disrupting the proceedings of an inquiry, a member of a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry may
exclude that person from those
proceedings, and authorise a person to use necessary and reasonable force in
excluding that person.
Proposal 19–5
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) dealing with contempt of Royal Commissions should not be included in
the proposed
Inquiries Act
In Ch 5, the ALRC proposes that the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) should be renamed the
Inquiries Act
and amended to enable the establishment of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries: Proposal 5–1.
Law Reform Commission,
While the Australian Government
prepared a position paper on the final recommendations and four jurisdictions
initially agreed to
work together for the purpose of agreeing on uniform
contempt legislation, there appears to have been no further progress on the
See A Arlidge and D Eady,
Law of Contempt
(1982), Ch 1.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
Crimes Act 1914
Royal Commissions Act
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
Section 6O(1)
also provides
for a penalty of $200, or imprisonment for three months. The ALRC discusses
penalties in Ch 20.
Court has the power to try and punish all forms of contempt in relation to the
High Court, and any inferior court (such
as a District Court or County Court)
over which it has a ‘supervisory jurisdiction’: see
Judiciary Act
Commissions Act 1923
(this is limited to Royal Commissions
chaired or constituted by judicial officers or legal practitioners of at least
seven years
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Royal Commissions Act
(ACT) ss 27,
Commissions Act 1923
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987), Ch
New Zealand Law Commission,
New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), [8.24]; Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
73 (2005), 107–115, 118.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
R v Arrowsmith
[1949] VicLawRp 56
[1950] VLR 78
, 85–86. See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
R v Arrowsmith
[1949] VicLawRp 56
This was noted by
Commissioner Cole as one of the reasons for the ineffectiveness of s 6O: T Cole,
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
(2003), vol 2, 45.
Contempt of Royal Commissions
Attorney-General (Cth) v The
[1957] HCA 12
(1957) 95 CLR 529
Contempt in Relation to Commissions and Tribunals—Research
(1986) Australian Law Reform Commission, 48; E Campbell,
Contempt of Royal Commissions
Constitution
exclusively vests judicial power in the courts, so there is no
equivalent constitutional doctrine of separation of powers in Australian
As to the position of territory courts, see L Zines,
Cowen and Zines’s
Federal Jurisdiction in Australia
(3rd ed, 2002),
Royal Commissions
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Commissions Act 1923
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
See Commonwealth Director of
Prosecutions,
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
F Costigan,
Report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters
and Dockers Union
(1984), [1.004].
National Crime Authority Legislation Amendment Bill 2000
Independent Review
of the Provisions of the
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
the Inter-Governmental Committee,
Parliament of
Australia—Parliamentary Joint Committee on the Australian Crime
Commission,
Inquiry into the
Australian Crime Commission Amendment Act
(2008), Rec 6.
[1995] NSWSC 100
(1995) 79 A Crim R 567.
Independent
Review of the Provisions of the
Australian Crime Commission Act
—Report to the Inter-Governmental Committee,
See Law Reform Commission of
Report on Public Inquiries Including Tribunals of Inquiry
73 (2005); Tribunals of Inquiry Bill 2005 (Ireland) cll 31,
New Zealand Law Commission,
New Inquiries Act
, Report No 102 (2008), Rec 39. This recommendation has
been incorporated into Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ), cl 32. This provision does,
however, use the language of ‘contempt of an inquiry’, unlike the
Irish and UK versions.
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
(2007), 99.
Provisions providing that
certificates of inquiries are evidence of the facts, unless rebutted, exist in
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Royal Commissions Act
; although not in
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
See the discussion in analogous circumstances in M Trowell,
Independent Review of the Provisions of the
Australian Crime Commission Act
—Report to the Inter-Governmental Committee,
[165]–[168].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
S Donaghue,
Commissions and Permanent Commissions of Inquiry
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Independent Review
of the Provisions of the
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
the Inter-Governmental Committee,
(2007), [169]–[171]. When a similar
power was introduced in a bill in 2000, it conferred power only on the Supreme
the states and territories:
National Crime Authority Legislation
Amendment Bill 2000
(Cth) cl 67.
Independent Review of the Provisions of the
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
—Report to the Inter-Governmental Committee,
(2007), [170]–[171].
[190]–[191]. While a person cannot be punished twice for the same conduct
or omission where it is an offence under two
or more laws, the term
‘offence’ indicates that it may not apply to contempt:
Commissions Act 1923
Royal Commissions Act 1968
The inquiries legislation of other jurisdictions which enable
punishment for contempt do not enable the same act or omission to constitute
both contempt and an offence: see
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Commissions
of Inquiry Act 1995
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35 (2009),
Question 9–6.
See Appendix 2 for a List of
Agencies, Organisations and Individuals
I Turnbull,
16 May 2009.
Law Council of
19 May 2009, citing A
Brown, ‘The Wig or the Sword? Separation of Powers and the Plight of the
Australian Judge’
[1992] FedLawRw 2
Federal Law Review
Penalties are discussed in Ch
See, eg, Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
The roles and
functions of public inquiries are discussed in detail in
In Ch 18, the ALRC
proposes that the
Inquiries Act
should provide, with respect to Royal
Commissions and Official Inquiries, that a person commits an offence if the
person, without
reasonable excuse, refuses or fails to comply with a certain
notice or requirement: Proposal
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
[762]–[763].
Ibid, [768]. The ALRC also noted
that, if the person was subject to findings by the Royal Commission, the person
should be removed
only if the hearing could fairly continue in their absence,
and steps should be taken to keep that person aware of what was occurring
hearing. The ALRC also suggested that an expulsion order should be able to be
swiftly challenged in proceedings before the
Federal Court or the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal.
Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
(2003), [91].
A Royal Commissioner
could also sue for defamation in relation to the use of false and defamatory
Commissions of Inquiry Act
Royal Commissions Act 1968
Royal Commissions Act 1917
See N Lowe and G Borrie
Borrie and Lowe’s Law of Contempt
(2nd ed, 1983),
See, eg, H Burmester,
‘Scandalizing the Judges’
[1985] MelbULawRw 18
Melbourne University Law
; C Walker, ‘Scandalising in the Eighties’
Law Quarterly Review
Freedom of expression is guaranteed under art 19 of the
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, which Australia ratified on 13
August 1980. The High Court has also interpreted the
Constitution
as including an implied freedom of political communication:
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR
H Burmester, ‘Scandalizing
the Judges’
[1985] MelbULawRw 18
Melbourne University Law Review
Attorney-General v Blomfield
[1913] NZGazLawRp 241
(1913) 33 NZLR 545
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987), Recs 56, 57. The Western Australian Law Reform
Commission recently made a similar recommendation in its review of
laws: Western Australian Law Reform Commission,
Report on Review of the Law
of Contempt
, Project No 93 (2003), Rec
Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987), [778].
Ibid. The ALRC also noted that judges feel that their position in the community
inhibits them from answering their critics publicly
or taking any legal action
against them, but that this does not apply to Royal Commissioners as they have
entered the public arena.
N Lowe and G Borrie
Borrie and Lowe’s Law of Contempt
(2nd ed, 1983), 6–7,
[1983] FCA 244
(1983) 10 A Crim R 240.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
Bell v Stewart
28 CLR 419, 427, Isaacs and Rich JJ took the view that a similar phrase in the
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904
(Cth) required actual intention to
prejudice the administration of justice. By analogy, such an intention may be
necessary to breach
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Royal Commissions Act
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Royal Commissions Act 1968
s 15A(1)(d)
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1995
Royal Commissions Act
Section 6O(2) of the
Royal Commissions Act
also restricts this power to Royal Commissions chaired or constituted by a
superior court judge, but this power need not be specifically
conferred in the
letters patent establishing the Royal
Commission.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
Ibid; E Campbell,
of Royal Commissions
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
H Coombs and others,
Commission on Australian Government Administration
(1976), Appendix 4K,
Commissions and Boards of Inquiry: Some Legal and Procedural Aspects
See, eg, Law Council of
19 May 2009; I
16 May 2009.
Law Council
of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Law Reform Commission,
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in
, ALRC 104 (2006).
Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
absence of such a power, a person could be liable for assault or battery.
20. Penalties, Proceedings and
Introduction
Setting penalties
Present penalties
Submissions and consultations
Penalties for Official Inquiries
Penalties for non-compliance
ALRC’s view
Unauthorised publications
ALRC’s view
Offence of substantial disruption
ALRC’s view
Proceedings
ALRC’s view
Costs in criminal proceedings generally
Costs in the
Royal Commissions Act
ALRC’s view
20. Penalties, Proceedings and
Introduction
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) includes a number of
offences, and specifies the maximum penalties that apply to them. The offences
are examined in Chapters
18 and 19. In those Chapters, the ALRC proposes that
the following three offences should apply to Royal Commissions and the Official
Inquiries proposed in this Discussion Paper—the offence of refusing or
failing to comply with a requirement of a Royal Commission
or Official Inquiry;
the offence of contravening a direction of a Royal Commission or Official
Inquiry; and the offence of causing
substantial disruption to the proceedings of
a Royal Commission or Official Inquiry.
20.2 This chapter examines the penalties that should apply to the offences
proposed in those chapters. It also examines
Commissions Act
deals with the way in which a proceeding for an
offence under the Act may be instituted, while s 15 confers a power on a court
award costs in relation to such a proceeding.
20.3 The two main forms of penalties are monetary penalties or a term of
imprisonment. Provisions creating federal offences typically
specify the maximum
penalty for the offence, which is intended for the worst type of case covered by
the offence.
Parliament determines
the maximum penalties, and courts in sentencing federal offenders are required
to determine the sentence or
order ‘that is of a severity appropriate in
all the circumstances of the
20.4 The setting of a maximum penalty is guided by two main principles,
namely proportionality and
consistency.
These principles
inform the discussion of penalties in this chapter.
20.5 The principle of proportionality requires that the penalty bears a
reasonable, or proportionate, relationship to the criminal
conduct in question.
That is, a maximum penalty should be ‘adequate and appropriate to act as
an effective deterrent to the
commission of the offence to which it applies, and
reflect the seriousness of the offence in the relevant legislative
In particular, a
‘heavier penalty is appropriate where there are strong incentives to
commit an offence, or where the consequences
of the commission of the offence
are particularly dangerous or
20.6 The principle of consistency requires that the penalty for an offence
should be consistent with penalties for offences of a similar
seriousness, and that the penalties within a given legislative regime should
reflect the relative seriousness of the offences
within that
20.7 One way of ensuring a degree of consistency in penalties in federal
legislation is through the setting of ‘penalty benchmarks’,
establish the appropriate penalty for a given type of offence in Commonwealth
law. Some penalty benchmarks are set out in the
Attorney-General’s
Department’s
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties
and Enforcement Powers
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) also includes a number of provisions
relating to penalties. These provisions adjust some of the penalties in the
Royal Commissions Act
. They also provide general principles for ensuring
consistency in the setting of penalties in federal legislation, which should
unless there is a good reason to depart from
These provisions are as
converts monetary penalties specified in dollars
into ‘penalty units’, which are then amended to reflect changes in
value of the dollar.
unit is currently $110.
monetary penalty is specified, the
also applies a maximum
monetary penalty by multiplying the number of months in the maximum term of
imprisonment by five.
example, if the maximum penalty is imprisonment for 12 months and no monetary
penalty is specified, the applicable monetary penalty
is 60 penalty units or
also provides that a court may impose a maximum
monetary penalty upon a body corporate that is five times the monetary penalty
by a natural person.
term of imprisonment for 12 months, where no penalty is specified, therefore,
would enable a court to impose a monetary penalty
on a body corporate of 300
penalty units or $33,000.
20.11 Finally, the
makes provision for indictable and
summary offences. An offence may be tried either on indictment (that is, by a
trial before a judge
or jury in a County Court, District Court or Supreme Court)
or summarily (that is, by a magistrate without a jury). Summary offences
typically less serious offences than indictable offences.
provides that, if not otherwise stated, an
offence with a maximum penalty of 12 months or less is a summary
which means that
offences with a maximum penalty exceeding 12 months are usually indictable
offences. The
provides, however, that, unless otherwise
stated, indictable offences with a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment or
be tried summarily, if the prosecutor and defendant
20.13 If an indictable offence with a maximum penalty of five years
imprisonment or less is tried summarily, then a maximum penalty
of 12 months
imprisonment or 60 penalty units applies, unless otherwise
If an indictable offence
with a higher maximum penalty is tried summarily, then the maximum penalty is
two years imprisonment or
120 penalty units, unless otherwise
Royal Commissions Act
sets a maximum penalty of six months
imprisonment or 10 penalty units (presently $1,100) for failing to attend or
produce documents,
or for refusing to be sworn or make an affirmation, or answer
a question. The Act sets a maximum penalty of 12 months imprisonment
penalty units ($2,200) for publishing contrary to a direction of a Royal
Commission. All of these offences are summary offences.
Royal Commissions Act
also includes a number of offences
penalising interference with evidence or witnesses. As discussed in Chapter 18,
there are parallel
offences in the
that apply to Royal
Commissions and, if the ALRC’s proposal for Official Inquiries is
accepted, also would apply to the Official
Inquiries proposed by the ALRC in
this Discussion Paper.
offence in the
Royal Commissions Act
dealing with false or misleading
evidence also parallels offences in the
Criminal Code
(Cth), which also
apply to Royal Commissions and would apply to Official
In Chapter 18, the
ALRC proposes that the offences in the
Royal Commissions Act
dealing with
interference with evidence or witnesses should not be included in the proposed
Inquiries Act
, and instead reliance should be placed on the offences in
20.16 This proposal makes it unnecessary to deal with the penalties in
relation to those offences in this chapter, since the maximum
penalties in the
Criminal Code
would apply. The table below sets out
the maximum penalties applicable under the
Royal Commissions Act
maximum penalties applicable to the equivalent offences under the
Criminal Code
, with differences between the penalties indicated in
These are the maximum
penalties applicable to a natural person, where the offence is tried on
indictment.
Table: 20.1 Penalties
Penalty under the
Royal Commissions Act
Penalty under the
Criminal Code
(differences between penalties are in
False or misleading evidence
5 years, or 200 penalty units
5 years, or
300 penalty units
for false evidence (
60 penalty units
for false or misleading
information or documents (
Criminal Code
ss 137.1, 137.2)
Bribery of witness
5 years, or 300 penalty units
5 years, or 300 penalty units (
Fraud on witness
2 years, or 120 penalty units
2 years, or 120 penalty units (
Destroying documents or other things
2 years or 100 penalty units
300 penalty units
Fabricating evidence
Not an offence in the Act
5 years, or 300 penalty units
Preventing witnesses from attending
1 year, or 60 penalty units
1 year, or 60 penalty units (
Injury to witness
1 year, or 10 penalty units
5 years, or 60 penalty units
Dismissal by employers of witness
1 year, or 10 penalty units
5 years, or 60 penalty units
Submissions and
consultations
20.17 In the Issues Paper,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
35), the ALRC asked whether the penalties in the Act needed to be amended, and
what penalties, if any, should apply to other forms
of inquiry established by
legislation.
20.18 Few stakeholders addressed the issue of penalties in either submissions
or consultations. A few indicated a concern that the
penalties for
non-compliance were too low and therefore ineffective. The Law Council of
Australia submitted that the variation in
the penalties between the
Commissions Act
Criminal Code
unjustified, and that the offences for non-compliance should attract the same
maximum penalty.
There was very
little comment from stakeholders on whether different penalties ought to apply
to other forms of inquiry established
by legislation.
Penalties for
Official Inquiries
20.19 The ALRC has considered whether different levels of penalty ought to
apply to Royal Commissions and the Official Inquiries proposed
Discussion Paper. For example, offences of refusing or failing to comply with
the requirements of a Special Commission of
Inquiry in New South Wales attract a
higher maximum penalty than in relation to Royal Commissions in that
in both cases the penalties are very
20.20 As discussed in Chapter 5, it is proposed that Royal Commissions should
be distinguished from Official Inquiries in a number
of ways. These differences
include: Royal Commissions should be established by the Governor-General, while
Official Inquiries should
be established by a minister; Royal Commissions are to
be established for issues of substantial public importance, while Official
Inquiries should be established for issues of public importance; and Royal
Commissions have a number of investigative powers which
Official Inquiries would
20.21 It could be argued that, under these proposals, Royal Commissions will
deal with matters that justify higher penalties than
Official Inquiries, because
there is a higher prospect that criminal activity of a serious kind may be
involved. In the ALRC’s
view, however, the penalties should be the same
for Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. The primary reason for this is
the form of an inquiry may depend on a number of different variables, and
the seriousness of the conduct that is the subject of the
inquiry is only one
20.22 It will not necessarily be the case, for example, that a failure to
comply with a notice or direction of a Royal Commission
will be more serious
than a failure to comply with an Official Inquiry. For example, an Official
Inquiry may be established to investigate
an alleged systemic criminal matter
because it is anticipated that the investigation will be quite confined. A Royal
Commission may
be established for policy purposes because of the substantial
public interest of the policy involved.
20.23 Since the form of the inquiry will not necessarily dictate the
seriousness of the conduct to be deterred, the same maximum penalty
is proposed
in relation to both Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries. The seriousness of
the conduct can be considered, however,
as a factor in sentencing.
20.24 This approach is adopted in other jurisdictions with different forms of
inquiry, although there tend to be fewer differences
between these forms of
inquiry. For example, the Australian Capital Territory and Victoria provide the
same penalties in respect
of Royal Commissions and Boards of
The Inquiries Bill 2008
(NZ) proposes the same penalties in respect of its three different forms of
Consistent penalties
are also provided in relation to offences by witnesses in federal
Penalties for
non-compliance
20.25 In Chapter 18, the ALRC proposes that it should be an offence under the
Inquiries Act
for a person, without reasonable excuse, to refuse
or fail to:
swear an oath or make an affirmation when required to do so by an
inquiry member;
answer a question when required to do so by an inquiry member, or a
person authorised by an inquiry member to ask the question;
comply with a notice requiring a person to attend or appear; or
comply with a notice requiring a person to produce a document or
other thing, in the custody or control of that
Chapter 19, the ALRC proposes that inquiries also should have the power to apply
to the Federal Court for enforcement of
their orders, as an alternative
mechanism to ensure
compliance.
20.27 As noted above, the existing offences of non-compliance in the Act
attract a maximum penalty of six months imprisonment or 10
penalty units
($1,100). The maximum term of imprisonment is consistent with the penalty
benchmark for similar offences in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
consistent with the penalties imposed in relation to federal
It is higher than the
penalty imposed in relation to hearings before the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission (ASIC),
although lower than the penalty imposed in relation to hearings before the
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission.
20.28 Existing penalties for offences of non-compliance are broadly
consistent with the penalties for equivalent offences in state
and territory
legislation, which typically range from between imprisonment for three to six
months, with the highest penalty being
imprisonment for one
20.29 The only maximum penalties for similar conduct that are significantly
higher are provided for in legislation governing standing
crime and corruption
commissions. Similar offences in relation to the federal Australian Commission
on Law Enforcement Integrity
(ACLEI) attract a maximum penalty of two
years imprisonment, or 120 penalty
while in New South Wales
similar offences in relation to the Independent Commission Against Corruption
attract a maximum penalty of two years
imprisonment.
20.30 The highest maximum penalty for similar offences—five years
imprisonment or 200 penalty units—is imposed in relation
to the Australian
Crime Commission (ACC). This was increased in
Before the increase, the
penalties were similar to those in the
Royal Commissions Act
. This level
of penalty was recommended for Royal Commissions by Commissioner Cole, who
headed the Royal Commission into the Building
and Construction Industry (2003)
(Building Royal Commission).
20.31 The increase in penalties in relation to the ACC was part of a package
of reforms designed to overcome the problem of significant
non-compliance by
witnesses. The increase was subject to an independent review in
in which the ACC reported
that the increase in penalties had facilitated the performance of its
The statistics set
out in that report show that before the amendments, the penalties imposed by
courts ranged from a $500 fine to
four months imprisonment. During
2005–2006, the typical penalty imposed was 12 months
imprisonment.
The reviewer
concluded that, in light of the varying circumstances of cases, the ‘best
that can be said is that the prevailing
range of sentences imposed by the courts
increased’.
20.32 The current maximum penalties for offences of non-compliance of six
months imprisonment is an appropriate penalty, although
the maximum monetary
penalty should be adjusted to 30 penalty units ($3,300) in line with the ratio
. This level of penalty is consistent with a broad range
of federal legislation, including legislation governing courts and tribunals.
20.33 The ALRC notes that some Acts provide a higher level of penalty in
relation to federal investigatory bodies. In the ALRC’s
view, a maximum
penalty in the range of five years imprisonment, as applies to non-compliance
with the ACC, is unjustified. The ACC
is a standing organisation responsible for
serious and organised crime. Witnesses before the ACC are likely to be facing
significant
criminal penalties, and a higher level of deterrence may therefore
be necessary. The ACC is also subject to a much higher level of
accountability
than an ad hoc inquiry, with oversight mechanisms including a Board, an
Inter-Governmental Committee, and a Parliamentary
considerations apply to the penalties applicable to ACLEI proceedings.
20.34 Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, in contrast, are ad hoc
bodies which are not established for the purpose of enforcing
investigating breaches of laws, but rather to inquire and report and make
recommendations to government. The penalty required
to deter non-compliance is
therefore less than in relation to investigations of serious and organised crime
or corruption. Of course,
Royal Commissions have in the past investigated
allegations of criminal activity and corruption. Nevertheless, the purpose of a
Commission of this nature remains in the end very different from the
purpose of bodies such as ACC or ACLEI.
20.35 A higher level of penalty would also be out of proportion to the
penalties imposed in relation to interference with evidence
or witnesses. As
noted above, maximum penalties in the range of one to five years imprisonment
are imposed in relation to these offences
offences generally involve a more culpable interference with the processes of a
Royal Commission or Official Inquiry than
mere non-compliance, and this should
be reflected in the applicable penalties.
20.36 It is the ALRC’s view, therefore, that the offence of refusing or
failing to swear or affirm, answer a question, or comply
with notices requiring
attendance or the production of evidence, should attract a maximum penalty of
six months imprisonment, or
30 penalty units.
Proposal 20–1
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, in the case of Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries, the maximum
penalty for the offences of refusing or failing
to swear or affirm, answer a
question, or comply with notices requiring attendance or the production of
evidence, is six months imprisonment
or 30 penalty units.
Unauthorised
publications
20.37 In Chapter 18, it is proposed that there should be an offence of
contravening a direction which concerns either national security
information,
the prohibition or restriction of public access to a hearing, or the prohibition
or restriction of publication of certain
information before an
This proposal extends
the existing offence of publication contrary to a direction of the Royal
Commission in
Royal Commissions Act
to directions
prohibiting or restricting public access to a hearing, which involve similar
considerations as that of publication.
20.38 The power to make directions in relation to national security,
discussed in Chapter 13, relates to directions as to the provision
of lists of
national security information and the forms in which national security
information may be produced or otherwise used
in the conduct of an
inquiry—including restrictions on access, subsequent use and disclosure of
such information.
20.39 As noted above, the existing offence in s 6D(3) of the Act
attracts a maximum penalty of 12 months imprisonment, or 20 penalty units.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
does not provide a penalty
benchmark for these kinds of offences.
20.40 The maximum penalty of 12 months imprisonment is the same as that which
applies to unauthorised publications in relation to
It is the highest penalty
provided in relation to commissions of inquiry in
It is also consistent
with the penalty relating to the New South Wales Independent Commission Against
Corruption.
20.41 The offences in the
National Security Information (Criminal and
Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(Cth), which relate to restrictions on
disclosure of national security information and contravention of court orders in
relation to
national security information, attract a maximum penalty of two
years imprisonment.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) imposes a maximum
penalty of two years imprisonment in relation to unauthorised disclosures by
defence members or defence civilians
which are likely to prejudice the security
or defence of Australia.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
specifies a penalty
benchmark of two years imprisonment or 120 penalty units for breach of secrecy
provisions,
although higher
penalties sometimes apply to secrecy offences relating to national security
information.
20.43 The ALRC is currently conducting an inquiry into secrecy provisions,
and has proposed in its 2009 Discussion Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
74), that a general secrecy offence be introduced. Among other things, the
general secrecy offence would prohibit disclosures
that harm, were reasonably
likely to or were intended to harm, the national security, defence or
international relations of the
Commonwealth.
The proposed
offence would have three tiers, depending on the mental state with which the act
was committed,
applicable penalties will range from two years imprisonment to seven years
imprisonment.
20.44 The offence of unauthorised publication should continue to attract a
maximum penalty of 12 months imprisonment, as this is consistent
with similar
offences in federal legislation. The maximum monetary penalty should be adjusted
in line with the ratio in the
, so the offence would carry a
maximum monetary penalty of 60 penalty units ($6,600) rather than the existing
20 penalty units.
20.45 This penalty is higher than the penalty for non-compliance, discussed
above. In the view of the ALRC, this is justified because
the consequences of
unauthorised disclosure can be serious and damaging to the interests that are
sought to be protected by the non-publication
order. For example, an
unauthorised publication could cause significant harm to people participating in
an inquiry, such as a threat
to their safety or a significant breach of their
greater than the potential for harm caused by non-compliance.
20.46 It is the ALRC’s view that no distinction should be made in terms
of penalty between the offence of unauthorised publication,
and the offence of
contravening a direction prohibiting or restricting public access to hearings.
Both directions not to publish
and directions restricting public access to
hearings are designed to minimise the same kinds of harm, and the contravention
direction restricting public access has the potential to cause the same
kinds of harm as a direction restricting publication.
20.47 In the ALRC’s view, however, the offence of contravening a
direction concerning national security information should attract
penalty of two years imprisonment, or 120 penalty units. National security
information involves a critical public interest,
and disclosure of such
information may cause substantial damage to Australian national interests,
members of the security and intelligence
agencies, and others. The maximum
penalty of two years imprisonment is consistent with that applicable to courts
and tribunals under
National Security Information (Civil and Criminal
Proceedings) Act
, and the seriousness of the conduct and the prospect of
harm is similar in relation to those proceedings and the proceedings of Royal
Commissions or Official Inquiries.
Proposal 20–2
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, in the case of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, the maximum
penalty for the offence of contravening
a direction concerning the prohibition
or restriction of public access to a hearing, or the prohibition or restriction
of publication,
is 12 months imprisonment or 60 penalty units.
Proposal 20–3
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, in the case of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, the maximum
penalty for the offence of contravening
a direction concerning national security
information is two years imprisonment or 120 penalty units.
substantial disruption
Royal Commissions Act
prohibits a range of
conduct such as disturbing or interrupting proceedings, or using insulting
language towards a Royal Commission.
This offence is discussed in Chapter 19.
is subject to a maximum penalty of three months imprisonment, or two
penalty units ($220).
20.49 In Chapter 19, the ALRC proposes that
should be replaced by a more
limited offence of causing substantial disruption to a proceeding of a Royal
Commission or Official
Inquiry, with the intention to disrupt the proceedings,
or recklessness as to whether the conduct would have that
The ALRC also proposes
that members of Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries have the power to
exclude a person from the proceedings
of an inquiry if that the person is
disrupting the inquiry.
20.50 In the Building Royal Commission, Commissioner Cole criticised the
penalty for
as ‘manifestly inadequate’ and recommended it be
increased to at least $5,000.
noted above, the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
specifies that
the ratio of months of imprisonment to penalty units in
—namely, that one month of imprisonment should equate to five
penalty units—should generally apply when setting penalties.
advice was followed, a maximum penalty of $5,000 would require a maximum term of
imprisonment of at least 10 months.
20.51 The maximum penalty of three months is also contrary to the advice in
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
, which directs those framing
Commonwealth offences to refrain from imposing terms of imprisonment of less
than six months. It states
Avoiding provision for short term prison terms underlines the message that
imprisonment is reserved for serious offences and also
avoids the potential for
burdening State/Territory correctional systems with minor
20.52 In contrast, in its report,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders
(ALRC 103), the ALRC recommended that sentences of
imprisonment of less than six months should continue to be available in the
of federal offenders.
The ALRC expressed the view that the federal sentencing regime protects against
the inappropriate imposition of short
The abolition of
short sentences may have perverse consequences, resulting in offenders receiving
longer sentences of imprisonment
than would otherwise have been
20.53 The penalty of three months imprisonment is also shorter than in
comparable legislation. Similar conduct in relation to ACLEI
and ASIC attracts a
maximum penalty of six months imprisonment and 12 months imprisonment
respectively.
In the Australian
Capital Territory, conduct of this kind before a Royal Commission would attract
a maximum penalty of 12 months
imprisonment.
Similar conduct
before the ACC would attract a penalty of two years imprisonment, although the
offence also covers other conduct
obstruction.
20.54 A maximum penalty of six months imprisonment, and a maximum monetary
penalty of 30 penalty units, in line with the ratio in
would be appropriate for the offence of causing substantial disruption. It is
consistent with the penalty imposed in relation to
ACLEI. It is also consistent
with the penalty proposed for offences of non-compliance. In the ALRC’s
view, the act of causing
substantial disruption to the proceedings of an inquiry
may be as serious an obstruction to its proceedings as refusing to comply
notices requiring production of documents.
20.55 The offence of causing substantial disruption does not justify the same
penalty as the offence of unauthorised publication which,
as discussed above,
should attract a maximum penalty of 12 months imprisonment, or 60 penalty units.
The offence of causing substantial
disruption causes harm to the inquiry itself,
while the offence of unauthorised publication has the potential to cause harm to
wide range of interests such as the physical safety and privacy of those
participating in an inquiry.
Proposal 20–4
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
that, in the case of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries, the maximum
penalty for the offence of causing substantial
disruption is six months
imprisonment or 30 penalty units.
Proceedings
20.56 As discussed above, offences may be prosecuted in one of two ways,
either summarily (that is, before a magistrate without trial
by jury) or on
indictment (before a judge or jury in the County, District or Supreme Court). As
noted earlier, the
provides that, unless otherwise stated, the
procedure for prosecution depends on the level of the maximum penalty that
the offence.
20.57 Under the proposals made in this chapter, all of the offences under the
Inquiries Act
will be summary offences. The exception to this is
the proposed offence of contravening a direction concerning national security
information,
which would be an indictable offence but could be tried summarily
if the prosecutor and defendant
20.58 Federal offences are typically prosecuted in the criminal courts of
state or territories, and the procedure for prosecution
in that state or
territory normally applies.
Usually, summary proceedings may be initiated by any person by laying a charge,
information or complaint.
20.59 In the procedure on indictment, before a person is tried before a judge
or jury there is usually a committal hearing before
magistrate.
The function of the
committal hearing is to determine whether there is a sufficient case against a
person to warrant a trial.
any person may institute a committal proceeding, the person cannot be tried on
indictment unless the prosecution is in the
name of the Attorney-General or such
other person as the Governor-General has appointed in that
The Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) may take over a prosecution of an offence
commenced by another person.
Royal Commissions Act
outlines the way in
which proceedings for summary offences against the Act may be instituted. It
provides as follows:
proceedings in respect of any offence against this Act (other than an indictable
offence) may be instituted by action, information,
or other appropriate
proceeding, in the Federal Court of Australia by the Attorney-General or the
Director of Public Prosecutions,
or by information or other appropriate
proceeding by any person in any court of summary jurisdiction.
20.61 In addition to the usual procedure for summary offences, this section
expressly empowers the Attorney-General or CDPP to initiate
proceedings in the
Federal Court. The CDPP also may take over a summary prosecution commenced by
another person.
20.62 It is unusual for the Federal Court to have jurisdiction over these
kinds of offences. The Federal Court does not have jurisdiction
in relation to
similar offences in relation to other federal bodies. As a practical matter,
proceedings for offences under the
Royal Commissions Act
generally are
not instituted in the Federal Court, but, rather, are instituted in state and
territory courts.
20.63 Originally, this provision of the
Royal Commissions Act
that proceedings in respect of an offence under the Act, other than an
indictable offence, could be brought in the High
Court of Australia. The Federal
Court was substituted for the High Court in
The section, in its
original form, was inserted in 1912 as a result of a prosecution for
non-attendance before a Royal Commission
which had taken 10 or 11 weeks in a
court of summary jurisdiction by the time the bill was introduced. The then
Attorney-General
emphasised that the amending Act provided for a direct
reference to the High Court in order to expedite matters, because the High
then despatched business much more quickly than courts of summary
20.64 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether there were any concerns about the way
proceedings could be instituted.
The ALRC received no submissions or stakeholder comment on this issue.
20.65 One issue that was raised in IP 35 was whether there should be any
restriction on who may institute a proceeding for a summary
offence under the
Royal Commissions Act
. For example, some overseas jurisdictions provide
that prosecutions for these offences can be instituted only with the consent of
20.66 The primary justification for a requirement for the Attorney-General or
the CDPP to consent to a prosecution is that it provides
an additional safeguard
to ensure that prosecutions are only brought in appropriate
circumstances.
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
advises that a consent provision
may be included, for example, where ‘it was not possible to define the
offence so precisely
that it covered the mischief aimed at and no more’ or
for offences that ‘involve a use of the criminal law in sensitive
controversial areas, or must take account of important considerations of public
20.67 In 1996, with respect to the repeal of certain provisions requiring the
Attorney-General’s consent to prosecution, the
then Attorney-General, the
Hon Daryl Williams AM QC MP, observed that consent provisions were originally
enacted for the purpose
of deterring private prosecutions brought in
inappropriate circumstances—particularly for offences relating to national
or international treaty obligations.
However, since establishing the office of the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions the retention of those provisions is difficult
to justify. That is
particularly so now that the Director of Public Prosecutions has the power to
take over and discontinue a private
prosecution brought in relation to a
Commonwealth offence.
20.68 Consent requirements also may raise concerns about whether the decision
to institute proceedings is politicised, as the ALRC
noted in its inquiry into
federal sedition laws.
20.69 A minor issue arises in relation to the application of
to offences
under the Act, other than indictable offences. As noted above, the ALRC proposes
a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment
in relation to the offence of
contravening directions concerning national security information, which would
make that offence an
indictable offence. There is no reason why s 10 should not
apply to that offence, however, if that offence is prosecuted summarily
consent of the prosecutor and defendant. If a provision similar to s 10 is to be
included in the proposed
Inquiries Act
, therefore, it should apply to any
offence under the Act tried summarily.
20.70 There are no compelling reasons why the usual practice of allowing any
person to initiate a summary proceeding should not apply
to offences relating to
Royal Commissions or Official Inquiries. In particular, there is no reason why
the consent of the Attorney-General
or Director of Public Prosecutions should be
necessary in relation to prosecutions in state or territory courts. The kinds of
in the proposed
Inquiries Act
do not raise any of the special
considerations that might justify such a requirement.
20.71 While it is unusual to confer jurisdiction on the Federal Court in
these cases, there appears to be no reason why the Federal
Court should not have
this jurisdiction. In practice, it is likely that such offences will continue to
be prosecuted in state or
territory courts. The ALRC is, however, interested in
stakeholder views on this issue.
20.72 It is the ALRC’s view that a provision equivalent to
Royal Commissions Act
should be retained in the proposed
. As noted above, this section should apply to all offences under the
proposed Act which are tried summarily, so that it also applies
consistently to
the offence of contravening a direction relating to national security when that
offence is prosecuted summarily.
Proposal 20–5
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should include a
provision dealing with the institution of proceedings for offences under the Act
in equivalent terms to
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Costs in criminal proceedings
20.73 Issues arise in relation to the costs of criminal proceedings. In
determining who should bear these costs, there are competing
interests of
justice. On the one hand, it is ordinarily unjust if an innocent person suffers
financial hardship as a result of being
unable to recover the costs of a
successful defence. On the other hand, the administration of criminal justice
may be adversely affected
if the initiation and conduct of prosecutions are
unduly influenced by the risk of an adverse costs order.
20.74 Like most federal offences, the offences under the
Royal Commissions
are normally prosecuted in state or territory courts, and the costs of
proceedings are determined by the laws of the state or territory
in which the
offence is prosecuted.
recovery of costs for those charged with federal offences, therefore, may differ
depending on where the charges are heard.
20.75 In all Australian states or territories, different costs rules apply
depending on whether the offence is prosecuted summarily
or on indictment. In
summary proceedings, the court usually has a broad power to award such costs to
either party as it thinks is
just and reasonable in the circumstances of the
The purpose of the award
is to reimburse the successful party for the reasonable costs the party has
incurred, rather than to punish
the unsuccessful
The discretion, however,
is subject to different conditions in each state and territory.
20.76 Although these statutory discretions are often framed broadly, they
must be exercised in accordance with the principles outlined
by the High Court
Latoudis v Casey
that case the High Court ruled that, in summary proceedings, ‘in ordinary
circumstances it would not be just or reasonable
to deprive a defendant who has
secured the dismissal of a criminal charge brought against him or her of an
Exceptionally, however, it may be just and reasonable to deprive a successful
defendant of his or her costs, such as where the defendant’s
after the alleged offence took place, brought the prosecution upon himself or
20.77 In indictable proceedings, the successful defendant is entitled to
recover his or her costs only in exceptional circumstances.
although in some jurisdictions the relevant
statutes may allow costs to be
recovered in limited
circumstances.
20.78 In its report,
Costs Shifting—Who Pays for Litigation
(ALRC 75), the ALRC examined the way costs are awarded in proceedings before
courts and tribunals exercising federal
In relation to
costs for criminal proceedings, the ALRC recommended that there should be no
distinction between summary and indictable
proceedings.
recommended that, in criminal proceedings, the prosecution should pay the
reasonable costs of an accused who is successful
in obtaining a dismissal,
acquittal or withdrawal of charges, unless the court was satisfied in all the
circumstances of the case
that some other order should be
The ALRC listed a number
of factors which might indicate that some other order should be
These were similar to
those identified by the courts as reasons for depriving a successful defendant
of his or her costs in summary
proceedings. This recommendation has not yet been
implemented.
20.79 The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia, considering the same
issue in the context of a review of the criminal justice
system, recommended
that no costs should be awarded to successful defendants in either summary or
indictable proceedings.
Costs in the Royal Commissions
Royal Commissions Act
provides that a
court ‘may award costs against any party’ in any proceedings for an
offence against the Act, other than
proceedings for the commitment for trial of
a person charged with an indictable offence. A similar provision in
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) has been interpreted as
conferring a general power to award costs according to the principles outlined
Latoudis v Casey
is, costs in a summary proceeding ordinarily should be awarded to a successful
defendant, although exceptionally a successful
defendant may be deprived of the
costs, such as where the defendant’s conduct brought the prosecution upon
himself or herself.
20.81 Importantly, the Court also held that
was directly
inconsistent with, and therefore rendered invalid, a state provision which set
out criteria to be satisfied before the
making of a costs
Applying this reasoning,
Royal Commissions Act
will also render invalid any state
provision that restrains in any way the discretion of the court to order
20.82 One difference between
Royal Commissions Act
Taxation Administration Act
also appears to apply
to proceedings on indictment, other than committal proceedings. This power to
award costs in indictable proceedings
is unusual, in light of the general
provisions restricting recovery of costs in indictable proceedings. As noted
earlier, the ALRC’s
proposal that reliance be placed on general offences
Criminal Code
prohibiting interference
with evidence or witnesses means that there is only one indictable offence under
the proposed Act, namely
the contravention of directions relating to national
security information.
Consistently with
Royal Commissions Act
, discussed above, if
a provision equivalent to
is to be retained in the proposed
, it should apply to all offences under the Act, where tried
20.83 Section 15 also provides that ‘all provisions of this Act
relating to the recovery of penalties, except as to commitment
to gaol, shall
extend to the recovery of any costs adjudged to be paid’. This part of the
provision is redundant as there are
no longer any provisions in the Act dealing
with the recovery of
provides that a law of an Australian state or territory relating to the
enforcement or recovery of fines applies to a person convicted
in the state or
territory of an offence against the law of the
Commonwealth.
20.84 In IP 35, the ALRC asked whether there were any concerns about the
substance or operation of
Royal Commissions Act
rules, if any, should apply to the costs of a proceeding for an offence under
legislation relating to other public
No stakeholder
addressed this issue.
20.85 In the ALRC’s view, a provision similar to
Commissions Act
should be retained in the proposed
Inquiries Act.
most cases, the power to award costs will be conferred on the state or territory
court in which the offence is prosecuted. There
are, however, differences
between the jurisdictions in relation to the approach taken to costs, and it is
desirable that someone
charged with a federal offence is not disadvantaged in
recovering costs because of the place in which he or she is prosecuted.
20.86 The provision should confer a power to award costs against any party,
rather than in the form recommended in ALRC 75. As noted
recommendation in ALRC 75 spells out the prevailing rules relating to costs in
summary proceedings, and applies them to
indictable proceedings as well. As
noted above, all of the offences under the proposed
Inquiries Act
one exception, are summary offences. As well, the recommendation in ALRC 75
applied to all criminal proceedings, and it would
be anomalous to include such a
provision in the limited context of inquiries.
20.87 As noted earlier, however, some changes ought to be made to any
provision replicating s 15. The provision should apply to offences
the Act tried summarily, so as to apply consistently to all of the offences
under the Act, and to ensure it does not apply
to indictable proceedings. It
should omit the part of s 15 dealing with the recovery of penalties, which
is now redundant.
Proposal 20–6
The proposed
Inquiries Act
should provide
for the award of costs in criminal proceedings in terms equivalent to those in
Royal Commissions Act 1902
(Cth), but the part of
dealing with the recovery of penalties for offences under the
Commissions Act
should be repealed.
Ibbs v The Queen
[1987] HCA 46
(1987) 163 CLR
Veen v The Queen [No 2]
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR 465
Crimes Act 1914
These are discussed in detail in
the related context of sentencing in Australian Law Reform Commission,
Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006), Ch
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Ibid, 40–41, 44,
Crimes Act 1914
the effect of increasing the specified monetary penalties in the
Commissions Act 1902
(Cth) by 10%.
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code
137.1(1)(c)(ii), 137.2(1)(c).
Proposal 18–8.
Criminal Law Officers Committee (MCLOC), a committee of the Standing Committee
of the Attorneys-General, is developing
a Model Criminal Code in an ongoing
project of harmonising Australian criminal laws. MCLOC has recommended
alteration of some of
these maximum penalties, with two levels of maximum
penalty: 5 years or 7 years. See
Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code—Chapter 7: Administration of Justice Offences
(1998), Appendix 2.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
, Issues Paper 35
(2009), Questions 9–8, 9–9.
Law Council of Australia,
19 May 2009.
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1983
(10 penalty units);
Royal Commissions Act 1923
Royal Commissions Act
Inquiries Act 1991
Evidence Act
(Vic) ss 16, 19, 20.
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ) cl 30.
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
There is no equivalent offence for the High
Court, which punishes similar conduct as contempt:
Judiciary Act 1903
Proposal 18–1.
Proposal 19–1.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Federal Magistrates Act
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Migration Act 1958
Defence Act 1903
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Trade Practices Act
(12 months or 20 penalty
Royal Commissions
(3 months);
Criminal Code
(ACT) s 721 (6
Commissions of Inquiry Act 1950
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1988
National Crime Authority
Legislation Amendment Act 2001
(Cth) sch 1, cl
Final Report of the
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
Independent Review of the Provisions of the
Australian Crime Commission Act
—Report to the Inter-Governmental Committee,
Australian Crime Commission
Proposal 18–7.
Proposal 13–2.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Crime Commission Act
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
It is equivalent to the maximum
Royal Commission (Police Service) Act 1994
Independent Commission Against
Corruption Act 1988
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, DP 74 (2009),
Ibid, Proposal
Ibid, Proposal
Ibid, Proposal
Proposal 19–3.
Proposal 19–4.
Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Construction
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
A Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), Rec 7–8.
Crimes Act 1914
provides that a sentence of imprisonment
should not be imposed for a federal offence unless the court is satisfied that
sentence is appropriate in the circumstances of the
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), [7.70]–[7.72].
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
, except for
(which applies to such conduct before a Disciplinary
Royal Commissions Act
Crime Commission Act 2002
Proposal 20–3.
These rules
are applied to Commonwealth offences under the
Judiciary Act 1903
Crimes Act 1914
The Attorney-General or the
Director of Public Prosecutions may also present an ex officio indictment, in
which case a committal
hearing is unnecessary, although this practice is
discouraged:
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR
Thomson Reuters,
, vol 11 Criminal Procedure, 11.5, [1] (as at 29 June
Judiciary Act 1903
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1983
, (5). This does not apply if it is a
prosecution for an indictable offence commenced by the Attorney-General or
Special Prosecutor.
For example, the prosecution of
Martin Kingham following the Building Royal Commission was conducted in the
Melbourne Magistrates
Court: S Balogh, ‘Unions Aim to Build on First Round
The Australian
(Sydney), 8 May 2003, 4.
(Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1979
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 24 July 1912, 1187 (W
Hughes—Attorney-General).
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question
Inquiries Act
(UK) s 35(6);
Commissions of Investigation Act
(Ireland) s 49.
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
(2008), [2.25].
Ibid, [2.27].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
House of Representatives, 4 December 1996, 7714,
(D Williams—Attorney-General). Under
of Public Prosecutions Act 1983
(Cth), the CDPP can take over a private
prosecution and terminate
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in Australia
, ALRC 104 (2006),
Judiciary Act 1903
Procedure Act 1986
Magistrates' Court
Justices Act 1886
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
Summary Procedure Act 1921
(SA) s 189;
Justices Act 1959
, (2), (2A);
Justices Act 1928
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967
Costs in Criminal Cases 1976
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Costs Shifting—Who Pays for Litigation?
Law Reform Commission of Western
Review of the Criminal and Civil Justice System in Western
, Project 92 (1999),
[31.15]–[31.17].
Commissioner
of Taxation v MacPherson
[2000] 1 Qd R
Under s 109 of the
Constitution
The provisions of
state and territory legislation that operate to constrain discretion were
discussed in
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
Proposal 20–3.
12 and 14 of the Act, dealing with the recovery of pecuniary penalties imposed
for offences against the Act, were repealed
Royal Commissions
Amendment Act 1982
Crimes Act 1914
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions Act
Issues Paper 35 (2009), Question 9–11.
Appendix 1. List of
Submissions
Submission Number
Australian Government, Department of Immigration and Citizenship
20 May 2009
Australian Government Solicitor
18 June 2009
Australian Intelligence Community
2 June 2009
A Bressington
25 June 2009
Commonwealth Ombudsman
4 June 2009
Community and Public Sector Union
22 May 2009
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
17 May 2009
Confidential
18 June 2009
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
12 May 2009
Law Council of Australia
19 May 2009
Liberty Victoria
12 May 2009
I Mackintosh
19 May 2009
17 May 2009
21 May 2009
16 May 2009
Victorian Society of Computers and the Law
12 May 2009
Appendix 2. List of Agencies,
Organisations and Individuals Consulted
K Alexander, Senior Lawyer, Australian Government Solicitor
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
Australian Government Department of Defence, Directorate of Military
Administrative Law
Australian Government Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
D Bamber, Magistrate, Northern Territory Magistrate Courts
Alice Springs
Dame M Bazley, former member of a number of New Zealand commissions of
T Begbie, General Counsel, Australian Government Solicitor
A Berger, General Counsel, Australian Government Solicitor
The Hon Chief Justice M Black, Federal Court of Australia
Emeritus Professor E Campbell, former Dean, Monash University
Mt Waverley
C Carruthers QC, Barrister
Central Australian Aboriginal Legal Service
Alice Springs
Central Land Council
Alice Springs
The Hon S Charles QC, former judge of the Victorian Court of Appeal
P Clark SC, Barrister
Telephone conference
The Hon J Clarke AO RDF QC, former judge of the Supreme Court of New South
L Coffey, Acting Northern Territory Anti-Discrimination Commissioner
The Hon Terence Cole QC, former judge of the New South Wales Court of
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Community and Public Sector Union
Canberra, Sydney
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
Professor R Creyke, Director, Australian Centre for Military Law, The
Australian National University
E Cubillo, Consultant, Indigenous Employment and Development, University of
South Australia
C Currie, Holding Redlich
S Daley, Special Counsel Litigation, Australian Government Solicitor
Dr S Donaghue, Barrister
P Flood AO, former chair of a number of federal inquires
Dr I Freckelton SC, Barrister
The Hon K Hammond, former head of the Corruption and Crime Commission of
Western Australia
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
M Johns, South Australian Coroner
M Johnson, Director, Magistrates Court and Tribunals, Court and Tribunal
Services, Western Australian Department of the Attorney-General
The Hon Justice J Judd, Supreme Court of Victoria
Liberty Victoria
A Markus, Special Counsel Immigration Litigation, Australian Government
D Marr, Journalist, The Sydney Morning Herald
The Hon Chief Justice W Martin, Supreme Court of Western Australia
R McClure, Senior Executive Lawyer, Australian Government Solicitor
R McIlwaine, Senior Solicitor, Legal Representation Office
D Meagher QC, Barrister
Telephone conference
G Millar, former Executive Officer of Royal Commissions and public
The Hon T Mulligan, Law Society of South Australia
K Murray, Senior Member, New Zealand Bar Association
National Archives of Australia
Telephone conference
New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs
New Zealand Law Commission
North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Northern Territory Aboriginal Interpreters Service
Northern Territory Community Justice Centre
Northern Territory Law Society (Round table)
Northern Territory Legal Aid
Alice Springs
The Hon Judge Catherine O’Brien, District Court of Western
Telephone conference
The Hon Justice N Owen, Western Australian Court of Appeal
D Page, Senior General Counsel, Australian Government Solicitor
M Palmer AO APM, former chair of the Inquiry into the Circumstances of the
Immigration Detention of Cornelia Rau, Inspector of Transport
Telephone conference
K Pettit QC, Barrister
Dr S Prasser, Senior Lecturer in Management, University of the Sunshine
H Prince, Barrister
H Rapke, Holding Redlich
The Hon Acting Justice R Sackville QC
A Schapel, Deputy South Australian Coroner
T Sharp, State Solicitor, Western Australian State Solicitor’s
Professor P Shergold, University of New South Wales
Ms Iris Stevens, former judge of the District Court of South Adelaide
D White QC, Barrister
The Hon J Wood, former chair of a number of New South Wales state
commissions of inquiry
The Hon H Wootten QC, former judge of the New South Wales Supreme
Appendix 3. List of
Abbreviations
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Australian Crime Commission
Australian Commission on Law Enforcement Integrity
Australian Defence Force
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Advance to the Finance Minister
Australian Federal Police
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
Australian Government Solicitor
Australian Intelligence Community
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Costs Shifting—Who Pays for
Litigation,
ALRC 75 (1995)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the
Federal Civil Justice System
, ALRC 89 (2000)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil
and Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: Protection of
Classified and Security Sensitive Information,
ALRC 98 (2004)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of
Federal Offenders,
ALRC 103 (2006)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Privilege in Perspective: Client Legal
Privilege in Federal Investigations
, ALRC 107 (2007)
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
APS Code of Conduct
Australian Public Service Code of Conduct
Australian Public Service Commissioner
Administrative Review Council
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Australian Secret Intelligence Service
AWB Inquiry
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-For-Food Programme (2006)
Building Royal Commission
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry (2003)
Chief of the Defence Force
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
Clarke Inquiry
The Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef (2008)
Commissioner Cole
The Hon Terence Cole AO RDF QC
Comrie Inquiry
Inquiry into the Circumstances of the Vivian Alvarez Matter (2005)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Costigan Royal Commission
Royal Commission into the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and
Dockers Union (1984)
Commonwealth Procurement Guidelines
Community and Public Sector Union
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Department of Immigration and Citizenship
Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation
Defence Intelligence Organisation
Director of Public Prosecutions
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws,
Paper 74 (2009)
Defence Signals Directorate
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
New South Wales Independent Commission Against Corruption
Independent Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Royal Commissions
, Issues Paper 35 (2009)
Law Council
Law Council of Australia
New South Wales Legal Representation Office
Law Reform Commission of Ireland
Model Criminal Law Officers Committee
National Archives
National Archives of Australia
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
NSI Regulations
National Security Information (Criminal Proceedings) Regulations
NSI Requirements
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Requirements
for the Protection of National Security Information in Federal Criminal
Proceedings and Civil Proceedings
New South Wales
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
New Zealand Law Commission
Palmer Inquiry
Inquiry into the Circumstances of the Immigration Detention of Cornelia
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
Principled Regulation
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil
and Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002)
Protective Security Coordination Centre
Australian Government Protective Security Manual
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Office of National Assessments
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
Salmon Royal Commission
Royal Commission on Tribunals of Inquiry (1966)
Senate Committee
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills
Stewart Royal Commission
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking (1983)
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Trowell Inquiry
Independent Review of the Provisions of the
Australian Crime Commission
Trowell Report
Independent Review of the Provisions of the
Australian Crime Commission
—Report to the Inter-Governmental Committee
Queensland Law Reform Commission
United Kingdom
Victorian Society for Computers and the Law
Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
[1996] HCA 18
(1996) 189 CLR 1
Appendix 4. Federal Royal
Commissions established since March 1983
Commissioners
Inquiry into Certain Australian Companies in Relation to the UN
Oil-For-Food Programme
November 2005–November 2006
Royal Commission to Inquire into the Centenary House Lease
June 2004– December 2004
Royal Commission into the Building and Construction Industry
August 2001– February 2003
HIH Royal Commission
August 2001– April 2003
Commission of Inquiry into the Relations between the CAA and Seaview
October 1994– October 1996
Street (1994–95), Staunton (1994–96)
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Leasing by the Commonwealth of
Accommodation in Centenary House
May 1994– November 1994
Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Secret Intelligence Service
March 1994– May 1995
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
October 1987– May 1991
Muirhead (Chair 1987–89), Johnston (Chair 1989–91),
O’Dea, Wootten, Dodson, Wyvill
Royal Commission into Grain Storage, Handling and Transport
October 1986– March 1988
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Chamberlain Convictions
April 1986– June 1987
Royal Commission of Inquiry into Alleged Telephone Interceptions
March 1985– May 1986
Royal Commission into British Nuclear Tests in Australia
July 1984– December 1985
McClelland (Chair), Fitch, Jonas
Commission of Inquiry into Compensation Arising from Social Security
Conspiracy Prosecutions
February 1984– June 1986
Royal Commission on Australia's Security and Intelligence Agencies
May 1983– May 1985
Royal Commission on the Use and Effects of Chemical Agents on Australian
Personnel in Vietnam
May 1983– August 1985
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Activities of the Nugan Hand Group
[extension of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking
March 1983– November 1985
Appendix 5. Non-Royal Commission
Federal Public Inquiries established since March
Chair of Inquiry
National Human Rights Consultation
December 2008– due to report by September 2009
Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef
March 2008– November 2008
Northern Territory Emergency Response Review Board
June 2008– September 2008
Equine Influenza Inquiry
September 2007– June 2008
Access Card Consumer and Privacy Taskforce
May 2006– March 2008
Taskforce on Reducing the Regulatory Burden on Business
October 2005– January 2006
Biennial Review of the Medicare Provider Number Legislation
August 2005– December 2005
Aviation Security and Policing Review
June 2005– September 2005
Legislation Review Committee into the Prohibition of Human Cloning
June 2005– December 2005
Taskforce on Biofuels
May 2005– July 2005
Review of Telecommunications Interception
March 2005– June 2005
Taskforce on Export Infrastructure
March 2005– June 2005
Beef Quota Review Panel
February 2005– June 2005
Inquiry into the Circumstances of the Immigration Detention of Cornelia
February 2005– June 2005
National Inquiry into the Teaching of Literacy
November 2004– December 2005
Review of Australia’s Symphony and Pit Orchestras
May 2004– March 2005
Inquiry into Australian Intelligence Agencies
March 2004– July 2004
National Review of School Music Education
March 2004– November 2005
Expert Committee on Complementary Medicine
May 2003– August 2003
Review of Closer Collaboration between Universities and Major Publicly
Funded Research Agencies
May 2003– March 2004
National Bushfire Inquiry
October 2003– April 2004
Livestock Export Review
October 2003– January 2004
Defence Procurement Review
December 2002– August 2003
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission Review Panel
November 2002– November 2003
Review of the Role of Divisions of General Practice
November 2002– February 2003
Independent Review of the National Institute of Clinical Studies
October 2002– n/a 2004
Review of Pricing Arrangements in Residential Aged Care
September 2002– April 2004
Independent Review of Soccer
August 2002– May 2003
Higher Education Bandwidth Advisory Committee
August 2002– December 2002
Regional Telecommunications Inquiry
August 2002–November 2002
Review of Rural Veterinary Services
July 2002– January 2003
National Corporate Governance Review
November 2002– July 2004
Independent Review of the Australian Greenhouse Office
May 2002– June 2002
Review of Wine Exports and Wine Tourism
May 2002– November 2002
Review of the Competition Provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
May 2002– April 2003
Committee for Review of Veterans’ Entitlements
February 2002– January 2003
Independent Assessment of the Sugar Industry
February 2002– June 2002
Independent Review of Energy Market Directions
September 2001– November 2002
Review of the
Managed Investments Act 1998
July 2001– December 2001
Review of Impact of
Trade Practices Act
on Doctors in Rural and Regional
August 2001– November 2002
Inquiry into the Contemporary Visual Arts and Craft Sector
July 2001– May 2002
Committee of Inquiry into Fuel Taxation
July 2001– March 2002
National Review of Nursing Education
April 2001– September 2002
Review of Australian Defence Force Remuneration Arrangements
March 2001– October 2001
Review of the Implementation of the Whole of Government Information
Technology Outsourcing Initiative
November 2000– January 2001
Inquiry into Definitional Issues Relating to Charitable, Religious and
Community Service Not-For-Profit Organisations
September 2000– March 2001
Telecommunications Services Inquiry
March 2000– October 2000
Inquiry into Access to Australia’s Biological Resources in
Commonwealth Areas
December 1999– September 2000
Reference Group on Welfare Reform
September 1999– March 2001
Taskforce on Industry Self-Regulation
August 1999– March 2001
Review of the Australian Blood Banking and Plasma Product Sector
July 1999– March 2001
Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
July 1999– September 2000
Independent Review Panel of the End of War List—Vietnam
May 1999– September 1999
Review of Service Entitlement Anomalies in Respect of South-East Asian
Service 1955–1975
April 1999– March 2000
Inquiry into Collins Class Submarine and Related Matters
March 1999– June 1999
Wool Industry Future Directions Taskforce
February 1999– June 1999
Major Performing Arts Inquiry
December 1998– December 1999
Aboriginal Land Rights Northern Territory Act 1976
November 1997– August 1998
Review of Policy Advice and Support to the Minister for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Affairs
October 1997– December 1997
Review of the Repatriation Medical Authority and the Specialist Medical
Review Council
April 1997– July 1998
Review of the Social Security Review and Appeals System
January 1997– May 1997
Review of Higher Education
January 1997– April 1998
Review of Governance Arrangements for Commonwealth Government Business
Enterprises
December 1996– March 1997
Review of Business Programs
November 1996– June 1997
Review of Attorney-General’s Legal Practice
November 1996– March 1997
Independent Review of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
November 1996– September 1997
Independent Inquiry into Urban Air Pollution
October 1996– September 1997
Commonwealth-State Inquiry into the Tasmanian Economy; Tasmania into the
21st Century
October 1996– July 1997
Drought Policy Review Taskforce
October 1996– February 1997
National Taskforce on Whaling
September 1996– June 1997
Review of Rural Adjustment Scheme
September 1996– May 1997
Review of the
Endangered Species Protection Act
November 1997– April 1998
Review of the Australian Film Industry
July 1996– February 1997
Review of the Role and Functions of the ABC
July 1996– January 1997
Information Industry Taskforce
June 1996– August 1997
Goldsworthy
Inquiry into the Manner in which DFAT has dealt with Allegations of
Paedophile Activities
May 1996– May 1997
Hunt, then Shergold
Inquiry into the Financial System
May 1996– March 1997
Small Business Deregulation Taskforce
May 1996– March 1997
Independent Inquiry into Allegations of Corruption in the Australian
Federal Police
March 1996– April 1997
National Commission of Audit
March 1996– June 1996
Commonwealth Hindmarsh Island Report
January 1996– abandoned
Review of the Australian Maritime College
n/a 1995– October 1995
Committee to Review Australia’s Quarantine Policies and
December 1995– June 1996
Review of Regulatory Regime for Patent Attorneys
December 1995– June 1996
Review of the
Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act 1976
October 1995– April 1996
Review of the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Act
October 1995– June 1996
Independent Inquiry into Women’s Artistic Gymnastics Program at the
Australian Institute of Sport
September 1995– November 1995
Independent Review of s18 of the
Tobacco Advertising Prohibition Act
September 1995– April 1996
Review of Higher Education Management
June 1995– February 1996
Review of the Commonwealth’s New Schools Policy
March 1995– December 1995
Inquiry into the Conduct of the Hon Alan Griffiths MP
March 1995– February 1996
Information Technology Review Group
December 1994– March 1995
Review of Australian Honours and Awards: A Matter of Honour
October 1994– September 1996
Committee of Inquiry into Temporary Entry of Business People and Highly
Skilled Specialists
October 1994– August 1995
Review of Better Cities Program
October 1994– November 1995
Review of the Role and Functioning of Institutional Ethics Committees
September 1994– March 1996
Civic Experts Group
June 1994– December 1995
Review of Government Business Programs
June 1994– November 1994
Review of the Australian Defence Force Personnel and Family Support
May 1994– September 1994
Inquiry into the Winegrape and Wine Industry
April 1994– June 1995
Review of the Australian Institute of Criminology
April 1994– June 1994
Review of the Coal Industry
March 1994– March 1995
Inquiry into the Law of Joint and Several Liability
February 1994– January 1995
Broadband Services Expert Group
November 1993– December 1994
Review Committee of the Bureau of Immigration and Population Research
November 1993– December 1994
Taskforce on Urban Design
November 1993– November 1994
Inquiry into ASIO Security
October 1993– December 1994
Review of Employment Support for People with Disability
October 1993– January 1995
National Planning Transport Taskforce
October 1993– December 1994
Independent Committee of Inquiry into National Competition Policy
October 1993– August 1994
Access to Justice Advisory Committee
October 1993– May 1994
Urban and Regional Development Review
September 1993– n/a 1995
National Review of Nurse Education in the Higher Education Sector
August 1993– August 1994
Review of the National Board of Employment, Education and Training
September 1993– March 1994
Review of the National Health and Medical Research Council
August 1993– January 1994
Bienenstock
Committee to Report on Development of Northern Territory and Darwin as
Australia’s Northern Link to East Asia
August 1993– June 1995
Review of Marine Research Organisation
July 1993– October 1994
Commission of Inquiry into the Shoalwater Bay Training Area
May 1993– May 1994
Committee of Review of the Australian Customs Service
May 1993– February 1994
Taskforce on Regional Development
May 1993– December 1993
Independent Inquiry into the Circumstances surrounding the Non-Payment of a
Deposit for Satellite Pay TV Licences and related matters
May 1993– May 1993
International Liner Cargo Shipping Review
April 1993– January 1994
Republic Advisory Committee
April 1993– September 1993
Wool Industry Review Committee
April 1993– August 1993
Inquiry into the Circumstances of Leo McLeay’s Compensation
February 1993– April 1993
Committee of Inquiry into National Savings
n/a– June 1993
Research Reactor Review
September 1992– May 1993
Review of the Australian Geological Survey Organisation
September 1992– July 1993
Independent Review of the Civil Aviation Authority’s Tender
Evaluation Process for the Australian Advanced Air Traffic System
July 1992– December 1992
Review of the Structure of Nursing Home Funding
June 1992– February 1994
Committee for the Review of the System for Review of Migration
February 1992– December 1992
Review of the National Space Program
November 1991– June 1992
Review of the Training for Aboriginals Program
September 1991– November 1992
Independent Panel on Intractable Waste
August 1991– November 1992
Review of the Future of Drug Evaluation in Australia
March 1991– July 1991
Industry Taskforce on Leadership and Management Skills
March 1991– April 1995
Review of Computing Studies and Information Sciences Education
February 1991– April 1995
Review of the Joint Coal Board
October 1990– February 1991
Independent Review of Current Practices and Procedures for Dealing with
Asbestos in Defence
August 1990– March 1991
Review of Australian Wool Industry
July 1990– April 1991
Review Committee of Training Costs Related to Award Restructuring
June 1990– October 1990
Review of the Institute of Advanced Studies, Australian National
March 1990– November 1990
Review of Agriculture in Australia’s Colleges and Universities and
Related Education
December 1989– April 1991
Inquiry into Industrial Property Protection for Industrial Design
December 1989– September 1991
Building Regulations Review Taskforce
October 1989– November 1991
Committee of Review of Commonwealth Primary Industry Statutory Marketing
Authorities
August 1989– October 1990
Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Review
August 1989– June 1990
Review of the Office of the Supervising Scientist
July 1989– November 1989
Review of Use of Civil Infrastructure in Australia’s
Defence–the Defence Force and the Community
May 1989– June 1990
Review of the Commonwealth’s Free Limbs Scheme
April 1989– October 1990
Drought Policy Review Taskforce
April 1989– March 1990
Review of the Accounting Discipline in Higher Education
March 1989– June 1990
Inquiry into the Needs of Australian Merchant Mariners, Commonwealth and
Allied Veterans and Allied Mariners
January 1989– September 1989
Committee for Review of Export Market Development Grants Scheme
December 1988– June 1989
Shipping Reform Taskforce
November 1988– April 1989
Review of the Implications for Australia of Economic Growth and Structural
Change in East Asia
November 1988– October 1989
Inquiry into Allegations as to the Administration of Aboriginal
November 1988– June 1989
National Committee on Violence
October 1988– December 1989
Independent Review of ACT Health Services
October 1988– November 1988
Committee to Review Higher Education Research Policy
October 1988– November 1988
Review of Aboriginal Arts and Crafts Industry
October 1988– March 1989
Review of the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service
September 1988– May 1989
Defence Force Discipline Legislation Board of Review
September 1988– March 1989
Review of the Australian Bureau of Mineral Resources and Geophysics
August 1988– September 1988
Committee to Review the Role and Functions of the National Health
Technology Advisory Panel
July 1988– February 1989
Review Committee on Marine Science and Technology
June 1988– February 1989
National Review of Teacher Education in Mathematics and Science
June 1988– February 1989
Taskforce on Aboriginal Education Policy
April 1988– October 1988
Social Impact study of the Casino Development Proposal for Section 19
March 1988– July 1988
Review of Australian Maritime College
March 1988– June 1988
Joint Taskforce on Intractable Industrial Wastes
December 1987– January 1990
McDonnell and Thomas
Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education Funding
December 1987– April 1988
Committee of Inquiry into Tourism Shopping in Australia
November 1987– April 1988
Air Safety Regulation Review Taskforce
October 1987– May 1990
Consultative Group on Biotechnology Industry Development
October 1987– May 1990
Wool Promotion Review Committee
September 1987– January 1988
Committee to Advise on Australia’s Immigration Policies
September 1987– January 1988
Review of Tender Procedures for Coastwatch Contracts
September 1987– November 1987
Committee of Inquiry into ‘Victim’ Toys
August 1987– January 1988
Review of Australian Quarantine Arrangements for the Future
May 1987– May 1988
Commission of Inquiry into the Lemonthyme and Southern Forests
May 1987– May 1988
Defence Facilities Review
February 1987– July 1988
Committee of Inquiry into Medical Education and the Medical Workforce
January 1987– April 1988
Review of Civilian Transport Infrastructure
November 1986– November 1988
Review of Engineering Education
September 1986– July 1988
Committee of Review of Standards Accreditation and Quality Control and
September 1986–October 1987
Review of National Language Policy
July 1986– May 1987
Committee of Review on Government High Technology Purchasing
Arrangements
July 1986– February 1987
Review of Alleged Entry of Suspected War Criminals into Australia
July 1986– December 1986
Committee of Inquiry into Folklife in Australia
April 1986– August 1987
Review of the
Customs Tariff Anti-Dumping Act 1975
February 1986– March 1986
Lambert, then Gruen
Constitutional Review Commission
January 1986– January 1988
Australian Government Committee of Inquiry into Tourism
January 1986– December 1986
Committee of Review of Migrant and Multicultural Programs and
January 1986–November 1986
Independent Inquiry into the Distribution of Federal Road Grants
January 1986– October 1986
Review of the Social Security System
December 1985– n/a 1988
Independent Review of Research and Educational Requirements for Public
Health and Tropical Health in Australia
December 1985– January 1986
Merino Export Review Committee
October 1985– May 1987
Committee to Review TAFE Funding
August 1985– April 1986
Inquiry into Australia’s Plant Breeding Needs
July 1985– April 1986
Inquiry into Taxation of the Gold Industry
November 1985– May 1986
Nursing Homes and Hostels Review
July 1985– April 1986
Inquiry into the Financial and Administrative Arrangements of Grants made
Under the Community Housing Expansion Programme
July 1985– August 1985
Review of International Air Freight Policy Relating to Export of Primary
June 1985– November 1985
Review of the
Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975
June 1985– September 1986
Working Party on the Sugar Industry
May 1985– August 1985
Committee of Review of Adult Migrant Education Programs
April 1985– August 1985
Independent Review of Economic Regulation of Domestic Aviation
March 1985– January 1987
Committee to Review Australian Studies in Tertiary Education
March 1985– June 1987
Commission of Inquiry into the Current Health Status of the Australian
March 1985– October 1986
Llewellyn-Jones
Review of Australia’s Defence Cooperations Programs and Policy on
Export of Defence Equipment
March 1985– April 1986
Review of Australia’s Defence Capabilities
February 1985– May 1986
Taskforce on Repetitive Strain Injury in the Australian Public
December 1984– August 1985
Committee of Review of Aboriginal Employment and Training Programs
October 1984– August 1985
Taskforce on Shore Based Shipping Costs
September 1984– July 1986
Taskforce to Review Australia’s Overseas Liner Shipping
Legislation
September 1984– February 1986
Working Party to Review Objective Meat Export Trade Descriptions
September 1984– February 1985
Inquiry into the Grape and Wine Industry including the Effect of the 10%
September 1984– June 1985
Taskforce to Review Australia’s International Trade Policy
September 1984– abandoned
Review of the Aboriginal Benefit Trust Account (and Related Financial
Matters) in the Northern Territory Land Rights Legislation
September 1984–December 1984
Quality of Education Review Committee
August 1984– April 1985
Taskforce on Australian Public Service and Defence Housing Programs
August 1984– January 1985
Taskforce to Review CSIRO’s External Communication Activities
July 1984– July 1985
Review of the Schedule of Medicare Benefits
July 1984– November 1985
Inquiry into Circumstances Surrounding the Customs Declaration by the Hon M
J Young at Adelaide on 5 July 1984
July 1984– August 1984
Review (and Expanded Review) of Commonwealth Criminal Law
June 1984– June 1988
Watson, then Gibbs
Review of Welfare Services and Policies in the ACT
May 1984– December 1984
Enquiry into Gambling and Amusement Machines in the ACT
June 1984– March 1985
Expert Committee on the Review of Data on Atmosphere Fallout Arising from
Nuclear Tests in Australia
May 1984– June 1984
Review of the Offset Policy
May 1984– November 1984
Committee of Inquiry into the Establishment of a Manufacturing Advisory
Service on Computer Assisted Manufacturing
April 1984– July 1984
Review of the Repatriation Hospital System
March 1984– September 1985
Inquiry into Allegations of SP Gambling Against Telecom
March 1984– September 1984
Taskforce on Aboriginal and Islander Broadcasting and Communications
March 1984– August 1984
Independent Inquiry into Aviation Cost Recovery
February 1984– December 1984
Panel of Review of the Proposed Incomes and Assets Test
February 1984– May 1984
Inquiry into the Running of the ACT Legal Aid Office
February 1984– May 1984
Inquiry into the Rights of Private Practice in Public Hospitals
January 1984– June 1984
Inquiry into the Superannuation Fund Investment Trust
January 1984– March 1984
Review Committee of the Experimental Building Station at Nth Ryde, NSW
December 1983– April 1984
Committee of Review of the Special Broadcasting Service
December 1983– March 1985
Committee of Inquiry into Labour Market Programs
December 1983– December 1984
Taskforce on Shipbuilding
November 1983– February 1984
Committee of Review to Examine Completion of Launceston General Hospital
and Hospital Development Needs of Northern Tasmania
November 1983– March 1984
Committee of Inquiry into Homelessness and Inadequate Housing in the ACT
and Surrounding Regions
November 1983– January 1984
Taskforce on Self-Government for the ACT
November 1983– March 1984
Independent Economic Inquiry into Transport Services to the Northern
October 1983– December 1983
Inquiry into National Aboriginal Conference, Aboriginal Development
Commission, Aboriginal Hostels, and Department of Aboriginal Affairs
October 1983– May 1984
National Road Freight Industry Inquiry
September 1983– September 1984
Committee of Review of Private Overseas Student Policy
September 1983– March 1984
Review of the Industries Assistance Commission
August 1983– January 1984
August 1983– October 1988
Committee of Review of Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs
July 1983– November 1983
Taskforce on Education and the Arts for Young People
August 1983– November 1984
Working Party concerning Asbestos in Commonwealth Government Buildings in
July 1983– December 1983
Panel to Review the Australian Trade Commissioner Service
July 1983– October 1983
Committee of Review into Australian Industrial Relations Law and Systems
July 1983– May 1985
Inquiry into Aboriginal Legal Aid Services
July 1983– October 1985
Review of the
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976
June 1983– December 1983
Committee to Review the Australian Overseas Aid Program
May 1983– March 1984
Taskforce on ACT Health Services
May 1983– September 1983
Inquiry into Australia’s Financial System
May 1983– January 1984
Committee of Inquiry into Safety Standards at the CSIRO Applied Organic
Chemistry and Advanced Materials Laboratories at Fishermen’s
Melbourne and the Death of CSIRO Employee, Dr R Bergamasco
April 1983– May 1983
Committee of Review into the Impact of Radford College on ACT Schools
April 1983– July 1983
Source for inquiries on this
list that reported in 2005 and earlier: S Prasser,
Royal Commissions and
Public Inquiries in Australia
(2006), Appendices 8–9.
Appendix 6. Table of Consequential
Name of Commonwealth Act
Name of provision
Anti-Money Laundering Act 2006
Definitions (definition of ‘Commonwealth Royal
Commission’)
Consequential amendment may be required
Definition also could
include Official Inquiries.
Officials of designated agencies etc include legal practitioners appointed
to assist a Royal Commission, or otherwise appointed by
members of a Royal
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to legal practitioners appointed to assist Official Inquiries.
Archives Act 1983
Records of Royal Commissions
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to records of Official Inquiries.
Also see Proposal 8–4 and
accompanying discussion in Chapter 8.
Australian Communications and Media Authority Act 2005
Disclosure to Royal Commissions
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to disclosure of information to an Official Inquiry within the meaning of
the proposed
Inquiries Act.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Confidentiality
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to disclosure of information to an Official Inquiry within the meaning of
the proposed
Inquiries Act.
Building Industry Act 1985
Application to Commission for declaration in relation to [the Australian
Building Construction Employees’ and Builders Labourers’
Federation]
Repeal of provision may be required
Provision may be
obsolete—allows the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to
consider evidence given in the proceedings
of a Royal Commission appointed to
inquire into the activities of the Australian Building Construction
Employees’ and Builders
Labourers’ Federation.
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
16(4D), (4E)
Consequential amendment may be required
Provisions also could
apply to Official Inquiries.
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
150(4D), (4E)
Consequential amendment may be required
Provisions also could
apply to Official Inquiries.
Civil Aviation Act 1988
Definitions (definition of ‘court’)
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
exclude Official Inquiries from definition.
Crimes Act 1914
Disclosing real identities during court
proceedings etc.
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
refer expressly to Official Inquiries.
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
Interpretation (definition of ‘official, in relation to a Royal
Commission’)
Repeal of provision may be required
Provision appears to be
obsolete—officials and Royal Commissions not referred to in other
provisions of the Act.
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Definitions
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
exclude expressly Official Inquiries from the definition of a ‘prescribed
authority’.
Documents in certain institutions
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to records of Official Inquiries
Health Insurance Act 1973
Minister may authorise disclosure of
information about a serious offence
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
refer expressly to Official Inquiries.
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
Amounts of Australian source ordinary income
and statutory income that are exempt
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
refer to members of Official Inquiries.
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
16(1)(4)(k), (4A), (4B), (4C), (4AAA)
Officers to observe secrecy
Consequential amendments may be required
Provisions also could
refer to officers of Official Inquiries.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Information and documents may be given to Royal
Commissioners
Repeal of provision may be required
The ALRC proposes that this
provision should be repealed: See Proposal 13–3 and accompanying
discussion in Chapter 13.
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
Powers of Royal Commission not affected
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to Official Inquiries.
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
Interpretation (definition of ‘tribunal’)
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
refer expressly to Official Inquiries.
Acts and practices of agencies, organisations
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
exempt acts and practices of Official Inquiries.
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Person may object to the disclosure of surveillance information in certain
circumstances in certain proceedings, including a court,
tribunal or Royal
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to Official Inquiries.
Protected information in the custody of a court, tribunal or Royal
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to protected information in the custody of Official Inquiries.
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Interpretation (‘eligible Royal Commission’)
Consequential amendment may be required
Definition also could include eligible Official Inquiries.
Eligible Royal Commissions currently are set out in Reg 3A of the
Taxation Administration Regulations 1976.
Provision of taxation information to Australian Crime Commission
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to information communicated to Official Inquiries under s 16(1)(4)(k)
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Use of tax information by Royal Commissions
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to Official Inquiries.
Requests to be prescribed as an eligible Royal Commission
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to Official Inquiries.
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Interpretation
(‘Commonwealth Royal Commission’ and ‘chief officer’ of
eligible Commonwealth Royal Commissions)
Consequential amendment may be required
Definition also could
include Official Inquiries and members of eligible Official Inquiries.
Eligible Commonwealth authority declarations
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
allow the relevant minister to declare that an Official Inquiry is an eligible
Commonwealth authority.
Authorisation of members of the staff of a ‘Commonwealth Royal
Commission’
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to members of the staff of Official Inquiries.
Trade Practices Act 1974
155AAA(9), (10), (11)
Protection of certain information
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to disclosure of information to Official Inquiries.
Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003
Powers of Parliament and Royal Commissions not
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
provide that disclosure of information to Official Inquiries is not affected by
relevant provisions.
Witness Protection Act 1994
Commissioner and members not to be required to
disclose information
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
apply to documents and information disclosed to Official Inquiries.
Identity of participant not to be disclosed in court proceedings etc
Consequential amendment may be required
Provision also could
refer expressly to Official Inquiries.
Name of Commonwealth Regulations
Name of regulation
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Regulations 1998
Prescription of prudential regulation framework
Consequential amendment may be required
Regulation could provide
that the proposed
Inquiries Act
is a prudential regulation framework law
for the purposes of the
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act
Electronic Transactions Regulations 2000
Laws of the Commonwealth to which certain
provisions of the Act do not apply
Consequential amendment may be required
Regulation could provide
that relevant provisions of the
Electronic Transactions Act 1999
the proposed
Inquiries Act.
Jury Exemption Regulations 1987
7(2)(b)(ii)
Exemptions relating to public administration
Consequential amendment may be required
Regulation also could
provide expressly that a person is exempted from liability to serve as a juror
if he or she is performing duties
as Secretary to an Official Inquiry.
Maternity Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Regulations 1982
Persons to whom the
Maternity Leave
(Commonwealth Employees) Act
applies—Prescribed persons
Consequential amendment may be required
Regulation could apply
to members of inquiries established under the proposed
Inquiries Act.
Taxation Administration Regulations 1976
Prescribed Royal Commissions (Act s 2,
definition of eligible Royal Commission)
Consequential amendment may be required
Regulation also could
apply to prescribed Official Inquiries.
Telecommunications Regulations 2001
Disclosure of information —
assistance to Royal Commission into Building and Construction Industry (Act
Repeal of regulation may be required
Regulation may be
obsolete—regulates disclosure of information to Royal Commission into the
Building and Construction Industry
Treaty of Peace Regulations 1920
Power to summon witnesses and require production of documents
Repeal of regulation may be required
Regulation may be
obsolete—conferred on a minister powers of a Royal Commission appointed
Royal Commissions Act 1902-1912
for proceedings before the
Mixed Arbitral Tribunal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (31.1 MB)
PDF format (2.52 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter