URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCCPS/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:31:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Family Violence - Improving Legal Frameworks (Consultation Paper Summary) [2010] ALRCCPS 1
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary version)
Table of Contents
Terms of Reference
List of Participants
Questions and Proposals
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
2. Constitutional and International Settings
3. Purposes of Laws Relevant to Family Violence
4. Family Violence: A Common Interpretative Framework?
5. Family Violence Legislation and the Criminal Law—An Introduction
6. Protection Orders and the Criminal Law
7. Recognising Family Violence in Criminal Law
8. Family Violence Legislation and Parenting Orders
9. Family Violence Legislation and the Family Law Act: Other Family Law Act Orders
10. Improving Evidence and Information Sharing
11. Alternative Processes
12. Child Protection—Introduction
13. Child Protection and the Criminal Law
14. Child Protection and the Family Law Act
15. Sexual Assault and Family Violence
16. Sexual Offences
17. Reporting, Prosecution and Pre-trial Processes
18. Trial Processes
19. Integrated Responses and Best Practice
20. Specialisation
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
Terms of Reference
Terms of Reference
Reducing Violence against Women and their Children
Terms of reference
Terms of Reference
Reducing Violence against Women and
their Children
Terms of reference
The 2009 report of the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and
their Children,
Time for Action
, acknowledged the complex interraction
between State and Territory family/domestic violence and child protection laws
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). The National
Council also stressed the importance of consistent interpretation and
application of laws relating to family/domestic
violence and sexual assault,
including rules of evidence, in ensuring justice for victims of such
At its meeting of 16–17 April 2009, the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General agreed that Australian law reform commissions
should work
together to consider these issues.
I refer to the Australian Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report
pursuant to
subsection 20(1)
Australian Law Reform Commission Act
the issues of:
1) the interaction in practice of State and Territory family/domestic
violence and child protection laws with the
Family Law Act
and relevant
Commonwealth, State and Territory criminal laws; and
2) the impact of inconsistent interpretation or application of laws in cases
of sexual assault occuring in a family/domestic violence
context, including
rules of evidence, on victims of such violence.
In relation to both issues I request that the Commission consider what, if
any, improvements could be made to relevant legal frameworks
to protect the
safety of women and their children.
Scope of the reference
In undertaking this reference, the Commission should be careful not to
a) the other actions being progressed as part of the Immediate Government
Actions announced by the Prime Minister on receiving the
Council’s report in April 2009;
b) the evaluation of the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental
Responsibility) Act 2006
reforms being undertaken by the Australian
Institute of Family Studies; and
c) the work being undertaken through SCAG on the harmonisation of uniform
evidence laws, in particular the development of model sexual
communications immunity provisions and vulnerable witness protections.
Collaboration and consultation
In undertaking this reference, the Commission should:
a) have regard to the National Council’s report and any supporting
material in relation to domestic violence and sexual assault
b) work jointly with the New South Wales
Law Reform Commission with a view to developing agreed recommendations
and consult with other
State and Territory law reform bodies as appropriate;
c) work closely with the Australian Government Attorney‑General’s
Department to ensure the solutions identified are practically
achievable and
consistent with other reforms and initiatives being considered in relation to
the development of a National Plan to
Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children or the National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children,
which has been
approved by the Council of Australian Governments; and
d) consult with relevant courts, the Australian Government Department of
Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
State and Territory agencies, State and Territory Legal Aid Commissions,
the Family Law Council, the Australian Domestic
Violence Clearinghouse and
similar bodies in each State and Territory.
Considering the scale of violence affecting Australian women and their
children and acknowledging the Australian Government’s
commitment to
developing a National Plan through COAG for release in 2010, the Commission
will report no later than 31 July 2010.
Dated: 17 July 2009
Robert McClelland
Attorney-General
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Special Adviser
Family Violence Team
Child Protection Team
Sexual Assault Team
Expert Readers
Research Manager
Project Assistant
Legal Interns
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Legal writing
Legal Research
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Professor Rosalind Croucher, President
Magistrate Anne Goldsbrough, Part-time Commissioner
Special Adviser
George Zdenkowski
Family Violence Team
Isabella Cosenza, Senior Legal Officer, Team Leader
Dr Joyce Chia, Legal
Officer (1 November 2009–15 April 2010)
Anna Dziedzic, Legal Officer
(from 1 March 2010)
Lisa Eckstein, Legal Officer (1 January–19 March
Erin Mackay, Legal Officer (1 November 2009–6 January 2010)
Child Protection Team
Carolyn Adams, Senior Legal Officer (from 1 March 2010)
Chris Paul, Senior
Legal Officer (11 January–24 March 2010)
Althea Gibson, Legal Officer
(31 August–1 November 2009)
Sexual Assault Team
Bruce Alston, Senior Legal Officer, Team Leader (from 27 January 2010)
Jane Wangmann, Senior Legal Officer, Team Leader (2 November 2009–
29 January 2010)
Katy McGree, Legal Officer (from 11 January 2010)
Dr Anne Cossins (from 22 January 2010)
Expert Readers
Stephen Odgers SC
Professor Patrick Parkinson
Research Manager
Jonathan Dobinson
Carolyn Kearney
Project Assistant
Tina O’Brien
Legal Interns
Aaron Besser
Philip Boncardo
Mia Hollick
Tracey Kingsbury
Tamara Phillips
Calvin Shaw
James Small
[back to top]
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Commissioners
Professor Hilary Astor (from 15 March 2010)
Professor Michael Tilbury
(until February 2010)
The Hon James Wood AO QC
Legal writing
Nicole Abadee (October–December 2009)
Francesca Di Benedetto (from February 2010)
Legal Research
Fiona Lam, Intern (January–February 2010)
Robyn Young
(January–February 2010)
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
List of Questions and
Part B – Family Violence
4. Family Violence: A Common Interpretative Framework?
5. Family Violence Legislation and the Criminal Law—An Introduction
6. Protection Orders and the Criminal Law
7. Recognising Family Violence in Criminal Law
8. Family Violence Legislation and Parenting Orders
9. Family Violence Legislation and the
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
10. Improving Evidence and Information Sharing
11. Alternative Processes
– Child Protection
13. Child Protection and the Criminal Law
14. Child Protection and the
Family Law Act
– Sexual Assault
16. Sexual Offences
17. Reporting, Prosecution and Pre-trial Processes
18. Trial Processes
Part E – Existing and Potential Responses
19. Integrated Responses and Best Practice
20. Specialisation
List of Questions and
Part B – Family
4. Family Violence: A Common
Interpretative Framework?
Proposal 4–1
(a) State and territory family violence
legislation should contain the same definition of family violence covering
physical and non-physical
violence, including conduct the subject of Proposals
4–3 to 4–5 and 4–7 to 4–10 below. The definition of
family violence in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should
be referred to as a model.
(b) The definitions of family violence in state and territory family violence
legislation should recognise the same types of physical
and non-physical
violence, including conduct the subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and
4–7 to 4–10 below. The
definition of family violence in the
Family Violence Protection
(Vic) should be referred to as a model.
Question 4–1
Should the definition of family violence in state
and territory family violence legislation, in addition to setting out the types
of conduct that constitute violence, provide that family violence is violent or
threatening behaviour or any other form of behaviour
that coerces, controls or
dominates a family member or causes that family member to be fearful?
Proposal 4–2
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
(NSW) should be amended to include a definition of ‘domestic
violence’, in addition to the current definition of ‘domestic
violence offence’.
Proposal 4–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should expressly recognise sexual assault in the definition of family violence
the extent that it does not already do so.
Proposal 4–4
State and territory family violence legislation
should expressly recognise economic abuse in the definition of family violence
the extent that it does not already do so.
Proposal 4–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should include specific examples of emotional or psychological abuse or
intimidation
or harassment that illustrate acts of violence against certain
vulnerable groups including: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally
linguistically diverse background; the aged; those with a disability; and those
from the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender
community. Instructive models of
such examples are in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA). In each
case, state and territory family violence legislation should make it clear that
such examples are illustrative and
not exhaustive of the prohibited conduct.
Question 4–2
Some state and territory family violence
legislation lists examples of types of conduct that can constitute a category of
family violence.
In practice, are judicial officers and lawyers treating such
examples as exhaustive rather than illustrative?
Proposal 4–6
The definition of family violence in state and
territory family violence legislation should not require a person to prove
or psychological harm in respect of conduct which, by its nature,
could be pursued criminally—such as sexual assault. In particular,
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) should be amended
to ensure that sexual assault of itself is capable of meeting the definition of
‘abuse’ without
having to prove emotional abuse.
Proposal 4–7
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) should be
amended expressly to recognise kidnapping or deprivation of liberty as a form of
family violence.
Proposal 4–8
Family Violence Act 1994
(Tas) should
be amended to recognise damage to property and threats to commit such damage as
a form of family violence.
Proposal 4–9
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) should be
amended to ensure that their definitions of family violence capture harm or
injury to an animal irrespective of whether
that animal is technically the
property of the victim.
Proposal 4–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should include in the definition of family violence exposure of children to
violence as a category of violence in its own right.
Proposal 4–11
Where state or territory family violence
legislation sets out specific criminal offences that form conduct constituting
family violence,
there should be a policy reason for the categorisation of each
such offence as a family violence offence. To this end, the governments
and the ACT should review the offences categorised as ‘domestic violence
offences’ in their respective family
violence legislation with a view to
(a) ensuring that such categorisations are justified and appropriate; and (b)
ascertaining whether
or not additional offences ought to be included.
Proposal 4–12
Incidental to the proposed review of
‘domestic violence offences’ referred to in Proposal 4–11
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW)—which deals with the
failure to provide any wife, apprentice, servant or insane person with necessary
food, clothing
or lodgings—should be amended to ensure that its underlying
philosophy and language are appropriate in a modern context.
Proposal 4–13
The definitions of family violence in a state or
territory’s family violence legislation and criminal legislation—in
context of defences to homicide—should align, irrespective of whether
the criminal legislation limits the availability of defences
to homicide in a
family violence context to cases involving ‘serious’ family
Proposal 4–14
The definition of ‘family violence’
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic)—which largely replicates
the definition in s 3 of the
Domestic Violence Act
(NZ)—should be replaced with the definition of ‘family
violence’ in
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic). Alternatively, the definition of family violence in
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) should be amended to include economic abuse.
Question 4–3
Are there any other examples where the criminal
law of a state or territory would allow for prosecution of conduct constituting
violence in circumstances where a state or territory’s family
violence legislation would not recognise the same conduct as
warranting a
protection order?
Proposal 4–15
State and territory governments should review
their family violence and criminal legislation to ensure that the interaction of
terminology
or definitions of certain conduct constituting family violence would
not prevent a person obtaining a protection order in circumstances
criminal prosecution could be pursued. In particular,
(a) the definition of stalking in
Domestic and Family Violence Act
(NT) s 7 should be amended to include all stalking behaviour referred to in
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 189; and
(b) the Queensland government should review the inclusion of the concepts of
‘wilful injury’ and ‘indecent behaviour
without consent’
in the definition of ‘domestic violence’ in
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), in light of how
these concepts might interact with the
Criminal Code
Proposal 4–16
The South Australian Government should review
whether the interaction of the definition of ‘emotional or psychological
in the definition of ‘abuse’ in
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA), and ‘mental harm’ in
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
likely to confuse victims and their legal representatives involved in both civil
family violence and criminal proceedings.
In particular, the review should
consider whether it would be desirable for:
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
to distinguish
between emotional and psychological harm;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
‘psychological harm’; and
(c) both above mentioned Acts to adopt a commonly shared understanding of
the meaning of ‘psychological harm’.
Question 4–4
In practice, what effect do the different
definitions of family violence in the
Family Law Act
and in state and territory family violence legislation have in matters before
federal family courts:
(a) where a victim who has suffered family violence
(i) has obtained a state or territory protection order; or
(ii) has not obtained a state or territory protection order; and
(b) on the disclosure of evidence or information about family violence?
Question 4–5
Does the broad discretion given to courts
exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
the approach taken in the Family Court of Australia’s Family Violence
Strategy overcome, in practice, the potential
constraints posed by the
definition of ‘family violence’ in the
Family Law Act
Proposal 4–17
The definition of family violence in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be expanded to include specific
reference to certain physical and non-physical violence—including conduct
subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and 4–7 to 4–10
above—with the definition contained in the
Family Violence Protection
(Vic) being used as a model.
Proposal 4–18
The definition of ‘family violence’
Family Law Act
(Cth) should be amended by removing the
semi-objective test of reasonableness.
Question 4–6
How is the application of the definition of
‘relevant family violence’ in the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) working in practice? Are there any difficulties or issues arising from its
application?
Proposal 4–19
The Tasmanian Government should review the
operation of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) and the
Justices Act
to establish equality of treatment of family members who
are victims of family violence.
Proposal 4–20
State and territory family violence legislation
should include as protected persons those who fall within Indigenous concepts of
as well as those who are members of some other culturally recognised
family group. In particular, the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) and the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) should be amended to capture such
Question 4–7
Should state and territory family violence
legislation include relationships with carers—including those who are
paid—within
the category of relationships covered?
Proposal 4–21
State and territory family violence legislation
should contain guiding principles, which should include express reference to a
rights framework. The preamble to the
Family Violence Protection Act
(Vic) provides an instructive model, although it would be preferable if
the principles also referred expressly to relevant international
conventions
such as the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women
the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Proposal 4–22
State and territory family violence legislation
should contain a provision that explains the nature, features and dynamics of
violence including: its gendered nature; detrimental impact on children;
and the fact that it can involve exploitation of power imbalances;
and occur in
all sectors of society. The preamble to the
Family Violence Protection Act
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence)
(NSW) provide instructive models in this regard. In addition,
family violence legislation should refer to the particular impact of
violence on: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally and linguistically
diverse background; those from the gay, lesbian,
bisexual and transgender
community; older persons; and people with disabilities.
Proposal 4–23
Family Law Act 1975
should be amended to include a provision that explains the nature, features
and dynamics of family violence.
Proposal 4–24
Restraining Orders Act 1997
should be amended to include an objects clause.
Proposal 4–25
State and territory family violence legislation
should articulate a common set of core purposes which address the following
(a) to ensure or maximise the safety and protection of persons who fear or
experience family violence;
(b) to ensure that persons who use family violence accept
responsibility—or are made accountable—for their conduct;
(c) to reduce or prevent family violence and the exposure of children to
family violence.
Proposal 4–26
objects clause in the
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) should be amended to specify core purposes, other
than the existing main purpose of providing for the safety and protection
persons in particular relationships; and
(b) the objects clause in the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) should
be amended to specify more clearly the core purposes of the Act.
Question 4–8
Are there any other ‘core’ purposes
that should be included in the objects clauses in the family violence
legislation
of each of the states and territories? For example, should family
violence legislation specify a purpose about ensuring minimal disruption
lives of those affected by family violence?
Proposal 4–27
State and territory family violence legislation
should adopt the same grounds for obtaining a protection order.
Proposal 4–28
The grounds for obtaining a protection order
under state and territory family violence legislation should not require proof
of likelihood
of repetition of family violence, unless such proof is an
alternative to a ground that focuses on the impact of the violence on the
seeking protection.
Question 4–9
Which of the following grounds for obtaining a
protection order under state and territory family violence legislation should be
(a) a person has reasonable grounds to fear, and, except in certain cases,
in fact fears family violence, along the lines of the
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
(b) a person has reasonable grounds to fear family violence;
(c) there are reasonable grounds to suspect that further family violence
will occur and the Court is satisfied that making an order
is appropriate in all
the circumstances, along the lines of the
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
(d) either the person seeking protection has reasonable grounds to fear
family violence or the person he or she is seeking protection
from has used
family violence and is likely to do so again.
[back to top]
5. Family Violence Legislation and the Criminal
Law—An Introduction
Question 5–1
How are matters dealt with in practice that
(a) an overlap between state or territory family violence legislation and
federal criminal law; and
(b) a joint prosecution of state or territory and federal offences arising
in a family violence context?
In particular, do state and territory prosecutors seek the consent of the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions to prosecute
federal offences
arising in a family violence context, and inform it of the outcomes of any such
prosecutions?
Question 5–2
Are you aware of any cases where an offence
against federal criminal law has formed the basis for obtaining a protection
order under
state or territory family violence legislation?
Proposal 5–1
The definition of family violence in state and
territory family violence legislation should be broad enough to capture conduct
subject of potentially relevant federal offences in the family violence
context—such as sexual servitude.
Proposal 5–2
The Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions—either by itself or in conjunction with other relevant
bodies—should
establish and maintain a centralised database of statistics
that records the number of times any federal offence has been prosecuted
family violence context including when such an offence is prosecuted:
(a) in addition to proceedings for the obtaining of a protection order under
state or territory family violence legislation;
(b) jointly with a state or territory offence in a family violence context;
(c) in the absence of any other criminal or civil proceeding.
Proposal 5–3
In order to facilitate the establishment and
maintenance of the centralised database referred to in Proposal 5–2, state
territory prosecutors—including police and directors of public
prosecution—should provide the Commonwealth Director of
Prosecutions with information about:
(a) federal offences in a family violence context which they prosecute,
including the outcomes of any such prosecutions;
(b) the prosecution of any federal offence in a family violence context
conducted jointly with a prosecution of any state or territory
family-violence
related offence; and
(c) whether the prosecution of the federal offence is in addition to any
protection order proceedings under state or territory family
legislation.
Question 5–3
Is there a need for lawyers involved in family
violence matters to receive education and training about the potential role of
offences in protection order proceedings under state and territory
family violence legislation? How is this best achieved?
Question 5–4
As a matter of practice, are police or other
participants in the legal system treating the obtaining of protection orders
under family
violence legislation and a criminal justice response to family
violence as alternatives rather than potentially
co-existing avenues of redress? If so, what are the practices or trends in this
regard and how can this best be addressed?
Question 5–5
Are criminal offences for economic and emotional
abuse in a family violence context necessary or desirable?
Question 5–6
In practice, where police have powers to issue
protection orders under family violence legislation, has the exercise of such
increased victim safety and protection?
Proposal 5–4
State and territory family violence legislation
which empowers police to issue protection orders should provide that:
(a) police are only able to impose protection orders to intervene in
emergency or crisis situations in circumstances where it is
not reasonably
practicable or possible for the matter to be dealt with at that time by a court;
(b) police-issued protection orders are to act as an application to the
court for a protection order as well as a summons for the
person against whom it
is issued to appear before the court within a short specified time period. In
particular,
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas)—which allows
police-issued protection orders to last for 12 months—should be
Proposal 5–5
State and territory family violence legislation,
to the extent that it does not already do so, should
(a) impose a duty on police to investigate family violence where they have
reason to suspect or believe that family violence has been,
is being or is
likely to be committed; and
(b) following an investigation, require police to make a record of their
reasons not to take any action such as apply for a protection
order, if they
decide not to take action.
Question 5–7
In what circumstances, if any, should police be
required to apply for protection orders on behalf of victims? Should such a
requirement
be imposed by state and territory family violence legislation or by
police codes of practice?
Question 5–8
Should all state and territory governments ensure
that there are Indigenous-specific support services in courts to enable
people to apply for protection orders without police involvement?
Question 5–9
In what circumstances, if any, has the NSW
Director of Public Prosecutions instituted and conducted protection order
proceedings under
family violence legislation or conducted a related appeal on
behalf of a victim? Do Directors of Public Prosecutions in other states
territories play a role in protection order proceedings under family violence
legislation?
Question 5–10
Do any issues arise in relation to the
availability, scope and exercise in practice of police powers in connection with
family violence
(a) enter premises;
(b) search for and seize firearms or other articles; and
(c) arrest and detain persons?
Proposal 5–6
State and territory legislation which confers on
police powers to detain persons who have used family violence should empower
to remove such persons from the scene of the family violence or direct
them to leave the scene and remain at another specified place
for the purpose of
the police arranging for a protection order.
Question 5–11
Should state and territory legislation which
confers on police power to detain persons who have used family violence empower
to detain such persons for a reasonably short period for the purpose of
making arrangements to secure the safety of victims and affected
children to the
extent that it does not already do so?
Question 5–12
Is there a need for legislative amendments to
provide guidance in identifying the primary aggressor in family violence
Question 5–13
In practice, does the application of provisions
which contain a presumption against bail, or displace the presumption in favour
bail in family violence cases, strike the right balance between ensuring the
safety and wellbeing of victims, and safeguarding the
rights of accused
Question 5–14
How often are victims of family violence involved
in protection order proceedings under family violence legislation not informed
a decision to release the offender on bail and the conditions of
Proposal 5–7
State and territory legislation, to the extent
that it does not already do so, should impose an obligation on the police and
prosecution
to inform the victim of a family violence offence of: (a) decisions
to grant or refuse bail to the offender; and (b) where bail is
granted, the
conditions of release. The
Bail Act 1992
ACT) provides an instructive
model in this regard. Police codes of practice or operating procedures and
prosecutorial guidelines or
policies as well as appropriate education and
training programs should also address the obligation to inform victims of family
of bail decisions.
Question 5–15
How often are inconsistent bail requirements and
protection order conditions imposed on a person accused of committing a family
Proposal 5–8
Judicial officers should be allowed, on a grant of bail, to consider
whether the purpose of ensuring that the offender does not commit
while on bail or endanger the safety, welfare or property of any person might be
better served or assisted by a protection
order, protective bail conditions or
both, as recommended by the Law Reform Commission WA in relation to the
[back to top]
6. Protection Orders and the Criminal
Proposal 6–1
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended, where necessary, to make it clear that the making, variation
revocation of a protection order or the refusal to make, vary or revoke such
an order does not affect the civil or criminal liability
of a person bound by
the order in respect of the family violence the subject of the order.
Question 6–1
Is it common for victims in criminal proceedings
to be cross-examined about evidence that they have given in support of an
application
to obtain a protection order under family violence legislation when
the conduct the subject of the criminal proceedings and the protection
substantially the same?
Proposal 6–2
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended to clarify whether, in the trial of an accused for an offence
out of conduct which is the same or substantially similar to that upon
which a protection order is based, references can be made
(a) the making, variation, and revocation of protection orders in
proceedings under family violence legislation;
(b) the refusal of a court to make, vary or revoke a protection order in
proceedings under family violence legislation;
(c) the existence of current proceedings for a protection order under family
violence legislation against the person the subject
of the criminal proceedings;
(d) the fact that evidence of a particular nature or content was given in
proceedings under family violence legislation.
Such provisions will need to address separately the conduct which constitutes
a breach of a protection order under family violence
legislation.
Question 6–2
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld)—which renders inadmissible in
criminal proceedings certain evidence about protection orders where those
proceedings arise
out of conduct upon which a protection order is
based—working in practice? In particular:
(a) how is it interacting in practice with
Evidence Act
(Qld) which states that ‘proof may be given’ of a previous
inconsistent statement;
(b) does it provide a model for other states and territories to adopt in
their family violence legislation in order to provide legislative
clarity about
the matters raised in Proposal 6–2 above; and
(c) is there a need to make express exception for bail, sentencing and
breach of protection order proceedings?
Question 6–3
In practice, to what extent are courts exercising
their powers to make protection orders in criminal proceedings on their own
where a discretion to do so is conferred on them?
Question 6–4
Are current provisions in family violence
legislation which mandate courts to make either interim or final protection
orders on: charging;
a finding or plea of guilt; or in the case of serious
offences, working in practice? In particular:
(a) have such provisions resulted in the issuing of unnecessary or
inappropriate orders; and
(b) in practice, what types of circumstances satisfy judicial officers in
NSW that such orders are not required?
Question 6–5
If provisions in state and territory family
violence legislation mandating courts to make protection orders in certain
circumstances
remain, is it appropriate for such provisions to contain an
exception for situations where a victim objects to the making of the
Question 6–6
To what extent are prosecutors in the Northern
Territory making applications for protection orders where a person pleads guilty
is found guilty of an offence that involves family violence? Is it desirable
for legislation to empower prosecutors in other states
and territories to make
an application for protection orders where a person pleads guilty or is found
guilty of such an offence?
Proposal 6–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should include an express provision conferring on courts a power to make a
order on their own initiative at any stage of a criminal
proceeding—including prior to a plea or finding of guilt.
Proposal 6–4
State and territory legislation should provide
that a court, before which a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of an
involving family violence, must consider any existing protection order
obtained under family violence legislation and whether, in
the circumstances,
that protection order needs to be varied to provide greater protection for the
person against whom the offence
was committed, irrespective of whether an
application has been made to vary the order.
Question 6–7
In practice, are the conditions which judicial
officers attach to protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation
sufficiently tailored to the circumstances of particular cases?
Proposal 6–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide expressly that one of the conditions that may be imposed by a
making a protection order is to prohibit the person against whom the order
is made from locating or attempting to locate the victim
of family violence.
Proposal 6–6
Application forms for protection orders in each
state and territory should clearly set out the full range of conditions that a
may attach to a protection order. The forms should be drafted to enable
applicants to indicate the types of conditions that they
would like imposed. In
particular, the application form for a protection order in Western Australia
should be amended in this regard.
Proposal 6–7
State and territory family violence legislation
should require judicial officers considering the making of protection orders to
whether or not to make an exclusion order—that is, an order
excluding a person against whom a protection order is made from
premises shared
with the victim, even if the person has a legal or equitable interest in such
Proposal 6–8
State and territory family violence legislation
should specify the factors that a court is to consider in making an exclusion
is, an order excluding a person against whom a protection order
is made from premises shared with the victim, even if the person
has a legal or
equitable interest in such premises. Judicial officers should be required to
consider the effect that making or declining
to make an exclusion order will
have on the accommodation needs of the parties to the proceedings and on any
children, as recommended
by the ALRC in the Report
Domestic Violence
(ALRC 30) 1986.
Question 6–8
If state or territory family violence legislation
empowers police officers to make an order excluding a person who has used family
violence from premises in which he or she has a legal or equitable interest,
should they be required to take reasonable steps to
secure temporary
accommodation for the excluded person?
Proposal 6–9
State and territory family violence legislation
should require a court to give reasons for declining to make an exclusion
is, an order excluding the person against whom a protection
order is made from premises in which he or she has a legal or equitable
interest—where such order has been sought.
Question 6–9
How is the presumption in the family violence
legislation of the Northern Territory—that where a victim, person who uses
violence and child reside together, the protection of the victim and
child is best achieved by their remaining in the home—working
in practice?
In particular, has the application of the presumption resulted in the making of
exclusion orders?
Question 6–10
Should state and territory family violence
legislation include an express presumption that the protection of victims is
best served
by their remaining in the home in circumstances where they share a
residence with the persons who have used violence against them?
Proposal 6–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended, where necessary, to allow expressly for courts making
orders to impose conditions on persons against whom protection orders
are made requiring them to attend rehabilitation or counselling
programs, where
such persons are suitable and eligible to participate in such programs.
Proposal 6–11
Application forms for protection orders should
specify conditions relating to rehabilitation or counselling or allow a victim
to indicate
whether she or he wishes the court to encourage the person who has
used violence to contact an appropriate referral service.
Question 6–11
Do judicial officers in jurisdictions, such as
NSW and Queensland, in which family violence legislation does not specify
rehabilitation or counselling programs as potential conditions
attaching to a protection order, in fact, impose such conditions as
their general power to impose any orders that they consider to be necessary or
Question 6–12
Are overlapping or conflicting obligations placed
on persons as a result of conditions imposed by protection orders under family
legislation requiring attendance at rehabilitation or counselling
programs and any orders to attend such programs either pre-sentencing
of the sentencing process?
Question 6–13
In practice, are courts sentencing offenders for
family-violence related offences made aware of, and do they take into account,
protection order conditions to which the offender to be sentenced is or has
been subject?
Question 6–14
Have there been cases where there has been
overlap or conflict between place restriction or area restriction orders imposed
on sentencing
and protection order conditions which prohibit or restrict the
same person’s access to certain premises?
Proposal 6–12
State and territory legislation should provide
that a court sentencing an offender for a family-violence related offence should
into account in sentencing the offender:
(a) any protection order conditions to which the person being sentenced is
subject, where those conditions arise out of the same
or substantially the same
conduct giving rise to the prosecution for the offence; and
(b) the duration of any protection order to which the offender is
Proposal 6–13
State and territory legislation should be
amended, where necessary, to provide that a person protected by a protection
order under
family violence legislation cannot be charged with or guilty of an
offence of aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the breach
of a protection
Proposal 6–14
State and territory family violence legislation
should empower a court hearing an allegation of breach of a protection order to
leave to proceed in an application to vary or cancel a protection order of
its own motion where:
(a) there is evidence that the victim for whose benefit the protection order
was made gave free and voluntary consent to the breach;
(b) the court is satisfied that the victim wants to vary or revoke the
protection order.
Proposal 6–15
State and territory criminal legislation should
be amended to ensure that victims of family violence cannot be charged with, or
found guilty of, offences—such as conspiracy or attempt to pervert the
course of justice—where the conduct alleged to
constitute such offences is
essentially conduct engaged in by a victim to reduce or mitigate the culpability
of the offender. Legislative
reform in this area should be reinforced by
appropriate directions in police codes of practice, or operating procedures and
prosecutorial
guidelines or policies.
Question 6–15
In practice: (a) are persons who breach
protection orders raising consent of the victim to the breach as a mitigating
factor in sentencing;
and (b) are courts treating consent of a victim to a
breach of a protection order as a mitigating factor in sentencing?
Question 6–16
Should state and territory family violence or
sentencing legislation prohibit a court from considering the consent of a victim
breach of a protection order as a mitigating factor in sentencing?
Question 6–17
In practice, where breach of a protection order
also amounts to another criminal offence to what extent are police in each state
territory charging persons with breach of a protection order, as opposed to
any applicable offence under state or territory criminal
Question 6–18
If there is a practice of police preferring to
lay charges for breach of a protection order, as opposed to any applicable
criminal offence, how can this practice best be addressed to ensure
victims’ experiences of family violence are not underrated?
Proposal 6–16
State and territory courts, in recording and
maintaining statistics about criminal matters lodged or criminal offences proven
criminal matters or offences that occur in a family-violence related
Question 6–19
Should there be consistency of maximum penalties
for breach of protection orders across the jurisdictions? If so, why, and what
the maximum penalty be?
Question 6–20
In practice, what issues or concerns arise about
the sentences actually imposed on offenders for breach of protection orders?
Question 6–21
Should state and territory family violence
legislation contain provisions which direct courts to adopt a particular
approach on sentencing
for breach of a protection order—for example, a
provision such as that in
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
(NSW), which requires courts to sentence offenders to
imprisonment for breach of protection orders involving violence, unless they
otherwise order and give their reasons for doing so?
Question 6–22
What types of non-financial sanctions are
appropriate to be imposed for breach of protection orders where the breach does
not involve
violence or involves comparatively low levels of violence?
[back to top]
7. Recognising Family Violence in Criminal Law
Question 7–1
Is it necessary or feasible for state and
territory criminal laws to introduce a specific offence of committing family
violence? If
so, how should such an offence be conceptualised? For example,
would it be feasible to create a two-tiered offence which captures
both coercive
conduct and physical violence in a family violence context?
Question 7–2
Which, if either, of the following options for
reform should be adopted:
(a) state and territory criminal legislation should provide that an offence
is aggravated—and therefore a higher maximum penalty
applies—if an
offender is in a family relationship with the victim and the offence committed
formed part of a pattern of controlling,
coercive or dominating behaviour;
(b) state and territory criminal legislation should be amended to include
specific offences—such as assault and sexual assault—which
committed by an offender who is in a family relationship with the victim, but
which do not attract a higher maximum penalty?
Question 7–3
What kind of family relationships should be
included for the purposes of the offences referred to in Question 7–2?
Question 7–4
Should federal criminal legislation be amended to
include specific offences committed by an offender who is in a family
relationship
with the victim? If so, which offences should be included and
should they carry a higher maximum penalty?
Question 7–5
In practice, are representative charges in
family-violence related offences under-utilised? If so, why, and how can this
best be addressed?
Question 7–6
In practice, are courts imposing sentences for
family-violence related offences taking into account, where applicable, the fact
the offence formed part of a course of conduct of family violence? If so,
are courts taking into account (a) uncharged criminal conduct;
non-criminal family violence? Should they do so?
Question 7–7
In practice, to what extent are guilty pleas
entered to a family-violence related charge accompanied by an acknowledgement
are representative of criminality, comprising uncharged conduct as
well as charged conduct?
Proposal 7–1
Commonwealth, state and territory governments, and Commonwealth, state and
territory directors of public prosecution respectively,
should ensure that
police and prosecutors are encouraged by appropriate prosecutorial guidelines,
and training and education programs,
to use representative charges to the
maximum extent possible in family-violence related criminal matters where the
charged conduct
forms part of a course of conduct.
Question 7–8
Should the sentencing legislation of states and
territories be amended to allow expressly for a course of conduct to be taken
account in sentencing, to the extent that it does not already do so?
Question 7–9
Should the fact that an offence was committed in
the context of a family relationship be an aggravating factor in sentencing? If
to which family relationships should this apply? Is making a specific link
between a family relationship and the escalation of violence
an appropriate
Proposal 7–2
State and territory sentencing legislation should
provide that the fact that an offence was committed in the context of a family
relationship
should not be considered a mitigating factor in sentencing.
Proposal 7–3
The Australian Government—in conjunction
with state and territory governments, the National Judicial College of
Australia, the
Judicial Commission of NSW, and the Judicial College of
Victoria—should develop, and maintain the currency of, a model bench
on family violence, which incorporates a section on sentencing in family
violence matters.
Question 7–10
Are current defences to homicide for victims in
violent family relationships adequate in each Australian state and
Proposal 7–4
State and territory criminal legislation should
provide defences to homicide which accommodate the experiences of family
victims who kill, recognising the dynamics and features of family
Proposal 7–5
State and territory criminal legislation should
expressly allow defendants to lead evidence about family violence in the context
a defence to homicide.
Section 9AH
Crimes Act 1958
is an instructive model in this regard.
Question 7–11
How can the criminal law best recognise family
violence as relevant to a defence to homicide? For example, should family
be expressly accommodated within an expanded concept of self-defence or
should jurisdictions introduce a separate defence of family
violence? What
problems or issues arise from current models which recognise family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide?
[back to top]
8. Family Violence Legislation and Parenting
Proposal 8–1
State and territory child protection laws should
be amended to require a child protection agency that advises a parent to seek a
order under state or territory family violence legislation for the
purpose of protecting the child to provide written advice to this
ensure that a federal family court does not construe the parent’s action
as a failure to ‘facilitate, and encourage,
a close and continuing
relationship between the child and the other parent’ pursuant to
s 60CC(3)(c)
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 8–2
Application forms for initiating proceedings in
the federal family courts and the Family Court of Western Australia should
seek information about existing protection orders obtained under state
and territory family violence legislation or pending proceedings
Proposal 8–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide mechanisms for courts exercising jurisdiction under such
legislation
to be informed about existing parenting orders or pending
proceedings for such orders. This could be achieved by:
(a) imposing a legally enforceable obligation on parties to proceedings for
a protection order to inform the court about any such
parenting orders or
proceedings;
(b) requiring courts making protection orders to inquire as to any such
parenting orders or proceedings; or
(c) both of the above.
Question 8–1
In practice, what steps does a police officer who
issues a protection order have to take in order to make ‘reasonable
order’, pursuant to the
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Should this requirement apply to police who issue protection orders in other
states and territories?
Proposal 8–4
Application forms for protection orders in all
states and territories, including applications for variation of protection
should clearly seek information about existing parenting orders or
pending proceedings for such orders.
Proposal 8–5
The ‘additional consideration’ in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which directs a court to
consider only final or contested protection orders when determining the best
interests of a child
in making a parenting order, should be:
(a) repealed, and reliance placed instead on the general criterion of family
violence contained in
s 60CC(3)(j)
(b) amended to provide that any family violence, including evidence of such
violence given in any protection order proceeding—including
proceedings in
which final or interim protection orders are made either by consent or after a
contested hearing—is an additional
consideration when determining the best
interests of a child.
Proposal 8–6
Rule 10.15A
Family Law Rules
(Cth) should apply to allegations of family violence in addition to
allegations of child abuse. A substantially equivalent rule should
proceedings in the Federal Magistrates Court.
Question 8–2
How often do federal family courts make consent
orders that are inconsistent with current protection orders without requiring
to institute parenting proceedings? Are additional measures needed to
prevent this—for example, by including a requirement
(Cth) for parenting proceedings to be initiated where parties
propose consent orders that are inconsistent with current protection
Question 8–3
Are additional measures necessary to ensure that
allegations of family violence in federal family courts are given adequate
consideration
in interim parenting proceedings? If so, what measures would be
beneficial?
Proposal 8–7
State and territory courts hearing protection order
proceedings should not significantly lower the standard of protection afforded
by a protection order for the purpose of facilitating consistency with a current
parenting order. This could be achieved by:
(a) a prohibition to this effect in state and territory family violence
legislation; or
(b) guidance in relevant state and territory bench books.
Question 8–4
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which requires a family court to specify any inconsistency between a
family law order and a family violence protection order,
working in practice?
Are any reforms necessary to improve the section’s operation?
Question 8–5
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which permits certain persons to apply for a declaration of inconsistency
between a family law order and a family violence
protection order, working in
practice? How frequently is this provision used?
Question 8–6
Do state and territory courts exercise their power
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to revive, vary,
discharge or suspend a parenting order to give effect to a family violence
protection order?
Proposal 8–8
Family violence legislation should refer to the
powers under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to revive, vary,
discharge or suspend a parenting order to give effect to a family violence
protection order by:
(a) referring to the powers—the South Australian model; or
(b) requiring the court to revive, vary, discharge or suspend an inconsistent
parenting order to the extent that it is inconsistent
with a family violence
protection order—the Victorian model.
Question 8–7
Should proceedings for a protection order under
family violence legislation, where there is an inconsistent parenting order, be
to a specialist state and territory court?
Proposal 8–9
Application forms for protection orders under
state and territory family violence legislation should include a clear option
applicant to request a variation, suspension, or discharge of a current
parenting order.
Question 8–8
Are legal practitioners reluctant to seek
variation of parenting orders in state and territory courts? If so, what factors
to this reluctance?
Proposal 8–10
(Cth) should be reviewed to
clarify its intended application to magistrates courts in Western Australia
seeking to exercise their
powers under div 11 of the
Family Law Act
Question 8–9
Family Law Act 1975
amended to direct state and territory courts varying parenting orders to give
priority to the protection of family members
against violence and the threat of
family violence over a child’s interest in having contact with both
Question 8–10
Family Law Act
(Cth) be amended to empower state and territory courts to make
parenting orders in those circumstances in which they can revive,
discharge or suspend such orders?
Question 8–11
Do applicants for interim protection orders who
seek variation of a parenting order have practical difficulties in obtaining new
from a court exercising family law jurisdiction within 21 days? If
so, what would be a realistic time within which such orders could
Question 8–12
Should there be a defence to a breach of a
parenting order where a parent withholds contact beyond 21 days due to
family violence
concerns while a variation or suspension of a parenting order
made by a state or territory court is awaiting hearing in a federal
family court
or the Family Court of Western Australia?
Proposal 8–11
The Tasmanian Government should undertake an
evaluation of the protocol negotiated between the Magistrates Court of Tasmania
Tasmanian Registry of the Family Court in relation to coexisting family
violence protection orders and parenting orders. On the basis
evaluation, other states and territories should consider whether adopting
cooperative models would be an effective strategy
to deal with coexisting
Proposal 8–12
Application forms for family violence protection
orders should include an option for applicants to indicate their preference that
there should be no exception in the protection order for contact required or
authorised by a parenting order.
Question 8–13
Should contact required or authorised by a
parenting order be removed from the standard exceptions to prohibited conduct
under state
and territory protection orders?
Proposal 8–13
The Australian Government—in conjunction
with state and territory governments, the National Judicial College of
Australia, the
Judicial Commission of NSW and the Judicial College of
Victoria—should provide ongoing training and development for judicial
officers in state and territory courts who hear proceedings for protection
orders on the exercise of their powers under the
Family Law Act 1975
Question 8–14
Should the provisions for resolving inconsistent
orders under
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
(Cth) be expanded to include inconsistencies resulting from:
(a) a party’s rights or responsibilities under the
Family Law Act
other than those pursuant to an order, injunction or undertaking, such as
those deriving from the concept of parental responsibility;
(b) laws other than family violence laws prescribed in reg 12BB of the
Family Law Regulations 1984
(Cth), such as protective bail
conditions?
[back to top]
9. Family Violence Legislation and the
Family Law Act:
Family Law Act
Question 9–1
In order to improve the accessibility of
injunctions for personal protection under the
Family Law Act 1975
to victims of family violence, should the
Family Law Act
provide separate
procedures in relation to injunctions for personal protection and other family
law injunctions available under s
114 of the Act? If so, what procedures
would be appropriate?
Proposal 9–1
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that a wilful breach of an injunction for personal protection
is a criminal offence, as recommended by the ALRC in
Equality Before the Law
Question 9–2
In practice, how often does a person who has
obtained an injunction under the
Family Law Act
subsequently need to seek additional protection under state or territory family
violence legislation?
Question 9–3
Should a person who has sought or obtained an
injunction for personal protection under the
Family Law Act
(Cth) also be able to seek a protection order under state or territory
family violence legislation?
Question 9–4
In practice, do problems arise from the provisions
dealing with inconsistencies between injunctions granted under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and protection orders made under
state and territory family violence legislation?
Proposal 9–2
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that in proceedings to make or vary a protection order, a
state or territory court with jurisdiction
may revive, vary, discharge or
Family Law Act
injunction for the personal protection of a
party to a marriage or other person.
Proposal 9–3
Section 114(2)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which permits a court to make an order relieving a party to a marriage
from any obligations to perform marital services or
render conjugal rights,
should be repealed.
Question 9–5
Is evidence of violence given in protection order
proceedings being considered in the context of property proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)? If so, how?
Proposal 9–4
The provisions of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) dealing with the distribution of property should refer expressly to
the impact of violence on past contributions and on future
needs, as recommended
by the ALRC in
Equality Before the Law
Proposal 9–5
The Australian Government should commission an
inquiry into the treatment of family violence in property proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). The inquiry should
consider, among other issues, the manner in which family violence should be
taken into account in determining
a party’s contribution under
and future needs under
; the definition of family
violence for the purpose of
proceedings; and interaction with other
schemes—for example, victims’ compensation.
Question 9–6
How often are persons who have been the subject of
exclusion conditions in protection orders made under family violence legislation
or victims of family violence taking possession of property which they do not
own or have a right to possess, or denying the other
person access to property?
If so, what impact does this have on any property proceedings or orders relating
to property under the
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 9–6
Provisions in state and territory family violence
legislation dealing with exclusion orders should:
(a) limit the types of property which a court may order an excluded person
to recover to clothes, tools of trade, personal documents
and other personal
effects, and any other items specified by the court; and
(b) provide that any order to recover property should not include
(i) which are reasonably needed by the victim or a child of the victim;
(ii) in which title is genuinely in dispute; and
(c) provide that an order to recover property should not be made where other
more appropriate means are available for the issue to
be addressed in a timely
Question 9–7
Are there any types of property other than those
set out in Proposal 9–6 which should, or should not, be subject to
by an excluded person under state and territory family violence
legislation—for example, should an excluded person be able
property of his or her child?
Proposal 9–7
State and territory family violence legislation
should require applicants for protection orders to inform courts about, and
to consider, any agreement or order for the division of property under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), or any pending application for such an
Proposal 9–8
Application forms for protection orders in family
violence proceedings should clearly seek information about any agreement or
for the division of property under the
Family Law Act 1975
any pending application for such an order.
Proposal 9–9
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that personal property directions made in protection order
proceedings
are subject to orders made by a federal family court or another
court responsible for determining property disputes.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should be referred to as a
model in this regard.
Proposal 9–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that personal property directions do not affect any ownership
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
should be referred to as a model in this regard.
Question 9–8
In practice, what issues arise from the
interaction between relocation orders and protection orders or allegations of
family violence?
If so, what legal or practical reforms could be introduced to
address these issues? For example, should there be a presumption that,
or all cases where a family court determines there has been family violence, it
is likely to be in the best interests of
a child to be able to relocate to a
safe distance from the person who has used violence? If so, to which type of
case should such
a presumption apply?
Question 9–9
Family Law Act 1975
amended to include provisions dealing with family violence in relocation matters
in addition to the provisions of the Act
that apply to family violence in
parenting proceedings?
Question 9–10
In practice, what issues arise from the
interaction between protection orders under state and territory family violence
legislation
and recovery orders under div VII of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) for return of a child pursuant to the
Convention on the Civil
Aspects of International Child Abduction
, as implemented by the
Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
(Cth)? If so, what legal
or practical reforms could be introduced to address these issues?
Question 9–11
Family Law Act 1975
amended to include provisions dealing with family violence in recovery matters,
in addition to the provisions of the Act
that apply to family violence in
parenting proceedings?
[back to top]
10. Improving Evidence and Information
Proposal 10–1
Judicial officers, when making a protection order
under state or territory family violence legislation by consent without
admissions,
should ensure that:
(a) the notation on protection orders and court files specifically states
that the order is made by consent ‘without admission
as to criminal
liability of the allegations in the application for the protection
(b) the applicant has an opportunity to oppose an order being made by
consent without admissions;
(c) the order gives attention to the safety of victims, and, if appropriate,
requires that a written safety plan accompanies the
(d) the parties are aware of the practical consequences of consenting to a
protection order without admission of liability.
Proposal 10–2
Before accepting an undertaking to the court from
a person against whom a protection order is sought, a court should ensure
(a) the applicant for the protection order understands the implications of
relying on an undertaking to the court given by the respondent,
rather than
continuing with their application for a protection order;
(b) the respondent understands that the applicant’s acceptance of an
undertaking does not preclude further action by the applicant
to address family
violence, if necessary; and
(c) the undertaking is in writing.
Question 10–1
What practical reforms could be implemented in
order to achieve the objectives set out in Proposal 10–2?
Question 10–2
In practice, do victims of family violence, who
rely on undertakings to the court from a person against whom a protection order
sought, often return to court because the undertaking has been breached, or
to seek further protection from family violence?
Question 10–3
In practice, do victims of family violence who
rely on undertakings to the court from a person against whom a protection order
sought inform federal family courts of the existence of such undertakings
during family law proceedings?
Proposal 10–3
Court forms for applications for a protection
order under state and territory family violence legislation should include
information
relevant jurisdiction.
Question 10–4
In order to improve the evidentiary value of
information contained in applications for protection orders under state and
family violence legislation, would it be beneficial for such
legislation to:
(a) require that applications for protection orders be sworn or affirmed;
(b) give applicants for protection orders the opportunity of providing
affidavit evidence in support of their application?
Question 10–5
What are the advantages or disadvantages of
providing written rather than oral evidence to a court when seeking a protection
Would a standard form of affidavit be of assistance to victims of family
Question 10–6
Are there any other ways to facilitate the use of
evidence given in proceedings for a protection order under state and territory
violence legislation in pending, concurrent or subsequent family law
proceedings where family violence is alleged?
Question 10–7
Are the provisions in state and territory family
violence legislation that allow the court to hear protection order proceedings
closed court effective in protecting vulnerable applicants and witnesses?
Question 10–8
How is the requirement in
and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), that a court hearing an
application for a protection order should not generally be open to the public,
working in practice?
Proposal 10–4
State and territory family violence legislation
(a) prohibit a person who has allegedly used family violence from personally
cross-examining, in protection order proceedings, a
person against whom he or
she has allegedly used family violence; and
(b) provide that any person conducting such cross-examination be a legal
practitioner representing the interests of the person who
has allegedly used
family violence.
Question 10–9
Should state and territory family violence
legislation allow a court to:
(a) make an order that a person who has made two or more vexatious
applications for a protection order against the same person may
further application without the leave of the court; and/or
(b) dismiss a vexatious application for a protection order at a preliminary
hearing before a respondent is served with that application?
Proposal 10–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that mutual protection orders may only be made by a court if it
satisfied that there are grounds for making a protection order against each
Proposal 10–6
State and territory family violence legislation
should require the respondent to a protection order to seek leave from the court
making an application to vary or revoke the protection order.
Question 10–10
In practice, are records of proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) accessible—in a timely
fashion—to persons seeking access for the purpose of protection order
proceedings under
state and territory family violence legislation? If not, are
any amendments to the
Family Law Act
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) necessary or desirable—for example, to impose an obligation on
federal family courts to provide details of injunctions
or orders to a state or
territory court hearing proceedings under family violence legislation involving
one or more of the parties
to the family law proceedings?
Question 10–11
In practice, does the prohibition on publication
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) unduly restrict
communication about family law proceedings to persons involved in protection
order proceedings under state
and territory family violence legislation,
including police who enforce such orders? If so, are any amendments to
necessary or desirable?
Proposal 10–7
Certificates issued under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should include information about why family
dispute resolution was inappropriate or unsuccessful—for example, because
there has been, or is a future risk of, family violence by one of the parties to
the proceedings.
Question 10–12
If more information is included in certificates
issued under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) pursuant to
Proposal 10–7, how should this information be treated by family courts?
For example, should such information
only be used for the purposes of screening
and risk assessment?
Question 10–13
Are the confidentiality provisions in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) inappropriately
restricting family counsellors and family dispute resolution practitioners from
releasing information relating
to the risks of family violence to:
(a) courts exercising family law jurisdiction; and
(b) state and territory courts exercising jurisdiction under family violence
legislation?
Proposal 10–8
Sections 10D(4)(b)
(4)(b) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be amended to permit family counsellors
and family dispute resolution practitioners to disclose communications where
they reasonably believe that disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a
serious threat to a person’s life, health or safety.
Proposal 10–9
Sections 10D(4)(c)
(4)(c) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should permit family counsellors and family
dispute resolution practitioners to disclose communications where they
believe that disclosure is necessary to report conduct that they
reasonably believe constitutes grounds for a protection order under
territory family violence legislation.
Question 10–14
Should there be any other amendments to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) enabling the release of any
other types of information obtained by family counsellors or family dispute
resolution practitioners?
For example, should the legislation permit release
where it would prevent or lessen a serious threat to a child’s
Proposal 10–10
Sections 10E
Family Law Act
(Cth) should enable the admission into evidence of disclosures made by
an adult or child that a child has been exposed to family violence,
disclosures have been made to family counsellors and family dispute resolution
practitioners.
Question 10–15
(Cth) permit the admission into evidence of communications made to
family counsellors and family dispute resolution practitioners
which disclose
family violence? If so, how should such an exception be framed?
Question 10–16
Family Law Act
(Cth) be amended to apply expressly to state and territory courts when
they are not exercising family law jurisdiction?
Question 10–17
In practice, do prohibitions on publication in
state and territory family violence legislation unduly restrict communication
protection order proceedings which may be relevant to proceedings in
federal family courts?
Question 10–18
Should prohibitions on publication of
identifying information about adults involved in protection order proceedings
under state and
territory family violence legislation be modified in one or more
of the following ways to
(a) require the prohibition on disclosure to be activated by a court
(b) impose a requirement that the disclosure of identifying information must
be reasonably likely to expose a person to risk of harm
as a precondition for a
court to issue an order prohibiting publication; and/or
(c) include an exception to prohibitions on publication for disclosure of
pleadings, transcripts of evidence or other documents to
police or other persons
concerned in any court proceedings, for use in connection with those
proceedings—for example, the exception
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
Question 10–19
Are there any situations in which state and
territory family violence legislation should require courts to provide details
of protection
order proceedings or orders to federal family courts?
Question 10–20
Do privacy and/or secrecy laws unduly impede
agencies from disclosing information which may be relevant to:
(a) protection order proceedings under state and territory family violence
legislation; and/or
(b) family law proceedings in federal family courts?
Proposal 10–11
Legislative privacy principles applying to the
use and disclosure of personal information by Australian Government and state
and territory
government agencies should permit use or disclosure where an
agency reasonably believes it is necessary to lessen or prevent a serious
to an individual’s life, health or safety, as recommended by the ALRC in
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(ALRC 108).
Proposal 10–12
State and territory family violence legislation
should authorise agencies in that state or territory to use or disclose personal
information
for the purpose of ensuring the safety of a victim of family
violence or the wellbeing of an affected child.
Proposal 10–13
Information-sharing provisions introduced
pursuant to Proposal 10–12 should permit disclosure to, at least,
relevant government
officers in other jurisdictions and federal, state and
territory court officers.
Proposal 10–14
Courts that hear protection order proceedings in
each state and territory should enter into an information-sharing protocol with
Family Court of Australia, Federal Magistrates Court, police, relevant
government departments and other organisations that hold information
in relation
to family violence.
Proposal 10–15
A national protection order database should be
established as a component of the Australian Government’s commitment to
the implementation
of a national registration system for protection orders. At a
minimum, information on the database should:
(a) include protection orders made under state and territory family violence
legislation as well as orders and injunctions made under
Family Law Act
(b) be available to federal, state and territory police officers, federal
family courts, and state and territory courts that hear
protection order
proceedings.
Question 10–21
Is there any other information which should be
included on, or are there any other persons who should have access to, the
protection order database, over and above those set out in
Proposal 10–15?
[back to top]
11. Alternative Processes
Question 11–1
Should any amendments be made to the provisions
relating to family dispute resolution in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)—and, in particular, to
of that Act—to ensure
that victims of family violence are not inappropriately attempting or
participating in family dispute
resolution? What other reforms may be necessary
to ensure the legislation operates effectively?
Proposal 11–1
Australian governments, lawyers’
organisations and bodies responsible for legal education should develop ways to
ensure that
lawyers who practice family law are given adequate training and
support in screening and assessing risks in relation to family violence.
Proposal 11–2
The Australian Government should promote the use
of existing screening and risk assessment frameworks and tools for family
resolution practitioners through, for example, training, accreditation
processes, and audit and evaluations.
Proposal 11–3
Measures should be taken to improve collaboration
and cooperation between family dispute resolution practitioners and lawyers, as
recommended by the Family Law Council.
Question 11–2
Does the definition of family violence in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) cause any problems in family dispute resolution
Question 11–3
In practice, are protection orders being used
appropriately in family dispute resolution processes to identify family violence
manage the risks associated with it? Are any reforms necessary to improve
the use of protection orders in such processes?
Proposal 11–4
State and territory courts should ensure that
application forms for protection orders include an exception allowing contact
purposes of family dispute resolution processes.
Question 11–4
In practice, are alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms used in relation to protection order proceedings under family
legislation? If so, are reforms necessary to ensure these mechanisms
are used only in appropriate circumstances?
Question 11–5
How can the potential of alternative dispute
resolution mechanisms to improve communication and collaboration in the child
system best be realised?
Question 11–6
Is there a need for legislative or other reforms
to ensure that alternative dispute resolution mechanisms in child protection
family violence appropriately?
Question 11–7
Is it appropriate for restorative justice
practices to be used in the family violence context? If so, is it appropriate
only for certain
should these practices have?
Question 11–8
Is it appropriate for restorative justice
practices to be used for sexual assault offences or offenders? If so, what
limits (if any)
should apply to the classes of offence or offender? If
restorative justice practices are available, what safeguards should apply?
[back to top]
Part C – Child
13. Child Protection and the
Criminal Law
Question 13–1
Should offences against children for abuse and
neglect be contained in child protection legislation or in general criminal
Question 13–2
In practice, what issues, if any, arise from the
way in which the offence provisions are currently drafted?
Question 13–3
In those jurisdictions where the same conduct may
give rise to an offence under both child protection or criminal legislation,
factors are taken into account in practice when determining whether to
bring an action against an alleged offender under child protection
or criminal
legislation?
Question 13–4
What range of penalties should be available to
courts for offences under child protection legislation?
Question 13–5
In practice, what range of penalties are most
regularly imposed, and if conditional, what are the most usual conditions
Question 13–6
In what circumstances is it appropriate for
police to make child protection notifications when responding to incidents of
family violence?
Proposal 13–1
State and territory child protection legislation
should contain an exemption from the prohibition on the disclosure of the
of the reporter, or of information from which the reporter’s
identity could be deduced, for information disclosed to a law
enforcement agency
(a) the information is disclosed in connection with the investigation of a
serious offence alleged to have been committed against
a child or young person;
(b) the disclosure is necessary for the purpose of safeguarding or promoting
the safety welfare and wellbeing of any child or young
person, whether or not
the victim of the alleged offence.
Proposal 13–2
State and territory child protection legislation
should also provide that the exemption in Proposal 13–1 does not
apply unless
a senior officer of the law enforcement agency to which the
disclosure is made has certified in writing beforehand that:
(a) obtaining the reporter’s consent would prejudice the investigation
of the serious offence concerned; or
(b) it is impractical to obtain the consent.
Proposal 13–3
State and territory child protection legislation
should define law enforcement agency to be the police force of the relevant
the Australian Federal Police and the police force of any other state and
Proposal 13–4
State and territory child protection legislation
should provide that the person or body that discloses the identity of a
reporter—or
the information in a report from which the reporter’s
identity can be deduced— should notify the reporter of the disclosure
unless it is impractical to do so, or would prejudice the investigation of the
serious offence concerned.
Question 13–7
In practice, are the inter-agency protocols and
memorandums of understanding between key agencies involved in child
protection—such
as the police and child protection
agencies—effective to ensure that professionals in each part of the system
understand the
consequences of their actions for other parts of the system?
Question 13–8
What legal changes are required to facilitate
effective relationships between agencies to ensure that evidence is obtained in
that is appropriate not only for child protection purposes but also for
family law purposes?
Question 13–9
Should child protection legislation be amended
to require police to consult with the child protection agency before deciding to
investigate
an alleged offence against a child where the child is suspected of
being in need of care and protection?
Question 13–10
Should child protection legislation be amended
to require police to consult with the child protection agency before initiating
proceedings
in relation to an alleged offence against a child?
Proposal 13–5
States and territories should ensure that best
practice features of collaborative models of child protection are adopted,
(a) legislative provisions that allow agencies (including federal agencies)
to share relevant information about children and families
to make accurate
assessments of the needs of children and families and to ensure that appropriate
programs relative to those needs
are delivered in a timely and coordinated
(b) the establishment of a shared database which contains basic information
can access to see quickly
which other agencies may be dealing with a particular child or family; and
(c) the development of guidelines to assist agencies to clarify their
respective roles and functions, to assist them when performing
functions under
the legislation, and to assist them to resolve any issues that may arise.
Question 13–11
In care proceedings under child protection
legislation, where final orders are pending, should children’s courts in
and territories be given power to make protection orders in favour of
the child who is the subject of proceedings before it, where
the court considers
a protection order necessary to protect the child from serious harm arising from
the child’s exposure to
family violence?
Question 13–12
Should a children’s court be able to make
protection orders in favour of siblings of the child who is the subject of care
proceedings
before it? If so, should it be able to make such an order of its own
motion or should it be by application by a party to the proceedings
advocate for the child?
Proposal 13–6
State and territory child protection legislation
should be amended to allow a court, in the exercise of its criminal jurisdiction
where a child or young person who is a defendant before it, to refer a matter to
the child protection agency for investigation where
it considers that there are
legislative grounds for a protection application, or an application for a
therapeutic treatment order,
to be made.
Proposal 13–7
State and territory child protection legislation
should require the child protection agency to provide, within 21 days of the
a report to the court setting out the outcomes of its investigation
into the matter, and specifying whether a care and protection
therapeutic treatment order is being sought, or if the investigation reveals
that such an order is not warranted.
Proposal 13–8
A court exercising care jurisdiction under state
and territory child protection legislation should have a power to refer its
for the safety of other children or siblings of the child or young
person the subject of care proceedings before it to the child
protection agency
for investigation, and to require the child protection agency to furnish it with
a report of its investigation
within a certain time period specified in the
legislation.
Question 13–13
In practice, when sentencing young offenders,
how often does the court request information held by the child protection agency
the offender to be provided to it?
[back to top]
14. Child Protection and the
Question 14–1
Can children’s courts be given more powers
to ensure orders are made in the best interests of children that deal with
have, and what resources would be required?
Question 14–2
Family Law Act 1975
amended to extend the jurisdiction which state and territory courts already have
to make orders for a parent to spend time with a child?
Question 14–3
When should state and territory children’s
courts have power to determine contact between one parent and another in matters
that are before the court in child protection proceedings?
Question 14–4
What features of the Family Court of Western
Australia should be replicated in other jurisdictions?
Question 14–5
Is there any role for a referral of legislative
power to the Commonwealth in relation to child protection matters? If so, what
such a referral cover?
Proposal 14–1
To ensure appropriate disclosure of safety
concerns for children, the
Initiating Application (Family Law)
should be amended by adding an additional part headed ‘Concerns about
safety’ which should include a question along
the lines of ‘Do you
have any significant fears for the safety of you or your child(ren) that the
court should know about?’.
Question 14–6
What other practical changes to the applications
forms for initiating proceedings in federal family courts and the Family Court
Western Australia would make it clear to parties that they are required to
disclose current or prior child protection proceedings
and current child
protection orders?
Question 14–7
In what other ways can family law processes be
improved to ensure that any child safety concerns that may need to be drawn to
attention of child protection agencies are highlighted appropriately upon
commencement of proceedings under the
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 14–2
Screening and risk assessment frameworks
developed for federal family courts should closely involve state and territory
child protection
Question 14–8
In what ways can cooperation between child
protection agencies and family courts be improved with respect to compliance
with subpoenas
Family Law Act 1975
Question 14–9
What role should child protection agencies play in
family law proceedings?
Question 14–10
Are amendments to the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and state and territory child protection legislation required to
encourage prompt and effective intervention by child protection
agencies in
family law proceedings? For example, should the
Family Law Act
to provide that the court may, upon finding that none of the parties to the
proceedings is a viable carer, on its own
motion join a child protection agency
or some other person (for example, a grandparent) as a party to proceedings?
Should federal
family courts have additional powers to ensure that intervention
by the child protection system occurs when necessary in the interests
safety of children?
Question 14–11
What are the advantages of registration of state
and territory child protection orders under
(Cth)? What are the interactions in practice of the registration
provisions and s 67ZK of the
Family Law Act
Question 14–12
How, in practice, can information exchange best
be facilitated between family courts and child protection agencies to ensure the
of children? Are changes to the
Family Law Act 1975
necessary to achieve this?
Proposal 14–3
All states and territories should develop a
Memorandum of Understanding or Protocol to govern the relationship between
federal family
courts and child protection agencies.
Question 14–13
Does the variation in the content of the
protocols cause any difficulties and, if so, what changes should be made to
facilitate the
flow of information between the family courts and child
protection agencies? What measures should be taken to ensure that the protocols
are effective in practice?
Question 14–14
How could the Memorandums of Understanding and
Protocols for exchange of information between federal family courts, child
agencies and legal aid commissions be better known within courts, and
beyond them?
Proposal 14–4
The Australian Government should encourage all
and territory child protection agencies which include procedures:
(a) for electing the jurisdiction in which to commence proceedings;
(b) for dealing with requests for documents and information under
Family Law Act 1975
(c) for responding to subpoenas issued by federal family courts; and
(d) which permit a federal family court to invite a child protection agency
to consent to an order being made which allocates parental
responsibility in the
child protection agency’s favour, in circumstances where it determines
that no order should be made in
favour of either parent.
Question 14–15
In what ways can the principles of the Magellan
project be applied in the Federal Magistrates Court?
Question 14–16
What changes to law and practice are required to
prevent children falling through the gaps between the child protection and
law systems?
Question 14–17
Can the problems of the interactions in practice
between family law and child protection systems be resolved by collaborative
arrangements
such as the Magellan project? Are legal changes necessary to
prevent systemic problems and harm to children, and, if so, what are
[back to top]
Part D – Sexual
16. Sexual Offences
Question 16–1
Do significant gaps or inconsistencies arise
among Australian jurisdictions in relation to sexual offences against adults in
(a) definition of sexual intercourse or penetration;
(b) recognition of aggravating factors;
(c) penalties applicable if an offence is found proven;
(d) offences relating to attempts; or
(e) definitions of indecency offences?
Question 16–2
Do these gaps or inconsistencies have a
disproportionate impact on victims of sexual assault occurring in a family
violence context?
If so, how?
Proposal 16–1
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide that the age of consent for all sexual offences is 16
Question 16–3
How should ‘similarity in age’ of the
complainant and the accused be dealt with? Should it be a defence, or should
of consent be included as an element of the offence in these circumstances?
Question 16–4
At what age should a defendant be able to raise
an honest and reasonable belief that a person was over a certain age?
Question 16–5
Has the offence of ‘persistent sexual
abuse’ or ‘maintaining a relationship’ achieved its aims in
the prosecution of sexual offences against children in the family
context, where there are frequently multiple unlawful acts? If
not, what further
changes are required?
Proposal 16–2
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide statutory definitions of consent based on ‘free
and voluntary agreement’.
Proposal 16–3
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should prescribe a non-exhaustive list of circumstances where there
is no consent to sexual activity, or where consent is vitiated. These need not
automatically negate consent, but the circumstances
must in some way be
recognised as potentially vitiating consent. At a minimum, the non-exhaustive
list of vitiating factors should
(a) lack of capacity to consent, including because a person is asleep or
unconscious, or so affected by alcohol or other drugs as
to be unable to
(b) the actual use of force, threatened use of force against the complainant
or another person, which need not involve physical violence
or physical
(c) unlawful detention;
(d) mistaken identity and mistakes as to the nature of the act (including
mistakes generated by the fraud or deceit of the accused);
(e) any position of authority or power, intimidation or coercive
Question 16–6
To what extent are the circumstances vitiating
consent set out in current legislation appropriate to sexual assaults committed
a family violence context? Are any amendments required to draw attention to
the coercive environment created by family violence,
or are the current
provisions sufficient?
Proposal 16–4
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide that a person who performs a sexual act with another
person, without the consent of the other person, knows that the other person
does not consent to the act if the person has no reasonable
grounds for
believing that the other person consents. For the purpose of making any such
finding, the trier of fact must have regard
to all the circumstances of the case
including any steps taken by the person to ascertain whether the other person
consents, but
not including any self-induced intoxication of the person.
Is an honest belief in consent more likely to be raised in cases
where the complainant has or has had an intimate relationship with
the accused?
If so, will the insertion of an objective element assist in these cases? Are
other measures required to clarify or restrict
the defence of honest belief in
these cases?
Proposal 16–5
State and territory legislation should provide that a direction must be
made to the jury on consent in sexual offence proceedings
where it is relevant
to a fact in issue. Such directions must be related to the facts in issue and
the elements of the offence and
expressed in such a way as to aid the
comprehension of the jury. Such directions should cover:
(a) the meaning of consent (as defined in the legislation);
(b) the circumstances that vitiate consent, and that if the jury finds
beyond reasonable doubt that one of these circumstances exists
complainant was not consenting;
(c) the fact that the person did not say or do anything to indicate free
agreement to a sexual act when the act took place is enough
to show that the act
took place without that person’s free agreement; and
(d) that the jury is not
to regard a person as having freely agreed to a sexual act just because she or
he did not protest or physically
resist, did not sustain physical injury, or
freely agreed to engage in another sexual act (whether or not of the same type)
that person, or a sexual act with another person, on an earlier
Where the defence asserts that the accused believed that the complainant was
consenting to the sexual act then the judge must direct
the jury to
(e) any evidence of that belief; and
(f) whether that belief was reasonable in all the relevant circumstances
having regard to (in a case where one of the circumstances
that vitiate consent
exists) whether the accused was aware that that circumstance existed in relation
to the complainant;
(g) whether the accused took any steps to ascertain whether the complainant
was consenting or might not be consenting, and if so,
the nature of those steps;
(h) any other relevant matters.
Proposal 16–6
State and territory sexual offences legislation should include a statement
that the objectives of the legislation are to:
(a) uphold the fundamental right of every person to make decisions about his
or her sexual behaviour and to choose not to engage
in sexual activity;
(b) protect children and persons with a cognitive impairment from sexual
exploitation.
Proposal 16–7
State and territory sexual offences, criminal
procedure or evidence legislation, should provide for guiding principles, to
which courts
should have regard when interpreting provisions relating to sexual
offences. At a minimum, these guiding principles should refer
(a) there is a high incidence of sexual violence within society;
(b) sexual offences are significantly under-reported;
(c) a significant number of sexual offences are committed against women,
children and other vulnerable persons, including persons
with a cognitive
impairment;
(d) sexual offenders are commonly known to their victims; and
(e) sexual offences often occur in circumstances where there are unlikely to
be any physical signs of an offence having occurred.
Question 16–8
Should such a statement of guiding principles
make reference to any other factors, such as recognising vulnerable groups of
or specifically acknowledging that sexual violence constitutes a form of
family violence?
[back to top]
17. Reporting, Prosecution and Pre-trial
Proposal 17–1
The Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault, the Australian
Institute of Criminology and similar state and territory agencies
prioritise the collection of comprehensive data on attrition rates and outcomes
in sexual assault cases, including in relation
to sexual assault perpetrated in
a family violence context.
Question 17–1
Have specialist police squads for sex crimes
increased the policing and apprehension of sexual assault offenders, including
in a family
violence context?
Question 17–2
To what extent is the work of specialist police
hampered by lack of training and resources? In what ways can improvements be
Question 17–3
Are specialised police and integrated agency
responses effective in reducing the attrition of sexual assault cases during the
investigation phase? If not, what further measures should be taken?
Question 17–4
What impact are specialised police units having
on improving collection of admissible evidence and support for victims of sexual
in a family violence context?
Question 17–5
Should specialised sexual assault police units be
established in jurisdictions that do not have them?
Proposal 17–2
Commonwealth, state and territory Directors of
Public Prosecution should ensure that prosecutorial guidelines and policies:
(a) facilitate the referral of victims and witnesses of sexual assault to
appropriate welfare, health, counselling and other support
(b) require consultation with victims of sexual assault about key
prosecutorial decisions including whether to prosecute, discontinue
prosecution or agree to a charge or fact bargain;
(c) require the ongoing provision of information to victims of sexual
assault about the status and progress of proceedings;
(d) facilitate the provision of assistance to victims and witnesses of
sexual assault in understanding the legal and court process;
(e) ensure that family violence protection orders or stalking intervention
orders are sought in all relevant circumstances; and
(f) require referral of victims and witnesses of sexual assault of victims to
providers of personal legal advice in related areas,
such as family law and
victims’ compensation.
Question 17–6
What measures should be taken to reduce the
attrition of sexual assault cases during the prosecution phase, including in
to sexual assault committed in a family violence context?
Question 17–7
Are there any further prosecutorial guidelines
and policies that could be introduced to reduce the attrition of cases of sexual
committed in a family violence context?
Proposal 17–3
State and territory legislation should prohibit
any complainant in sexual assault proceedings from being required to attend to
evidence at committal proceedings. Alternatively, child complainants should
not be required to attend committal proceedings and,
for adult complainants, the
court should be satisfied that there are special reasons for the complainant to
Proposal 17–4
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
(a) create a presumption that when two or more charges for sexual offences
are joined in the same indictment, it is presumed that
those charges are to be
tried together; and
(b) state that this presumption is not rebutted merely because evidence on
one charge is inadmissible on another charge.
Question 17–8
What impact has
Phillips v The Queen
the prosecution of sexual assaults where there are multiple complaints against
the same defendant and consent is a fact in
Question 17–9
Is there a need to
introduce reforms to overturn the decision in
Phillips v The Queen
Proposal 17–5
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should allow the tendering of pre-recorded audiovisual material of interview
investigators and a sexual assault complainant as the
complainant’s evidence-in-chief.
Proposal 17–6
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should permit child victims of sexual assault and victims of sexual assault who
vulnerable as a result of mental or physical impairment to provide an
audiovisual record of evidence at a pre-trial hearing attended
by the judge, the
prosecutor, the defence lawyer, the defendant and any other person the court
deems appropriate. Adult victims of
sexual assault should also be permitted to
provide evidence in this way, by order of the court. Audiovisual evidence should
be replayed
at the trial as the witness’s evidence. Recorded evidence
should be available for use at any re-trial following an appeal or
proceedings in appropriate circumstances.
Proposal 17–7
Commonwealth, state and territory governments
should ensure that participants in the criminal justice system receive
comprehensive
education about legislation authorising the use of pre-recorded
evidence in sexual assault proceedings, and training in relation
to interviewing
victims of sexual assault and creating pre-recorded evidence.
[back to top]
18. Trial Processes
Question 18–1
Should Commonwealth, state and territory evidence
law and procedural rules limit cross-examination and the admission of evidence
the sexual reputation and prior sexual history of all witnesses in sexual
assault proceedings?
Question 18–2
How best can judicial officers and legal
practitioners be assisted to develop a consistent approach to the classification
of evidence
as being either of ‘sexual reputation’, ‘sexual
disposition’ and ‘sexual experience’ (or ‘sexual
activities’)?
Proposal 18–1
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that a court must not allow any questions as to, or admit any
of, the sexual reputation of the complainant.
Question 18–3
Under discretionary models, is evidence of a
complainant’s prior sexual history admitted more or less often in
proceedings concerning
offences perpetrated in a family violence context, as
compared to other sexual assault proceedings?
Proposal 18–2
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that complainants of sexual assault must not be cross-examined,
court must not admit any evidence, as to the sexual activities (whether
consensual or non-consensual) of the complainant other than
those to which the
charge relates, without the leave of the court.
Proposal 18–3
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that the court shall not grant leave for complainants of sexual
to be cross-examined about their sexual activities unless it is
satisfied that:
(a) the evidence has significant probative value to a fact in issue; and
(b) the probative value of the evidence substantially outweighs the danger
of unfair prejudice to the proper administration of justice,
taking into account
the matters in Proposal 18–4 below.
Proposal 18–4
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that the court, in deciding whether the probative value of the
substantially outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice to the proper
administration of justice, must have regard to:
(a) the distress, humiliation, or embarrassment which the complainant may
suffer as a result of the cross-examination or the admission
of the evidence, in
view of the age of the complainant and the number and nature of the questions
that the complainant is likely
to be asked;
(b) the risk that the evidence may arouse in the jury discriminatory belief
or bias, prejudice, sympathy or hostility;
(c) the need to respect the complainant’s personal dignity and
(d) the right of the accused to make a full answer and defence; and
(e) any other factor which the court considers relevant.
Question 18–4
Should Commonwealth, state and territory
legislative provide that ‘sexual history evidence’ or sexual
experience evidence
(a) admissible to support an inference that the complainant is the type of
person who is more likely to have consented to the sexual
activity to which the
charge relates; and/or
(b) to be regarded as having substantial probative value by virtue of any
inference it may raise as to general disposition.
Proposal 18–5
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that ‘sexual history evidence’ or sexual experience
is not to be regarded as being proper matter for cross-examination as
to credit unless, because of special circumstances, it would
materially to impair confidence in the reliability of the evidence of the
complainant.
Proposal 18–6
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should require an application for leave to admit or adduce sexual history
evidence to
(a) made in writing; and
(b) filed with the relevant court and served on the informant or the
Director of Public Prosecutions within a prescribed minimum
number of days,
and prescribe:
(a) the required contents of such an application;
(b) the circumstances in which leave may be granted out of time;
(c) the circumstances in which the requirement that an application for leave
be made in writing may be waived; and
(d) that the application is to be determined in the absence of the jury, and
if the accused requests, in the absence of the complainant.
Proposal 18–7
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should require a court to give reasons for its decision whether or not to grant
and if leave is granted to question the complainant, to state the nature
of the evidence which may be elicited by that questioning.
Proposal 18–8
Commonwealth, state and territory Directors of
Public Prosecution should introduce and implement a policy of writing to the
in sexual assault matters and informing them of the procedural
application requirements imposed under the relevant legislation in
relation to
admitting and adducing sexual experience evidence.
Question 18–5
In sexual assault proceedings, the sexual assault
communications privilege must generally be invoked by the complainant, who is
unrepresented. Assuming complainants continue to be unrepresented in
such sexual assault proceedings, what procedures and services
would best assist
them to invoke the privilege?
Proposal 18–9
State and territory evidence legislation should
provide that
(a) the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of a person
based on that person’s specialised knowledge of child
development and
child behaviour; and
(b) the credibility rule does not apply to such evidence given concerning
the credibility of children.
Question 18–6
Should Commonwealth, state and territory
legislation provide for mandatory jury directions, containing prescribed
information about
children’s abilities as witnesses or children’s
responses to sexual abuse?
Proposal 18–10
Commonwealth, State and territory legislation
should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings, a court should not have
the possibility that the evidence of a witness or witnesses is the
result of concoction, collusion or suggestion when determining
the admissibility
of tendency or coincidence evidence.
Question 18–7
To what extent does the ‘striking
similarities’ test impede the ordering of joint trials in relation to sex
Question 18–8
Should the Western Australian reforms in relation
to the cross-admissibility of evidence be adopted in other jurisdictions?
Question 18–9
Should the ‘no rational view of the
evidence’ (
) test be applied to determine the admissibility
of relationship evidence at common law?
Question 18–10
Should Commonwealth, state and territory
legislation provide that, where complainants in sexual assault proceedings are
give evidence, the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a
preliminary complaint, regardless of when the preliminary complaint
Proposal 18–11
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should prohibit a judge in any sexual assault proceeding from:
(a) warning a jury, or making any suggestion to a jury, that complainants as
a class are unreliable witnesses; and
(b) warning a jury of the danger of convicting on the uncorroborated
evidence of any complainant.
Proposal 18–12
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that:
(a) if the court, on application by the defendant, is satisfied that the
defendant has suffered a significant forensic disadvantage
because of the
consequences of delay, the court must inform the jury of the nature of the
disadvantage and the need to take that
disadvantage into account when
considering the evidence;
(b) the judge need not comply with (a) if there are good reasons for not
doing so; and
(c) no particular form of words needs to be used in giving the warning
pursuant to (a), but in warning the jury, the judge should
not suggest that it
is ‘dangerous to convict’ because of any demonstrated forensic
disadvantage.
Question 18–11
What issues arise in practice pursuant to s 165B
of the uniform Evidence Acts? Is the s 165B(5) abrogation of the trial
obligation and power to give a
warning sufficiently
Question 18–12
Are warnings about the effect of delay on the
credibility of complainants necessary in sexual assault proceedings?
Proposal 18–13
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings:
(a) (i) the issue of any delay in complaint, or absence of complaint, on
the credibility of the complainant should be a matter for
argument by counsel
and for determination by the jury;
(ii) subject to paragraph (iii), save for identifying the issue for the
jury and the competing contentions of counsel, the trial
judge must not give a
direction regarding the effect of delay in complaint, or absence of complaint,
on the credibility of the complainant,
unless satisfied it is necessary to do so
in order to ensure a fair trial; and
(iii) if evidence is given, or a question is asked, or a comment is made
that tends to suggest that the person against whom the
offence is alleged to
have been committed either delayed making or failed to make a complaint in
respect of the offence, the judge
must tell the jury that there may be good
reasons why a victim of a sexual offence may delay making or fail to make a
complaint in
respect of the offence.
(b) the judge:
(i) must inform the jury that there may be good reasons why a victim of a
sexual assault may delay or hesitate in complaining about
(ii) must not warn or suggest in any way to the jury that the law regards
the complainant’s evidence to be more reliable or
less reliable only
because of the length of time before the complainant made a preliminary or other
(iii) maintains a discretion to give appropriate directions to correct
statements by counsel that conflict with the evidence or are
stereotypical assumptions about reporting of sexual offences; and
(iv) maintains a discretion to comment on the reliability of the
complainant’s evidence in the particular case if the judge
considers it is
appropriate to do so in the interests of justice.
Proposal 18–14
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
(a) prohibit an unrepresented defendant from personally cross-examining any
complainant or other witness in sexual assault proceedings;
(b) provide that any person conducting such cross-examination is a legal
practitioner representing the interests of the defendant.
Question 18–13
Are there significant gaps or inconsistencies
among Australian jurisdictions in relation to ‘alternative’ or
arrangements for the giving of evidence by complainants or
other witnesses in sexual offence proceedings?
Question 18–14
Should Commonwealth, state and territory
legislation permit prosecutors to tender a record of the original evidence of
the complainant
in any re-trial ordered on appeal?
[back to top]
Part E – Existing and Potential
19. Integrated Responses and Best
Proposal 19–1
State and territory governments should establish
and further develop integrated responses to family violence in their respective
building on best practice. The Australian Government should also
foster the development of integrated responses at a national level.
integrated responses should include the following elements:
(a) common policies and objectives;
(b) mechanisms for inter-agency collaboration, including those to ensure
information sharing;
(c) provision for legal and non-legal victim support, and a key role for
victim support organisations;
(d) training and education programs; and
(e) provision for data collection and evaluation.
Question 19–1
Should state and
territory legislation support integrated responses to family violence within
their jurisdictions and, if so, what
should this legislation address? For
example, should responsibility for coordinating integrated responses within a
placed on a statutory office-holder or agency?
Proposal 19–2
State and territory governments should, to the
extent feasible, make victim support workers and lawyers available at family
violence-related
court proceedings, and ensure access to victim support workers
at the time the police are called out to family violence incidents.
Proposal 19–3
The Australian Government should ensure that
court support services for victims of family violence are available nationally
family courts.
Proposal 19–4
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should:
(a) provide that evidence of a pattern of family violence may be considered
in assessing whether an act of violence or injury occurred;
(b) define family violence as a specific act of violence or injury, as in
and the Dictionary in the
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
(NSW) and cl 5 of the
Victims of Crime Assistance Regulation
(c) extend the definition of injury to include other significant adverse
impacts, as is done in respect of some offences in
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–5
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should provide that:
(a) acts are not ‘related’ merely because they are committed by
the same offender; and
(b) applicants should be given the opportunity to object if multiple claims
are treated as ‘related’, as in
Crime Assistance Act 1996
Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–6
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should not require that a victim report a crime to the police, or
reasonable cooperation with law enforcement authorities, as a condition
of such compensation for family violence-related claims.
Proposal 19–7
State and territory legislation should provide
that, when deciding whether it was reasonable for the victim not to report a
or cooperate with law enforcement authorities, decision makers must
consider factors such as the nature of the relationship between
the victim and
the offender in light of the nature and dynamics of family violence.
Proposal 19–8
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should require decision makers, when considering whether victims
contributed
to their injuries, to consider the relationship between the victim
and the offender in light of the nature and dynamics of family
violence. This
requirement should also apply to assessments of the reasonableness of
victims’ failures to take steps to mitigate
their injuries, where the
legislation includes that as a factor to be considered. Section 30(2A) of the
Victim Support and Rehabilitation Act 1996
(NSW), which makes such
provision in relation to a failure to mitigate injury, should be referred to as
Proposal 19–9
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should not enable claims to be excluded on the basis that the
might benefit from the claim.
Proposal 19–10
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should ensure that time limitation clauses do not apply unfairly to
of family violence. These provisions may take the form of providing
(a) decision makers must consider the fact that the application involves
family violence, sexual assault, or child abuse in deciding
to extend time, as
set out in s 31 of the
Victims of Crime
(b) decision makers must consider whether the offender was in a position of
power, influence or trust in deciding to extend time,
as set out in
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–11
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should ensure that victims of family violence are not required to be
at a hearing with an offender in victims’ compensation
Proposal 19–12
State and territory governments should ensure
that data is collected concerning the claims and awards of compensation made to
of family violence under statutory victims’ compensation schemes.
The practice of the Victims’ Compensation Tribunal
in NSW provides an
instructive model.
Proposal 19–13
State and territory governments should provide
information about victims’ compensation in all courts dealing with family
matters. The Australian Government should ensure that similar
information is available in federal family courts.
Question 19–2
In practice, are the current provisions for making interim compensation
awards working effectively for victims of family violence?
Question 19–3
Should measures be adopted to ensure that
offenders do not have access to victims’ compensation awards in cases of
family violence?
If so, what measures should be introduced?
Proposal 19–14
Australian universities offering law degrees
should review their curriculums to ensure that legal issues concerning family
are appropriately addressed.
Proposal 19–15
Australian law societies and institutes should
review continuing professional development requirements to ensure that legal
concerning family violence are appropriately addressed.
Proposal 19–16
The Australian Government and state and
territory governments should collaborate in conducting a national audit of
family violence
training conducted by government and non-governmental agencies,
in order to:
(a) ensure that existing resources are best used;
(b) evaluate whether such training meets best practice principles; and
(c) promote the development of best practice in training.
Proposal 19–17
The Australian Government and state and
territory governments should ensure the quality of family violence training
(a) developing minimum standards for assessing the quality of family
violence training, and regularly evaluating the quality of
such training in
relevant government agencies using those standards;
(b) developing best practice guidelines in relation to family violence
training, including the content, length, and format of such
(c) developing training based on evidence of the needs of those being
trained, with the ultimate aim of improving outcomes for victims;
(d) fostering cross-agency and collaborative training, including
cross-agency placements.
[back to top]
20. Specialisation
Proposal 20–1
Each state and territory police force should
ensure that:
(a) victims have access to a primary contact person within the police, who
specialises and is trained in family violence issues;
(b) a police officer is designated as a primary point of contact for
government and non-government agencies involved in responding
(c) specially trained police have responsibility for supervising, monitoring
or assuring the quality of police responses to family
violence incidents, and
providing advice and guidance to operational police and police prosecutors in
this regard; and
(d) there is a central forum or unit responsible for policy and strategy
concerning family violence within the police.
Question 20–1
What issues arise in practice concerning the role
and operations of police who specialise in family violence matters?
Question 20–2
What are the benefits of specialised family violence prosecutors, and the
disadvantages or challenges associated with them, if any?
Could the benefits of
specialised prosecutors be achieved in other ways, such as by training or
guidelines on family violence?
Proposal 20–2
State and territory governments should ensure
that specialised family violence courts determine matters relating to protection
and criminal proceedings related to family violence. State and territory
governments should review whether specialised family violence
courts should also
be responsible for handling related claims:
(a) for civil and statutory compensation; and
(b) in child support and family law matters, to the extent such jurisdiction
is conferred in the state or territory.
Proposal 20–3
State and territory governments should establish
mechanisms for referral of cases involving family violence to specialised family
violence courts. There should be principled criteria for determining which cases
could be referred to such courts. For example, these
criteria could include:
(a) where there are concurrent family-related claims or actions in relation
to the same family issues;
(b) where there have been multiple family-related legal actions in relation
to the same family in the past;
(c) where, for exceptional reasons, a judicial officer considers it
Proposal 20–4
State and territory governments should establish
or further develop specialised family violence courts in their jurisdictions, in
close consultation with relevant stakeholders. These courts should have, as a
(a) especially selected judicial officers;
(b) specialised and ongoing training on family violence issues for judicial
officers, prosecutors, registrars, and police;
(c) victim support workers;
(d) arrangements for victim safety; and
(e) mechanisms for collaboration with other courts, agencies and
non-government organisations.
Proposal 20–5
State and territory governments should review
whether, and to what extent, the following features have been adopted in the
in their jurisdiction dealing with family violence, with a view to
adopting them:
(a) identifying, and listing on the same day, protection order matters and
criminal proceedings related to family violence, as well
as related family law
act and child protection matters;
(b) providing victim and defendant support, including legal advice, on
family violence list days;
(c) assigning selected and trained judicial officers to work on cases
related to family violence;
(d) adopting practice directions for family violence cases;
(e) ensuring that facilities and practices secure victim safety at court;
(f) establishing a forum for feedback from, and discussion with, other
agencies and non-government organisations.
Proposal 20–6
State and territory governments should establish
centres providing a range of family violence services for victims, which would
the following functions:
(a) recording victim statements and complaints;
(b) facilitating access to victim support workers for referrals to other
(c) filing all claims relating to family violence from victims on behalf of
the victim in relevant courts; and
(d) acting as a central point of contact for victims for basic information
Proposal 20–7
The Australian Government should assist state and
territory governments in the establishment, development and maintenance of
family violence courts by, for example, facilitating the transfer of
specialised knowledge and expertise in dealing with family violence
assault across federal and state and territory jurisdictions; and establishing
and maintaining national networks of judicial
officers and staff specialising in
family violence or family law.
Proposal 20–8
The Australian Government should create positions
for Family Law Courts liaison officers. These officers should have the following
(a) facilitating information sharing between federal family law courts and
state and territory courts;
(b) developing and promoting best practice in relation to information
sharing between the federal family law courts and state and
territory courts;
(c) representing the federal family law courts in relevant forums for
collaboration with agencies, courts and non-government organisations.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
1. Introduction to the
Terms of Reference
Other inquiries and reviews
Matters outside this Inquiry
Processes of reform
Working with NSWLRC
Consultation with designated bodies and groups
Consultation Paper and Consultation Paper Summary
Advisory groups
Structure of the Consultation Paper and Summary
1. Introduction to the
[back to top]
On 17 July 2009, the Attorney-General of Australia, the Hon Robert McClelland
MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC)
to conduct an Inquiry
together with the New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) into particular
questions in relation to family
violence that had arisen from the March 2009
Time for Action
, produced by the National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children (the National
[back to top]
Time for Action
recommended that the ALRC be given two specific tasks,
which are reflected in the two branches of the Terms of Reference for this
1) the interaction in practice of State and Territory family/domestic violence
and child protection laws with the
Family Law Act
and relevant Commonwealth,
State and Territory criminal laws; and
2) the impact of inconsistent interpretation or application of laws in cases of
sexual assault occurring in a family/domestic violence
context, including rules
of evidence, on victims of such violence.
In relation to both these issues, the ALRC has been asked to consider
‘what, if any, improvements could be made to relevant
legal frameworks to
protect the safety of women and their
received parallel terms of reference.
The first Term of Reference requires the Commissions to consider the
interaction of:
state and territory family violence laws with the
• state and territory
child protection laws with the
Family Law Act
state and territory family violence laws with relevant Commonwealth,
state and territory criminal laws;
state and territory child protection laws with relevant
Commonwealth, state and territory criminal laws.
There are further
areas of interaction that the Commissions consider lie within the first Term of
Reference, in particular, the interaction
of state and territory family violence
laws and child protection laws.
The second Term of Reference requires the Commissions to focus on two key
issues: inconsistency in the interpretation or application
of laws; and a
specific focus on sexual assaults committed by a person with whom the
complainant is in a domestic or family relationship.
The focus on sexual assault
committed in a family violence context reflects the fact that most sexual
assaults are committed by someone
known to the victim.
There are areas of intersection between the two Terms of Reference, as sexual
assault can also constitute family violence. However,
given the particular
emphasis in
Time for Action
on sexual assault, a separate term of
reference was warranted. In addition, at the intersection of all the areas under
consideration
sits the issue of sexual assault of children, potentially bringing
together all the areas of law under consideration in this Inquiry—child
protection, criminal law, the
Family Law Act
, and family violence
[back to top]
inquiries and reviews
The ALRC has been directed not to duplicate:
a) the other actions being progressed as part of the Immediate Government
Actions announced by the Prime Minister on receiving the
Council’s report in April 2009;
b) the evaluation of the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental
Responsibility) Act 2006
reforms being undertaken by the Australian
Institute of Family Studies; and
c) the work being undertaken through SCAG on the harmonisation of uniform
evidence laws, in particular the development of model sexual
communications immunity provisions and vulnerable witness protections.
In addition, the Commissions have been directed not to duplicate significant
other work. The Commissions have taken into account the
review by Professor
Richard Chisholm, former Justice of the Family Court of Australia, of the
practices, procedures and laws that
apply in the federal family law courts in
the context of family violence (the Chisholm Review). The review was completed
of November 2009, and released on 28 January 2010. The Commissions
have also considered the Family Law Council advice to the Attorney-General
the impact of family violence on children and on parenting, which was also
released at the same time as the Chisholm Review.
[back to top]
Matters outside this
The Commissions recognise that the Inquiry concerns only a narrow range of
the vast number of issues raised by the prevalence of family
violence—when
women and children encounter the legal system in its various manifestations.
The Commissions note that family violence is also relevant—or
potentially relevant—to other legislative schemes in the
Commonwealth
arena, including, for example, those regulating workplace relations,
immigration, social security and child support.
A consideration of such schemes
is outside the Commissions’ current Terms of Reference. Given the
importance of this issue
the Commissions consider that the Australian Government
should initiate an inquiry into how family violence is treated in these and
other legislative schemes not falling within the present Terms of Reference.
[back to top]
Processes of
with NSWLRC
The Consultation Paper and this Consultation Paper Summary are released as
joint documents of the ALRC and the NSWLRC. The use of
the term ‘the
Commissions’ throughout the documents reflects the joint nature of the
Consultation with designated bodies and
The consultation strategy for this Inquiry includes all of the bodies
identified expressly in the Terms of Reference as well as key
stakeholder
groups. To date, consultations include—in addition to those required by
the Terms of Reference—the police,
offices of public prosecutions,
lawyers, legal services, judicial officers, the Family Law Council, the
Australian Institute of Family
Studies (AIFS), the Australian Centre for the
Study of Sexual Assault (ACSSA), specialist courts, academics and the Australian
and Domestic Violence Clearinghouse (AFDVC).
Consultation Paper and Consultation Paper
In the past, the ALRC’s standard practice has been to produce an issues
paper and a discussion paper, prior to producing a final
report. In this
Inquiry, in response to the very wide-ranging and challenging Terms of
Reference, and a tight time frame—twelve
months and two weeks—the
Commissions have had to adopt a different approach to provide appropriate
opportunities for community
engagement.
Only one Consultation Paper will be produced—accompanied by this
Consultation Paper Summary—before the production of the
final report. In
these documents, the Commissions have posed questions—particularly in
highly contested areas—as well
as proposing options for reform.
E-newsletter
In this Inquiry the ALRC has adopted a new and additional consultation
strategy, by way of monthly Family Violence Inquiry e-newsletters.
e-newsletter also seeks views, experiences and recommendations in relation to
particular topics.
Online forum
The second use of internet communication tools is the online forum conducted
from November 2009 to January 2010 amongst women’s
legal services,
assisted by a grant from the Government 2.0 Taskforce. The online forum was
conducted amongst a closed group from
the women’s legal services community
to facilitate frank and open discussion in a secure online environment between a
group of stakeholders spread across Australia, about issues relevant to
the concerns and experiences of that stakeholder group.
Advisory groups
A key aspect of ALRC procedures is to establish an expert Advisory Committee
or ‘reference group’ to assist with the development
inquiries. Because of the complex nature of this Inquiry the Commissions are
taking the approach of using roundtables of invited
experts and advisers to
inform the consultative processes at key points during the Inquiry. In
particular, Magistrate Anne Goldsbrough
has been appointed as a part-time
Commissioner for the Inquiry and George Zdenkowski is acting as special
[back to top]
Structure of the
Consultation Paper and Summary
Part A of the Consultation Paper comprises two chapters: an introductory
chapter and a chapter focused on the constitutional and international
for the Inquiry.
Parts B and C arise principally from the first Term of Reference. Part B
looks at the various interaction issues from the perspective
of family violence
looks at the interactions from the perspective of child
protection.
focuses on the second Term of Reference and considers sexual assault
in a family violence context.
Part E focuses on existing and potential responses to the range of
interaction and impact issues considered throughout the Consultation
particular, specialist courts and other agencies, integrated responses and best
practice solutions.
This Consultation Paper Summary reflects this general structure. All the
questions and proposals for reform are included in both documents,
in the same
order, and numbered in the same way, for ease of reference. If you require
further background information on any particular
question or proposal, you
should consult the full Consultation Paper available free online at
www.alrc.gov.au.
National Council to Reduce Violence
against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
complete Terms of Reference for this Inquiry are set out at the front of the
Consultation Paper.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
2. Constitutional and International
2. Constitutional and International Settings
2. Constitutional and International
Chapter 2 of the Consultation Paper describes the constitutional context for
family law in Australia—including a discussion
of the Commonwealth’s
constitutional powers in this area and the referral of powers from the
states—as well as relevant
international instruments that provide a
backdrop for Australian family law today. The chapter also considers the range
of different
courts—both state and federal—that are involved in
adjudicating on family violence and related matters.
Chapter 2 is intended to
provide general background information and does not contain any questions or
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
3. Purposes of Laws Relevant to
Family Violence
3. Purposes of Laws Relevant to Family Violence
3. Purposes of Laws Relevant to
Family Violence
Chapter 3 of the Consultation Paper discusses the underlying policy
justifications for various laws relevant to family violence. These
laws include
those specifically referred to in the Terms of Reference—namely family
violence laws, family law and the criminal
law—as well as victims’
compensation schemes and migration law.
Victims’ compensation schemes are discussed because of their particular
interaction with the criminal law. The
Migration Regulations 1994
are addressed because their operation impacts on a group of women who are
particularly vulnerable to family violence, due to
the threat of deportation, as
highlighted in
Time for Action
This analysis reveals that in some cases different statutory regimes share
common aims. The discussion is a prelude to the consideration
desirability of pursuing a common interpretative framework of what constitutes
family violence across the different legislative
schemes under
consideration—an issue which is canvassed in Chapter 4.
The discussion also serves as a general background to the discussion of
specific interaction issues between family violence laws and
the criminal law,
and between family violence laws and the
Family Law Act
, which are
considered in the following chapters of Part B of the Consultation Paper.
Chapter 3 is intended to provide general background information and does not
contain any questions or proposals.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
4. Family Violence: A Common
Interpretative Framework?
Introduction
Definition of family violence or acts constituting family violence
Family violence legislation
Criminal law
Migration legislation
Persons protected
Model provisions reflecting best practice?
Guiding principles and a human rights framework
Grounds for obtaining a protection order
4. Family Violence: A Common
Interpretative Framework?
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 4 explores what constitutes family violence—or domestic
violence or domestic abuse, as it is referred to in some jurisdictions.
Definitions of family violence vary widely across family violence legislation,
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), the criminal law, and other types of
legislation such as victims’ compensation legislation and migration
regulations.
The chapter considers whether it is appropriate or desirable to aim
for a common interpretative framework for what constitutes family
across the different legislative schemes under consideration. The chapter also
considers addressing key differences in family
violence legislation across the
approaches.
[back to top]
Definition of family
violence or acts constituting family violence
Family violence
legislation
Although the family violence legislation of states and territories does not
appear to be substantially different in respect of crucial
matters such as the
that there are some key differences
that ought to be addressed. One option for
reform is to have a standard definition of family violence across state and
family violence legislation. A uniform definition would remove any
confusion about the meaning of family violence across the jurisdictions.
definition was proposed in the Model Domestic Violence Laws Report but was not
The Commissions note that
drafting a uniform definition acceptable to all states and territories would be
a significant task, especially
given that jurisdictions adopt differing
terminology to describe family violence—including domestic violence and
domestic abuse.
The protection of victims of violence should not, however, be
compromised by achieving a consistent definition, if consistency represents
lowest common denominator. The Commissions seek stakeholder views on the
feasibility of this option.
An alternative is to concede that while definitions of family violence across
state and territory family violence legislation need
not be drafted in precisely
the same terms, there should be a shared understanding of the types of conduct
that constitute family
violence, covering both physical and non-physical
violence. The Victorian family violence legislation provides an instructive
in this regard.
The Commissions agree with the recommendation made by the United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs Division for the
Advancement of Women
that legislation should include a comprehensive definition of domestic violence,
including physical, sexual,
psychological and economic
The Commissions are interested in hearing views about whether the definition
of family violence—in addition to setting out examples
of conduct which
constitute violence—should also provide that family violence is violent or
threatening behaviour or any other
form of behaviour that coerces, controls
and/or dominates a family member and/or causes him or her to be fearful. The
Commissions
note that this formulation was proposed by the VLRC and part of this
formulation is contained in the definition of family violence
in the Victorian
family violence
legislation.
Need for a definition of family violence in NSW family violence
legislation
The NSW family violence legislation is notable in its omission to define
‘domestic violence’—although it defines
a ‘domestic
violence offence’. The Commissions reiterate the view, previously
expressed by the NSWLRC, that there should
be a separate definition of
‘domestic violence’ in the NSW family violence legislation which
should include reference
to psychological
It is important for the
definition to capture conduct which of itself may not amount to a criminal
offence, expanding the circumstances
in which victims of violence may seek
protection. Apart from physical violence, the definition should capture the
other types of
family violence addressed below.
Sexual assault
In the Commissions’ view, sexual assault should be expressly recognised
in the definitions of family violence in the family
violence legislation of each
state and territory. Raising the profile of sexual assault in the definitions
may go some way to addressing
the general invisibility of sexual assault as a
form of family violence.
This will clearly
necessitate amendment to the family violence legislation of Western Australia,
which does not recognise sexual assault.
The Commissions are interested in views
s 13 of the ACT
family violence legislation should be amended to include
express reference to sexual assault—even though various offences of
assault are included in sch 1 as ‘domestic violence’ offences.
The Commissions tend to the view, however, that
the general definition in the
ACT family violence legislation should refer expressly to sexual assault.
Further, as discussed below, the Queensland definition of family
violence—although it refers to ‘indecent behaviour without
consent’—may also need to be amended to capture sexual offences
against children where consent is not a defence.
Economic abuse
Economic abuse should be expressly recognised in the definitions of family
violence in the family violence legislation of each state
and territory. This
will necessitate amendment to the family violence legislation of NSW,
Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern
Territory. Economic abuse is a
particular form of violence identified as being used against older women.
The Commissions propose that the NSW Government amend
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW)—a ‘domestic violence offence’
dealing with failure to provide any wife, apprentice, servant or insane person
with necessary food, clothing or lodgings—to ensure that its underlying
philosophy and language are appropriate in a modern
context. The Commissions
consider that the proposed inclusion of economic abuse in the family violence
legislation of NSW may be
more appropriate.
Emotional or psychological harm/abuse
The Commissions note the various formulations of emotional or psychological
harm or abuse—or related conduct that ‘intimidates,’
‘harasses’ or ‘coerces’—referred to in the family
violence legislation of the various states or territories.
While one option is
to have a consistently worded definition, the Commissions consider that, at the
least, the emphasis should be
on a shared understanding that emotional abuse is
a recognised form of family violence.
However, there are two respects in which the Commissions offer a tentative
view. One is in relation to the use of legislative examples;
the other concerns
possibly inappropriate emphasis on proof of emotional abuse in relation to
certain types of family violence. Each
of these is addressed below.
Use of legislative examples.
The category of violence covering
emotional or psychological abuse or intimidation/coercion is one that is
particularly likely to
impact differently on various groups in the community. In
this regard, the Commissions endorse the recommendation made by the VLRC
definition of family violence ‘should be broad enough to include abuses
specific to certain groups in the
community’.
Examples of such conduct as they affect varying groups and that appear
desirable to include in family violence legislation include:
threatening to: institutionalise a person; withdraw care on which
the person is dependent; withhold medication or prevent the person
necessary medical equipment or treatment—potentially relevant to aged
persons and those suffering from a disability
or illness;
racial taunts; and preventing a person from making or keeping
connections with the person’s family, friends or culture, including
cultural or spiritual ceremonies or practices—potentially relevant to
migrants, Indigenous people and persons from diverse
cultural and linguistic
backgrounds;
threatening to disclose a person’s sexual orientation against
the person’s wishes—relevant to those from the gay,
bisexual and transgender community.
The Commissions are interested
in hearing whether, in practice, legislative examples of certain types of family
violence conduct are
being treated as exhaustive. In any event, family violence
legislation should make it clear that such examples are not intended to
exhaustive.
Appropriate use of emotional or psychological abuse category.
In some cases family violence legislation refers to emotional or
psychological abuse to describe conduct that would not otherwise
amount to a
criminal offence (if proved to the requisite standard), for example, repeated
derogatory taunts. This approach is appropriate.
In other cases, even where
conduct could amount to a criminal offence a person must also prove emotional
abuse to obtain a protection
order. For example, the South Australian family
violence legislation focuses on either the impact of harm to a victim or the
of the person engaging in family violence. Sexual assault is included
as an example of conduct that could result in emotional or
psychological harm.
The Commissions are concerned that requiring a person to prove emotional or
psychological harm as the result of sexual assault adds
a further evidentiary
burden. The very fact of sexual assault should fall within conduct constituting
family violence without the
need to prove that such conduct had a certain effect
on the victim. The same could be said of depriving a person of his or her
liberty—which
is also cited as an example of conduct that could cause
emotional or psychological harm in the South Australian legislation.
Kidnapping or deprivation of liberty
The Commissions consider that, for the sake of clarity, the definition of
family violence in the family violence legislation of Queensland
Northern Territory should include kidnapping or deprivation of liberty.
Damage to property
In the Commissions’ view, the family violence legislation of Tasmania
should be amended to include damage to property and the
threat to commit such
damage in the definition of family violence. The absence of this category of
violence is anomalous. As stated
in the review of that jurisdiction’s
legislation, property damage is a common feature of family violence incidents.
damage is recognised as family violence across the family violence
legislation of the other states and territories and also, for
example, in the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), and in overseas jurisdictions such as
New Zealand.
Injury to animals
The definition of family violence in each of the states and territories
should be broad enough to capture relevant conduct that causes
death or harm to
an animal, such as a family pet, irrespective of whether the animal is
technically the property of the victim. There
are a number of ways of achieving
this. Harm to an animal can be specifically incorporated into the definition of
family violence,
or it can fall within the general category of emotional or
psychological abuse. Where harm to an animal is linked to property damage,
definitions of property can be extended to make it clear that property covers
not only property that is owned by the victim but also
property in his or her
possession or otherwise used or enjoyed.
It appears that the family violence legislation of the following
which may not
technically be the property of the victim:
NSW—as its legislation does not refer to such harm, nor does
it contain the category of emotional or psychological abuse, nor
an expanded
definition of property either in s 7—which refers to
intimidation—or insofar as it picks up property offences
, which refers to property ‘belonging to
Queensland—as its legislation only specifically refers to
wilful damage to the other person’s property—including
pet—and does not contain a category of emotional or psychological
Western Australia—as its legislation links harm to an animal
to property belonging to the victim, and although it contains
covering emotional abuse, it requires such abuse to be ‘ongoing’.
One or two instances of killing or injuring
a family pet may not qualify as
Northern Territory—as its legislation allows for injury or
death of an animal either on the basis that it damages the victim’s
property or intimidates the victim by causing reasonable apprehension of harm to
his or her property.
Exposure of children to
Time for Action
noted that:
Children and young people exposed to sexual assault and domestic and family
violence experience anger, sadness, shame, guilt, confusion,
despair. Children do not need to be physically present when violence occurs to
suffer negative consequences. Living
in an environment where violence occurs is
extremely damaging to children and there is little difference in outcomes for
whether they see the violence or not.
Living with domestic and family violence can directly affect infants, causing
negative developmental, social, emotional and behavioural
consequences. At a
time of rapid neurological growth, an infant’s development may be
compromised by exposure to ongoing violence,
whether or not they are the target
of the violence. Infants may have symptoms typical of post-traumatic
The Commissions are of the preliminary view that family violence legislation
ought to acknowledge the detrimental impact of family
violence on children. The
Commissions tend to the view that the definitions of family violence in the
family violence legislation
of each state and territory should either
acknowledge exposure of children to family violence as a category of violence in
right—as is the case in Victoria—or enable the making of
orders to protect children from such exposure. In making these
proposals, the
Commissions have been persuaded by the considerable amount of research
documenting the fact that exposure of children
to family violence causes
long-term emotional, psychological, physical and behavioural issues.
Exposure of children to family violence encompasses more than just witnessing
family violence. Indeed the terminology of ‘witnessing’
problematic in the sense that it may have a tendency to downplay the fact that
children are living with the reality of family
violence. The Victorian family
violence legislation provides instructive examples of behaviour that causes a
child to hear or witness
or otherwise be exposed to family
These include the child
comforting or providing assistance to a family member who has been physically
abused by another family member,
and being present when police officers attend
an incident involving physical abuse of a family member by another family
The Commissions are interested, however, in hearing whether such a proposal
would have negative effects for mothers who are victims
of family violence and
are held accountable for not protecting children from violence at a time when
they are under intense pressure.
Linkage to criminal law
The Commissions note that family violence legislation in both NSW and the ACT
sets out certain offences which are ‘domestic
violence’ offences.
The Commissions consider that the states and territories should have flexibility
to do this in their definitions
of family violence—provided that other
elements of family violence are also acknowledged in the definition. Linking
violence to certain criminal offences has the advantage of clarity.
However, the Commissions consider that the list of offences should
be reviewed
by the respective state and territory governments with a view to ascertaining
each of the offences ought to remain classified as a ‘domestic
violence offence’;
there are any additional offences that ought to be included;
there are any offences that need to be updated or
The Commissions are particularly interested in
understanding why it is necessary to categorise the following offences as
violence’ offences (as the ACT legislation does) and
whether they have been used as the basis for obtaining protection orders:
causing bushfires;
engaging in unreasonable obstruction in relation to the use of
government premises;
behaving in an offensive or disorderly manner while in or on
government premises; and
refusing or neglecting to leave government premises when
The Commissions consider that the NSW and ACT Governments,
in undertaking the proposed review of ‘domestic violence offences’,
should also give particular attention to those offences in respect of which
their legislation differs. For example, NSW does not
categorise incest, causing
bushfires and negligent driving as ‘domestic violence offences’, but
the ACT does.
Proposal 4–1
(a) State and territory family violence legislation should contain the same
definition of family violence covering physical and non-physical
including conduct the subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and 4–7
to 4–10 below. The definition of
family violence in the
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should be referred to as a model.
(b) The definitions of family violence in state and territory family violence
legislation should recognise the same types of physical
and non-physical
violence, including conduct the subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and
4–7 to 4–10 below. The
definition of family violence in the
Family Violence Protection
(Vic) should be referred to as a model.
Question 4–1
Should the definition of family violence in state and territory family
violence legislation, in addition to setting out the types
of conduct that
constitute violence, provide that family violence is violent or threatening
behaviour or any other form of behaviour
that coerces, controls or dominates a
family member or causes that family member to be
Proposal 4–2
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
(NSW) should be amended to include a definition of ‘domestic
violence’, in addition to the current definition of ‘domestic
violence offence’.
Proposal 4–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should expressly recognise sexual assault in the definition of family violence
the extent that it does not already do so.
Proposal 4–4
State and territory family violence legislation
should expressly recognise economic abuse in the definition of family violence
the extent that it does not already do so.
Proposal 4–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should include specific examples of emotional or psychological abuse or
intimidation
or harassment that illustrate acts of violence against certain
vulnerable groups including: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally
linguistically diverse background; the aged; those with a disability; and those
from the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender
community. Instructive models of
such examples are in the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA). In each
case, state and territory family violence legislation should make it clear that
such examples are illustrative and
not exhaustive of the prohibited conduct.
Question 4–2
Some state and territory family violence legislation lists examples of
In practice,
are judicial officers and lawyers treating such examples as exhaustive rather
than illustrative?
Proposal 4–6
The definition of family violence in state and
territory family violence legislation should not require a person to prove
or psychological harm in respect of conduct which, by its nature,
could be pursued criminally—such as sexual assault. In particular,
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) should be amended
to ensure that sexual assault of itself is capable of meeting the definition of
‘abuse’ without
having to prove emotional abuse.
Proposal 4–7
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) should be
amended expressly to recognise kidnapping or deprivation of liberty as a form of
family violence.
Proposal 4–8
Family Violence Act 1994
(Tas) should
be amended to recognise damage to property and threats to commit such damage as
a form of family violence.
Proposal 4–9
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
(NT) should be
amended to ensure that their definitions of family violence capture harm or
injury to an animal irrespective of whether
that animal is technically the
property of the victim.
Proposal 4–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should include in the definition of family violence exposure of children to
violence as a category of violence in its own right.
Proposal 4–11
Where state or territory family violence
legislation sets out specific criminal offences that form conduct constituting
family violence,
there should be a policy reason for the categorisation of each
such offence as a family violence offence. To this end, the governments
and the ACT should review the offences categorised as ‘domestic violence
offences’ in their respective family
violence legislation with a view to
(a) ensuring that such categorisations are justified and appropriate; and (b)
ascertaining whether
or not additional offences ought to be included.
Proposal 4–12
Incidental to the proposed review of
‘domestic violence offences’ referred to in Proposal 4–11
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW)—which deals with the
failure to provide any wife, apprentice, servant or insane person with necessary
food, clothing
or lodgings—should be amended to ensure that its underlying
philosophy and language are appropriate in a modern context.
The discussion below addresses interaction issues between the definitions or
terminology in family violence laws and the criminal
in the limited circumstances where the criminal law defines
‘family violence’; and
where each law defines a
constitute family
Interaction of definitions
of ‘family violence’ in criminal and family violence
There are limited examples of definitions of ‘family violence’ or
‘domestic violence’ in the criminal laws
of Australia. One area
where the criminal law has defined ‘family violence’ is in the
context of defences to homicide.
This is the case under the
(Vic), and the
Criminal Code (Abusive Domestic Relationship Defence
and Another Matter) Amendment Act 2010
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, where a state or
territory’s criminal legislation recognises family violence as
relevant to
a defence to homicide—either in its own right or as part of a broader
concept of self-defence—family violence
should be defined broadly to
include both physical and non-physical violence, in the same way that it should
be defined under family
violence legislation. There is merit in a
adopting a common
understanding of the types of conduct that constitute family
violence irrespective of whether the criminal legislation limits the
availability of defences to homicide in a family violence context to cases
involving ‘serious’ family violence.
There would appear to be a stronger case for
definition of ‘family violence’
territory’s family violence and criminal laws, than is the case
state or territory jurisdictions. In the latter case, the emphasis
should be on adopting a shared understanding of what constitutes
The Commissions have considered whether the differing policy objectives of
civil protection legislation and criminal legislation warrant
a more restrictive
definition of family violence in the criminal context. On balance, the
Commissions tend to the view that the different
policy objectives of the
criminal law and family violence legislation are not compromised by the adoption
of a commonly shared definition.
Those different policy objectives may be
addressed by placing emphasis, where necessary, on the
seriousness
family violence, rather than excluding certain types of violence. That is the
approach taken in Queensland criminal legislation,
which provides one model for
reform. It appears appropriate that the degree of severity of family violence
capable of being relied
upon as a defence to murder is higher than that which
may be needed to obtain a protection order.
Where a jurisdiction allows evidence of family violence to be adduced in the
context of a broader concept of self-defence, like Victoria,
the issue of
severity will most likely be one of the factors considered by the jury in
determining whether the accused had reasonable
grounds for believing his or her
conduct was necessary.
In Chapter 7 the Commissions pose a series of questions about how the
criminal law can best recognise family violence as a defence
to homicide,
including seeking feedback on problems or issues which arise from current models
which recognise family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide.
The fact that the Victorian criminal legislation has a narrower definition in
its family violence legislation is more accidental rather
than purposeful. The
definition of family violence used in Victoria’s family violence
legislation was not enacted at the time
the family violence amendments were made
to the Victorian
In the Commissions’ preliminary view,
the definition of family violence in
be replaced with the definition of family violence in
Victoria’s family violence legislation. Alternatively, the definition of
family violence in
should be amended to
include economic abuse. The Commissions understand that the Victorian
is currently under review.
The inclusion of economic abuse in the definition of family violence in
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) will not necessarily mean that
economic abuse of itself will constitute a defence to homicide. Rather, it will
ensure that
the pattern of family violence to which a person has been
subjected—including physical and non-physical violence—will
relevant to self-defence where a person kills a family member who has been
violent towards her or him.
Proposal 4–13
The definitions of family violence in a state or
territory’s family violence legislation and criminal legislation—in
context of defences to homicide—should align, irrespective of whether
the criminal legislation limits the availability of defences
to homicide in a
family violence context to cases involving ‘serious’ family
Proposal 4–14
The definition of ‘family violence’
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic)—which largely replicates
the definition in s 3 of the
Domestic Violence Act
(NZ)—should be replaced with the definition of ‘family
violence’ in
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic). Alternatively, the definition of family violence in
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) should be amended to include economic abuse.
Definitions of, or terminology referring to, acts that may constitute
family violence across criminal and family violence laws
Some state and territory definitions of family violence pick up some
definitions of criminal law offences. For example, the Victorian
family violence
legislation provides that the definition of ‘assault’ for the
purpose of family violence is the same
as the definition of assault in
Crimes Act 1958
Similarly, the Western
Australian family violence legislation provides that various definitions,
including those of ‘assault’,
‘intimidate’,
‘kidnapping or depriving the person of his or her liberty’ and
‘pursue’ are the
same as the equivalent definitions in the
Criminal Code
However, there are some examples where the different ways in which the family
violence law and criminal law of a jurisdiction define
family violence produces
potentially anomalous outcomes. Some specific examples are set out below, as are
the Commissions’
proposals to address such anomalies.
Stalking—Northern Territory
. ‘Stalking’ is
defined differently—and in some respects more narrowly—under
Domestic and Family
Violence Act
(NT) than it is for the purpose of delineating conduct
constituting a criminal offence under the
Criminal Code
(NT). In theory,
this could mean that a victim in the Northern Territory may not be able to
obtain a protection order in family violence
proceedings against a person
engaging in stalking for conduct that could be the subject of a criminal
prosecution for stalking. The
Commissions are interested in hearing about
practical interactions between the stalking provisions in the Northern
Territory’s
criminal and family violence laws.
‘Domestic violence’—Queensland
definition of ‘domestic violence’ in
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) includes ‘wilful injury’. How does
this interact in practice with ‘common assault’ as it is defined
s 245 of the
Criminal Code
(Qld)? The latter includes striking,
touching or moving a person without his or her consent. A person may touch or
move someone without
causing injury, which appears to make the definition of
‘wilful injury’ in the family violence legislation more restrictive
than the definition of ‘assault’ in the criminal legislation.
The definition of ‘domestic violence’ in s 11 also includes
‘indecent behaviour to the other person without consent’.
Criminal Code
there are some sexual offences against children
where consent is not a defence. The scope of the definition of ‘domestic
in the family violence Act means that a person would not be able
to obtain a protection order—for example on behalf of a child—in
circumstances where criminal redress may be available.
The Commissions are interested in hearing about whether there are other
examples where the scope of conduct that could warrant prosecution
than conduct that could warrant an application for a protection order.
Question 4–3
Are there any other examples where the criminal law of a state or territory
would allow for prosecution of conduct constituting family
violence in
circumstances where a state or territory’s family violence legislation
would not recognise the same conduct as
warranting a protection
There may of course be occasion for a particular term in family violence
legislation to be defined more broadly than its corresponding
term in criminal
legislation, given the different objectives of the civil protection order
regime. However, this should not be done
in a way that may cause confusion. An
example where different definitions and terminology across state or territory
family violence
and criminal legislation may cause confusion is discussed
Emotional or psychological harm, mental harm—South
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
(SA) one of the categories of abuse is that which causes, or is
intended to cause, ‘emotional or psychological harm’.
Such harm is
defined as including:
mental illness;
nervous shock; and
distress, anxiety or fear, that is more than
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) uses the term ‘mental
harm’. It defines ‘harm’ as meaning ‘physical or mental
harm (whether temporary
permanent)’.
harm’ is in turn defined as ‘psychological harm and does not include
emotional reactions such as distress,
grief, fear or anger unless they result in
psychological harm’.
On first reading, the scope of each of the definitions—read in
isolation—is arguably ambiguous, and when read together,
confusing—especially from the point of view of a victim of family violence
who may try to obtain a protection order
based on emotional or psychological
harm, in circumstances where there is also the prospect of commencing criminal
proceedings for
offences such as: causing serious
acts endangering life or
creating risk of serious
It appears that the definition of ‘mental harm’ in the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
excludes emotional harm—given that
any emotional reaction within the ambit of the definition has to amount to
psychological
harm. That may be a valid policy position. However, the criminal
law does not define psychological harm. The absence of a definition
term, combined with the fact that the
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
conflates the definition of ‘emotional
or psychological harm’, has the potential to cause confusion. Would proof
illness’ or ‘nervous shock’—for the
purpose of obtaining a protection order—qualify as proof of ‘mental
harm’ for the purposes of a criminal prosecution for an offence, such as
‘causing harm’—assuming that proof
is established beyond
reasonable doubt?
At the time of writing, the
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
had not come into effect, so it is not known whether the interaction in
practice of the definitions discussed above is problematic.
In terms of policy, it is not justifiable to have a definition of family
violence in family violence legislation that makes it
more difficult
a victim to obtain a protection order than to commence a prosecution—in
circumstances which warrant criminal prosecution.
State and territory governments should review the definitions and terminology
used in defining family violence in their respective
family violence Acts to
ensure that they align with corresponding concepts or definitions in their
criminal laws or, at least, ensure
that the interaction of such terminology or
definitions does not prevent a person obtaining a protection order in
circumstances where
a criminal prosecution could be pursued.
In particular, the definition of ‘stalking’ in the Northern
Territory family violence legislation should be amended. Further,
those aspects
of the definition of ‘domestic violence’ referring to ‘wilful
injury’ and ‘indecent behaviour
without consent’ in the
Queensland family violence legislation should be reviewed.
In addition, the Commissions consider that the South Australian Government
should review whether the interaction of the definition
of ‘emotional or
psychological harm’ in its family violence legislation, and ‘mental
harm’ in its criminal
legislation is likely to confuse victims and their
legal representatives involved in both civil and criminal proceedings. This
should consider whether it would be desirable, for example, for (a) the
family violence legislation to distinguish between emotional
and psychological
harm; or (b) the criminal legislation to define ‘psychological
harm’; and (c) for both the family violence
and criminal legislation to
adopt a commonly shared understanding of the meaning of ‘psychological
Proposal 4–15
State and territory
governments should review their family violence and criminal legislation to
ensure that the interaction of terminology
or definitions of certain conduct
constituting family violence would not prevent a person obtaining a protection
order in circumstances
where a criminal prosecution could be pursued. In
particular,
(a) the definition of stalking in
Domestic and Family Violence Act
(NT) s 7 should be amended to include all stalking behaviour referred to in
Criminal Code Act
(NT) s 189; and
(b) the Queensland government should review the inclusion of the concepts of
‘wilful injury’ and ‘indecent behaviour
without consent’
in the definition of ‘domestic violence’ in
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), in light of how
these concepts might interact with the
Criminal Code
Proposal 4–16
The South Australian Government should review
whether the interaction of the definition of ‘emotional or psychological
in the definition of ‘abuse’ in
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA), and ‘mental harm’ in
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
likely to confuse victims and their legal representatives involved in both civil
family violence and criminal proceedings.
In particular, the review should
consider whether it would be desirable for:
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act
to distinguish
between emotional and psychological harm;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
‘psychological harm’; and
(c) both above mentioned Acts to adopt a commonly shared understanding of
the meaning of ‘psychological harm’.
Family Law Act
defines family violence to mean:
conduct, whether actual or threatened, by a person towards, or towards the
property of, a member of the person’s family that
causes that or any other
member of the person’s family reasonably to fear for, or reasonably to be
apprehensive about, his
or her personal wellbeing or safety.
A person reasonably
fears for, or reasonably is apprehensive about, his or her personal wellbeing or
safety in particular circumstances
if a reasonable person in those circumstances
would fear for, or be apprehensive about, his or her personal wellbeing or
This definition of ‘family violence’ requires reasonableness
(objective element) but also requires the decision-maker
to place themselves in
the position of the potential victim (subjective element). The definition is
narrower in some respects than
the definitions in state and territory family
violence legislation. Objective definitions have been criticised as ‘it is
essentially
a contradiction in terms to apply the notion of reasonableness to
the experience of fear, and to do so fails to understand the psychological
impact of violence, particularly in situations where there has been a history of
What may seem
benign to an outsider may be conduct that causes a victim to fear for his or her
Significantly, the Family Violence Strategy of the Family Court of Australia
acknowledges that the definition of ‘family violence
Family Law Act
is too narrow to meet the objectives of the Strategy. As a
result, the Family Violence Committee adopted ‘a more comprehensive
definition of the elements of violence:
Family violence covers a broad range of controlling behaviours, commonly of a
physical, sexual, and/or psychological nature, which
typically involve fear,
harm, intimidation and emotional deprivation. It occurs within a variety of
close interpersonal relationships,
such as between spouses, partners, parents
and children, siblings, and in other relationships where significant others are
of the physical household but are part of the family and/or are
fulfilling the function of
The Family Court is bound to consider family violence orders that apply to a
child or a member of the child’s family in ascertaining
what is in a
child’s best interests, but only if they are final or contested. In
addition, in making parenting orders, the
Family Court has to ensure that the
order is consistent with any family violence order and does not expose a person
to an unacceptable
risk of family violence.
The Family Court has to take family violence orders ‘as they
are’, that is, orders based on the particular definitions
and the grounds
for obtaining those orders in the particular state or territory jurisdiction. In
other words, in practice, the Family
Court may be required to consider a
conceptualisation of family violence that is broader than that envisaged under
Family Law Act
. In cases where a person appearing before the Family
Court has a pre-existing final or contested protection order, the differences
definitions between the state or territory and federal scheme may have little
effect. Further, in ascertaining what is in a child’s
best interests, the
Family Court has broad discretion to consider any other fact or relevant
circumstance that the court thinks is
which may extend to a
consideration of violence falling outside the parameters of the definition of
family violence in the
Family Law Act
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether, as a matter of practice,
the different definitions between family violence in the
Family Law Act
and in the family violence laws of a particular state or territory have any
impact in matters where there are pre-existing state and
territory family
violence orders, as well as in matters where there are not. Preliminary
consultations that the Commissions have
conducted tend to indicate that
definitional issues do not have great significance in practice.
Question 4–4
In practice, what effect do the different definitions of family violence in
Family Law Act
(Cth) and in state and territory family
violence legislation have in matters before federal family courts:
a victim who has suffered family violence
(i) has obtained a state or
territory protection order; or
(ii) has not obtained a state or territory
protection order; and
(b) on the disclosure of evidence or information about
family violence?
Question 4–5
Does the broad discretion given to
courts exercising jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
and the approach taken in the Family Court of Australia’s Family Violence
Strategy overcome, in practice, the potential
constraints posed by the
definition of ‘family violence’ in the
Expanding definition
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, the definition of family violence
Family Law Act
is too narrow. The definition should be expanded to
include certain types of conduct recognised under state and territory family
violence legislation. This would include the types of conduct the subject of the
Commissions’ proposals in relation to the
definition of family violence in
family violence legislation—such as economic abuse, sexual assault, and
exposing children
to violence. The Commissions consider that the definition of
family violence in the Victorian family violence legislation is an instructive
model in this regard.
The Commissions note that this suggested approach is consistent with that
taken by the Family Law Council in its December 2009 advice.
The Council
advocated that the
Family Law Act
define ‘family violence’ in
the same way that it has been defined under the Victorian family violence
legislation, noting
that this approach would remove the objective element
contained in the definition. The Commissions note, however, that the Chisholm
Review took a different stance on the removal of the reasonableness requirement.
The Review did, however, state that ‘further
consideration should be given
to this issue if more relevant information comes to light about the operation of
the definition in
The Commissions recognise that an expansion of the definition of family
violence may affect the operation of the shared parental responsibility
provisions in the Act, and note that reform of these provisions was considered
in the Chisholm Review. The Commissions agree with
the Family Law Council that
further consideration be given to the ‘possible legislative side-effects
of broadening the
definition’.
Proposal 4–17
The definition of family violence in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be expanded to include specific
reference to certain physical and non-physical violence—including conduct
subject of Proposals 4–3 to 4–5 and 4–7 to 4–10
above—with the definition contained in the
Family Violence Protection
(Vic) being used as a model.
Proposal 4–18
The definition of ‘family violence’
Family Law Act
(Cth) should be amended by removing the
semi-objective test of reasonableness.
legislation
Migration Regulations
‘relevant family violence’
is defined as conduct, whether actual or threatened towards:
(a) the alleged victim; or
(b) a member of the family unit of the alleged victim; or
(c) a member of the family unit of the alleged perpetrator; or
(d) the property of a member of the family unit of the alleged victim; or
(e) the property of a member of the family unit of the alleged perpetrator
that causes the alleged victim to reasonably fear for, or to be reasonably
apprehensive about, his or her own wellbeing or
The focus of the definition is therefore not on categorising certain types of
conduct—such as physical or emotional abuse—but
rather on the effect
of conduct on the victim. In this regard, the definition has a similar approach
to that of ‘family violence’
adopted in the
Family Law Act
For emotional abuse to qualify as family violence under the
Regulations
it must be considered to have been serious enough to cause fear
or apprehension for the person’s well-being or safety. Acts
that only have
the ‘effect of causing diminution of a person’s feeling of well
being’ will not suffice.
The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders affected by the
operation of the definition of family violence in the
Regulations
. Persons from a culturally diverse background—including
women who are sponsored by Australian citizens and residents, who are
particularly vulnerable to abuse due to the threat of deportation—are
important voices in this Inquiry.
The Commissions note the similarity of approach between the
Regulations
Family Law Act
in defining family violence. The
Commissions’ initial impression is that the definition in the
Regulations
is too narrow, for the same reasons expressed in relation to the
definition in the
Family Law Act
. One option, therefore, would be to
amend the definition in a similar way as that proposed for the definition in the
Family Law Act
—namely to expand it to recognise specific types of
physical and non-physical violence, with the definition in the Victorian
violence legislation being used as model, and by removing the test of
reasonableness.
The Government may wish to reconsider the appropriateness of locating the
family violence provisions—which impact on the lives
and safety of a
particularly vulnerable group in our society—in regulations, where they
are currently housed, as opposed to
primary legislation. Such provisions may be
more appropriately placed in the
Migration Act.
However, the Commissions make no formal proposals in this regard, noting that
reform of migration legislation is outside the Commissions’
Reference. As noted in Chapter 1, the Commissions consider that the Australian
Government should initiate an inquiry into
how family violence is treated in
federal legislative schemes not falling within the present Terms of Reference.
Information received
by the Commissions concerning the practical application of
the definition of family violence in the
Migration Regulations
used in any further inquiry into the treatment of family violence in federal
legislative schemes.
Question 4–6
How is the application of the definition of ‘relevant family
violence’ in the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) working in
practice? Are there any difficulties or issues arising from its application?
[back to top]
In each jurisdiction, in order for a person to obtain a protection order
under family violence legislation that person needs to be
in a defined
relationship with the person engaging in violence. The relationships covered by
family violence legislation across the
The Commissions have some concern that certain family relationships in
Tasmania—such as between parents and children and between
siblings—are afforded less legal protection and redress on breach of a
‘restraint’ order—than spouses and
couples. In the
Commissions’ preliminary view, the Tasmanian Government should review the
operation of the
Family Violence Act 2004
Justices Act
with a view to establishing equality of treatment of family
members who are victims of family violence.
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether this issue arises in other
The disproportionately high level of family violence suffered by Indigenous
women is a major issue. In the Commissions’ view,
the persons protected by
the family violence legislation of each state and territory should capture those
who fall within Indigenous
concepts of family, as well as those who are members
of some other culturally recognised family group. The two jurisdictions that
currently do not take this approach are Western Australia and Tasmania.
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views as to whether
relationships with carers—including those who are paid—should
included in the relationships covered by family violence legislation. The
specific inclusion of carers, for example, would recognise
the particular
vulnerabilities of the elderly and those with disabilities, to family violence.
However, the Commissions are interested
in hearing whether the expansion of the
definition to include such relationships poses any issues, including challenge
in implementation.
Proposal 4–19
The Tasmanian Government should review the
operation of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) and the
Justices Act
to establish equality of treatment of family members who
are victims of family violence.
Proposal 4–20
State and territory family violence legislation
should include as protected persons those who fall within Indigenous concepts of
as well as those who are members of some other culturally recognised
family group. In particular, the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) and the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA) should be amended to capture such
Question 4–7
Should state and territory family violence legislation include
relationships with carers—including those who are paid—within
category of relationships covered?
[back to top]
provisions reflecting best practice?
While pursuing model family violence laws is beyond the scope of this
Inquiry, the Commissions consider that there are a number of
discrete areas of
family violence laws that ought to be the subject of best practice approaches
across the jurisdictions.
principles and a human rights framework
There is some precedent in family violence legislation—and criminal
legislation—for the articulation of principles to
guide legislative
interpretation and to educate those applying or engaging with the law. In the
Commissions’ preliminary view
the family violence legislation of each
state and territory should contain guiding principles that include express
reference to a
human rights framework. The principles contained in the preamble
to the Victorian family violence legislation provide an instructive
this regard—although the principles should also refer expressly to
relevant international conventions.
The endorsement of a human rights framework is particularly relevant, for
example, for Indigenous peoples and those from culturally
diverse backgrounds,
by reinforcing that customary laws or cultural practices do not override the
rights of family members to be
safe and live free from violence and fear.
The adoption of guiding principles across family violence legislation will
serve an educative function, as well as promote a common
interpretative
framework—complementing the proposed adoption of a commonly shared
understanding of the meaning of family violence.
The family violence legislation of each state and territory should also
contain a provision that explains the features and dynamics
violence—including its gendered nature, detrimental impact on children,
and the fact that it can involve exploitation
of power imbalances, and occur in
all sectors of society. Both the NSW and Victorian family violence legislation
provide an instructive
model in this regard.
In addition, the Commissions consider that, just as the Victorian and NSW
family violence legislation highlight the particularly damaging
children of exposure to family violence, family violence legislation should also
acknowledge the particularly damaging
impact of family violence on other groups
in society including: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally and
linguistically diverse
background; those from the gay, lesbian, bisexual and
transgender community; older people; and victims with disabilities. These
are not mutually exclusive, and some persons may suffer the
compounding effect of multiple disadvantages.
Highlighting the impact of violence on these groups complements the
Commissions’ proposal that family violence legislation include
examples of
emotional or psychological abuse that would affect diverse groups in the
community. The Commissions consider that the
combined effect of these proposals
may assist in the challenging task of ensuring that experiences of family
violence of such groups
is properly recognised across the legal system.
The Commissions have not determined precisely how the legislative provisions
might refer to the impacts of family violence on diverse
groups. It may well be
that the precise formulation could be informed by the processes recommended by
the Family Law Council to establish
a common knowledge base about family
violence. Some preliminary thoughts, by way of illustration, are that family
violence legislation
could refer to the following:
the fact that there is a disproportionate level of family violence
among Indigenous communities, and the particular dynamics of Indigenous
violence such as violence within extended kinship
the barriers faced by victims from culturally and linguistically
diverse backgrounds, including communication and language difficulties,
cultural barriers such as beliefs about traditional gender roles and the
importance of the family;
the features of elder abuse—that it commonly consists of
economic abuse, as well as the withholding of medication, involuntary
isolation, and neglect;
the particular problems faced by victims with disabilities because
of their dependence on others for support, the compounding effect
disability on their lack of power and control in a relationship, and the fact
that their disability is exploited by their
the problems faced by the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender
community—including the fear of homophobia, transphobia, the
fear of being
outed and the fear of discrimination from the legal system due to their gender
orientation.
Commissions are interested in hearing views from stakeholders in this
Finally, in the Commissions’ preliminary view, the
should also include a section detailing the features and nature of
family violence. This would complement the proposed approach of
commonly shared understanding of family violence across the family law and
family violence legislative schemes.
The Commissions note that this approach is also consistent with an
alternative recommendation made by the Chisholm Review for the
provisions in the
Family Law Act
referring to family violence to be strengthened, including
more detail about the nature and consequences of family
Proposal 4–21
State and territory family violence legislation
should contain guiding principles, which should include express reference to a
rights framework. The preamble to the
Family Violence Protection Act
(Vic) provides an instructive model, although it would be preferable if
the principles also referred expressly to relevant international
conventions
such as the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women
the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Proposal 4–22
State and territory family violence legislation
should contain a provision that explains the nature, features and dynamics of
violence including: its gendered nature; detrimental impact on children;
and the fact that it can involve exploitation of power imbalances;
and occur in
all sectors of society. The preamble to the
Family Violence Protection Act
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence)
(NSW) provide instructive models in this regard. In addition,
family violence legislation should refer to the particular impact of
violence on: Indigenous persons; those from a culturally and linguistically
diverse background; those from the gay, lesbian,
bisexual and transgender
community; older persons; and people with disabilities.
Proposal 4–23
Family Law Act 1975
should be amended to include a provision that explains the nature, features
and dynamics of family violence.
An articulation of core common purposes across state and territory family
violence legislation is a critical pillar of a common interpretative
Objects clauses therefore serve an important role in complementing proposed
provisions setting out guiding principles
and the features and dynamics of
family violence. They also serve an educative function. It is essential that
they are given some
prominence in family violence legislation.
The Commissions are of the preliminary view that the
Restraining Orders
(WA) should be amended to include an objects clause.
Objects clauses in family violence legislation do not need to express
purposes using precisely the same wording, nor is there a need
for every purpose
in one jurisdiction to be replicated in the others. However, there should be a
cluster of core purposes that are
commonly acknowledged and articulated across
each of the states and territories. The Commissions consider that the Queensland
violence legislation, in particular, should state its other core
purposes. The Commissions also consider that the Tasmanian family
legislation should articulate its purposes more clearly.
The Commissions tend to the view that core purposes should
include—apart from the main one of ensuring or maximising the safety
protection of persons who fear or experience family violence—the following
ensuring that persons who use family violence accept responsibility
for their conduct, or promoting the accountability of those who
violence for their actions; and
reducing or preventing family violence and the exposure of children
to the effects of family violence.
There should be flexibility for
states and territories to articulate purposes in addition to core ones. The
Commissions are also interested
in hearing views from stakeholders about the
need to include other purposes that are not currently referred to in any of the
and territory family violence legislation.
The Commissions seek stakeholder views about whether family violence
legislation should articulate a purpose concerning the desirability
minimising disruption to the lives of families affected by violence. The
Commissions are interested in whether giving this objective
some prominence is
likely to encourage judicial officers to make exclusion orders in appropriate
circumstances, and go some way to
addressing the fact that family violence is a
leading cause of homelessness for women and children who flee from it.
Proposal 4–24
Restraining Orders Act 1997
should be amended to include an objects clause.
Proposal 4–25
State and territory family violence legislation
should articulate a common set of core purposes which address the following
(a) to ensure or maximise the safety and protection of persons who fear or
experience family violence;
(b) to ensure that persons who use family violence accept
responsibility—or are made accountable—for their conduct;
(c) to reduce or prevent family violence and the exposure of children to
family violence.
Proposal 4–26
objects clause in the
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld) should be amended to specify core purposes, other
than the existing main purpose of providing for the safety and protection
persons in particular relationships; and
(b) the objects clause in the
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas) should
be amended to specify more clearly the core purposes of the Act.
Question 4–8
Are there any other ‘core’ purposes that should be included in
the objects clauses in the family violence legislation
of each of the states and
territories? For example, should family violence legislation specify a purpose
to the lives of those affected by family
for obtaining a protection order
There are two broad approaches to setting a threshold for obtaining a
protection order. One approach is to focus on the commission
of past family
violence as well as the likelihood that the person engaging in violence will do
so again. This is the approach taken
in Victoria and Queensland.
The second broad approach focuses on the effect on the victim. This is the
approach taken in NSW and the Northern Territory where
the grounds focus on
fear. In NSW a person has to have reasonable grounds to fear, and must in fact
fear, the commission of a personal
violence offence. The subjective test of fear
is not however required to be met in certain cases. These include if the
person is a child or below average intelligence. Importantly, another
exception is where the victim has been subjected to past family
violence by the
person against whom the order is sought and there is a likelihood that the
person engaging in violence will do so
again—and the court is satisfied
that the making of the order is necessary in the
circumstances.
The Northern
Territory legislation only requires an objective standard of
The South Australian family violence legislation articulates the test as
reasonable grounds to ‘suspect’—rather
‘fear’—that the relevant person will commit an act of abuse,
and that making an order is appropriate in all
circumstances.
Western Australia, in effect, adopts both approaches in the alternative. That
is, a court can make a protection order either because
there has been past
violence and there is the likelihood of future violence or because the victim
has reasonable grounds to fear
violence. In each case the court has to be
satisfied that the granting of the order is appropriate in the
circumstances.
The approach of
adopting both tests in the alternative is in accordance with the approach
ultimately recommended by the Domestic
Violence Legislation Working Group in
drafting Model Domestic Violence
The ACT alone allows for a protection order to be made on the basis that the
person against whom it is sought has used family
In all jurisdictions the court has discretion not to make a protection order
even if the grounds for the order have been met.
The Commissions consider that each state and territory should have similar
grounds for triggering the granting of an application for
a protection order.
This complements the Commissions’ proposed approach for a common
interpretative framework. Just as there
should be a common understanding of what
constitutes family violence, so should there be a common understanding of when
the law should
step in to provide protection.
The Commissions have some preliminary reservations about an approach that
requires proof of likelihood of repetition, noting the evidential
hurdle that
this may present to victims. The Commissions are also of the preliminary view
that the position in the ACT—where
it is only necessary to prove the fact
that a person has used family violence to obtain a protection order—is
unsatisfactory
as it does not attempt to consider whether or not a person is
actually in need of future protection, which is the primary function
legislation.
The Commissions consider that there is some merit in adopting grounds that
focus on fear—that is, an approach that focuses on
the effect on the
victim. In applying for a protection order a victim is, in effect, seeking not
only protection from violence but
also freedom from fear.
The Commissions express the preliminary view that it is problematic to
include an objective test of fear in the
of family violence in
Family Law Act
. Different considerations may apply in adapting such a
test for the purpose of meeting a threshold to obtain a protection order.
Commissions are interested in views in this regard.
The Commissions have not decided, at this stage, how to frame precisely the
standard grounds for obtaining a protection order. Given
the Commissions’
preliminary preference for at least including grounds that focus on the effect
on the victim, and the exclusion
of grounds that rely solely on proof of
likelihood of repetition of violence, there appear to be four options:
a test similar to that in NSW—which includes an objective test
of fear, and a subjective test with the latter capable of being
excluded in
certain circumstances;
a test similar to that in the Northern Territory which imposes only
an objective test of fear;
a test similar to that adopted in South Australia, which imposes an
objective test of suspicion that the relevant person will use
violence plus a
requirement that the court is satisfied that making the order is appropriate in
all the circumstances;
an approach similar to that in Western Australia and advocated in
the Model Domestic Laws—that is adopting as alternatives
the test that
focuses on past conduct and likelihood of repetition, and the objective test of
Proposal 4–27
State and territory family
violence legislation should adopt the same grounds for obtaining a protection
Proposal 4–28
The grounds for obtaining a protection order
under state and territory family violence legislation should not require proof
of likelihood
of repetition of family violence, unless such proof is an
alternative to a ground that focuses on the impact of the violence on the
seeking protection.
Question 4–9
Which of the following grounds for obtaining a protection order under state
and territory family violence legislation should be adopted:
(a) a person has
reasonable grounds to fear, and, except in certain cases, in fact fears family
violence, along the lines of the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
(b) a person has reasonable grounds to fear family violence;
(c) there are reasonable grounds to suspect that further family violence
will occur and the Court is satisfied that making an order
is appropriate in all
the circumstances, along the lines of the
Intervention Orders (Prevention of
Abuse) Act 2009
(d) either the person seeking protection has
reasonable grounds to fear family violence or the person he or she is seeking
from has used family violence and is likely to do so
Domestic Violence Legislation Working
Model Domestic Violence Laws
United Nations Department of
Economic and Social Affairs Division for the Advancement of Women,
for Legislation on Violence Against Women
, 1 July 2009,
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), Rec 14;
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
s 5(1)(vi).
See New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103 (2003),
[4.14]–[4.22].
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
The National Council to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Background Paper to Time
for Action: The National Council’s Plan to Reduce Violence against Women
and their Children, 2009–2021
(2009), 40 (citations
Family Violence Protection
Violence Protection Act 2008
Restraining Orders Act
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Family Law Act 1975
B Fehlberg and J
Australian Family Law—The Contemporary Context
Family Court of Australia,
Family Violence Strategy
(2004–2005), 3 (citation
Family Law Act 1975
s 60CC(3)(m).
R Chisholm,
Family Courts Violence Review
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) reg 1.21(1). The purpose of these regulations is discussed in
[2002] MRTA
Malik v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(Unreported, FCA, Wilcox J, 19 April 2000); P Eastel, ‘Violence Against
Women in the Home: Kaleidoscopes on a Collision Course?’
(2003) 3(2)
Queensland University of Technology Law and Justice Journal
[2001] MRTA 6123
where emotional and financial
deprivation, and manipulation were considered because they caused fear or
apprehension, and not just
well-being.
P Memmott, R Stacy, C
Chambers and C Keys,
Violence in Indigenous Communities
(2001) Crime
Prevention Branch of the Attorney-General’s Department,
D Bagshaw, S Wendt and L Zannettino,
Preventing the Abuse of Older People by Their Family Members
Australian Domestic and Family Violence Clearinghouse,
G Hauge, R Thiara, A Mullender and P
Making the Links: Disabled Women and Domestic Violence Final
(2008) Women’s Aid (UK),
Inner City Legal
Centre—Safe Relationships Project,
January 2010.
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Restraining Orders Act
(WA) s 11A.
Violence Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
5. Family Violence Legislation and
the Criminal Law—An Introduction
Interactions with federal criminal law
Legislation
Education and statistics
Civil and criminal proceedings
Choice of proceedings
The boundaries of criminal redress
Interaction with participants in criminal justice system
Police-issued protection orders
The role of police and DPPs in applying to the court for protection orders
Interaction with criminal law procedures
Police powers of entry, search and seizure
Police powers of arrest and detention
5. Family Violence Legislation and
the Criminal Law—An Introduction
[back to top]
Interactions with
federal criminal law
The Commissions have been asked to consider the interaction between family
violence laws and federal criminal law. One area where
interaction may occur is
where conduct which might give rise to a protection order also constitutes an
offence under federal criminal
law. For example, conduct such as threatening
behaviour or harassment that can form the basis for a protection order under
violence legislation can also fall within the ambit of the following
federal offences:
using a carriage service to make a
using a carriage service to menace, harass or cause
using a postal or similar service to make a
using a postal or similar service to menace, harass or cause
Another area
where overlap between family violence laws and federal criminal law may occur is
in relation to conduct constituting
economic abuse. For example, coercing a
family member to claim a social security payment is recognised as economic abuse
to family violence in some
Such behaviour,
could also constitute offences under:
social security legislation; and
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) relating to fraudulent
conduct—such as obtaining a financial advantage by deception or making
false or misleading statements
in applications.
The Commissions are
interested in ascertaining the frequency with which family violence laws
intersect with offences in federal criminal
law. The Commissions consider that
one possible area where this could arise is in relation to sexual servitude
offences under the
Criminal Code
(Cth), where the person committing the
offence is in a defined family relationship with the
The Commissions are also interested in hearing how, in practice, matters are
dealt with that involve:
an overlap between family violence legislation and federal criminal
a joint prosecution of state or territory and federal offences
arising in a family violence context.
The Commissions understand that the CDPP has little involvement in this
regard, and that state and territory prosecutors will typically
have carriage of
How are matters dealt with in practice that involve:
overlap between state or territory family violence legislation and federal
criminal law; and
(b) a joint prosecution of state or territory and federal
offences arising in a family violence context?
In particular, do state and
territory prosecutors seek the consent of the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions to prosecute
federal offences arising in a family violence context,
and inform it of the outcomes of any such prosecutions?
Question 5–2
Are you aware of any cases where an offence against federal criminal law
has formed the basis for obtaining a protection order under
state or territory
family violence legislation?
Legislation
The Commissions consider that it is important for the definition of family
violence in family violence legislation to be broad enough
to capture conduct
the subject of potentially relevant federal offences that could form the basis
for obtaining a protection order.
One area where this could arise, for example,
is in relation to the federal offence of sexual servitude.
Education and statistics
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, it is essential to establish a
central database capturing the frequency of prosecutions
of federal offences in
the family violence context. The CDPP is the appropriate entity to establish and
manage such a database, either
by itself or in conjunction with other relevant
bodies. For example, the Commissions note that the federal sentencing database
jointly established by the National Judicial College of Australia, the
Judicial Commission of New South Wales and the CDPP. The maintenance
prosecutors involved in the prosecution
of federal offences—including
police and DPPs—for the purposes of data collection.
The maintenance of proper statistics would enable principled policy to be
developed in this area. For example, interrogation of statistics
prosecution of federal offences in the family violence context could reveal
of certain offences,
such as the telecommunications offences relating to making threats. This could
highlight a need to investigate
whether specific education and training programs
need to be delivered to lawyers in certain jurisdictions or areas to educate
Proposal 5–1
The definition of family violence in state and territory family violence
legislation should be broad enough to capture conduct the
subject of potentially
relevant federal offences in the family violence context—such as sexual
Proposal 5–2
The Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions—either by itself or in conjunction with other relevant
bodies—should
establish and maintain a centralised database of statistics
that records the number of times any federal offence has been prosecuted
family violence context including when such an offence is prosecuted:
(a) in addition to proceedings for the obtaining of a protection order under
state or territory family violence legislation;
(b) jointly with a state or territory offence in a family violence context;
(c) in the absence of any other criminal or civil proceeding.
Proposal 5–3
In order to facilitate the establishment and
maintenance of the centralised database referred to in Proposal 5–2, state
territory prosecutors—including police and directors of public
prosecution—should provide the Commonwealth Director of
Prosecutions with information about:
(a) federal offences in a family violence context which they prosecute,
including the outcomes of any such prosecutions;
(b) the prosecution of any federal offence in a family violence context
conducted jointly with a prosecution of any state or territory
family-violence
related offence; and
(c) whether the prosecution of the federal offence is in addition to any
protection order proceedings under state or territory family
legislation.
Question 5–3
Is there a need for lawyers involved in family violence matters to receive
education and training about the potential role of federal
offences in
protection order proceedings under state and territory family violence
legislation? How is this best
[back to top]
Civil and criminal
proceedings
proceedings
There may be legitimate reasons for opting for a protection order instead of
a criminal charge. These include that: a protection order
offers a speedier
response to violence and therefore protection; the offending conduct may not
constitute a criminal offence; and
there is a lower standard of proof in civil
protection order proceedings. However, one issue of significance in this Inquiry
is whether,
in practice, relevant decision makers—including
police—are favouring the pursuit of either a civil or criminal remedy
at the expense of the other
in circumstances where both civil and
criminal redress is possible.
Question 5–4
As a matter of practice, are police or other participants in the legal
system treating the obtaining of protection orders under family
legislation and a criminal justice response to family violence as alternatives
rather than potentially co-existing avenues
of redress? If so, what are the
practices or trends in this regard and how can this best be addressed?
The boundaries of
criminal redress
An issue that arises in assessing the dividing line between civil and
criminal responses to family violence is the extent to which
traditionally
non-criminal behaviour in a family violence context—typically non-physical
forms of violence, such as emotional
and economic abuse—should be
criminalised. Tasmania is the only jurisdiction which criminalises economic
abuse in the context
of family violence.
The Commissions have some preliminary concerns about the criminalisation of
such conduct. First, the policing of such offences may
be fraught with
difficulties. Secondly, each element of such offences has to be proved beyond
reasonable doubt and there may be significant
evidentiary challenges to meet
this standard. The Commissions note in this regard that there do not appear to
have been any prosecutions
for emotional and economic abuse under the Tasmanian
family violence legislation.
Moreover, given that the breach of a protection order amounts to a criminal
offence, any conduct by a person that breached conditions
tailored to prevent
emotional abuse, intimidation or economic abuse (in jurisdictions whose family
violence legislation recognises
such forms of behaviour as family violence)
would, in any event, be criminal.
Question 5–5
Are criminal offences for economic and emotional abuse in a family violence
context necessary or desirable?
[back to top]
Interaction with
participants in criminal justice system
Police-issued
protection orders
In some state and territory jurisdictions, police are able to issue
protection orders or ‘police safety notices’ on persons
used family violence. When police issue such notices they are generally able to
attach conditions to the order that a court
is empowered to make, including
exclusion orders. The duration of police-issued protection orders varies
significantly across the
protection orders can either last for 24 hours—without the victim’s
consent—or for 72 hours—with the consent of the victim, parent,
guardian, or child welfare officer as relevant. In Tasmania,
such orders may
last for 12 months, unless revoked, varied or extended sooner.
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether police powers to issue
protection orders are in fact increasing victim safety and
protection in those
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that if police are given—or
are to be given—powers to issue protection orders,
then the rationale
should be to enable them to intervene to deal with an emergency or crisis
situation in circumstances where it
is not reasonably practicable for the matter
to be dealt with at that time by a court. Police-issued protection orders should
as an application by a police officer for a protection order in favour of
the victim as well as a summons for the person against
whom it is issued to
appear in court within a specified short period of time—the model used in
Victoria and South Australia.
Restrictions imposed on a person’s liberty through the imposition of
police-issued protection orders should be reviewed by a
judicial officer as soon
as possible. In this regard, the Commissions have serious concerns about the
Tasmanian model which allows
police to impose orders that may last 12 months,
and practically places an onus on the person against whom the order is made to
for a variation or revocation. The Tasmanian provision providing that
police-issued protection orders last for 12 months has the
potential to make the
rights and liberties of citizens unduly dependent on the decisions of police as
opposed to the judiciary, and
should be repealed.
Question 5–6
In practice, where police have powers to issue protection orders under
family violence legislation, has the exercise of such powers
increased victim
safety and protection?
Proposal 5–4
State and territory family violence legislation
which empowers police to issue protection orders should provide that:
(a) police are only able to impose protection orders to intervene in
emergency or crisis situations in circumstances where it is
not reasonably
practicable or possible for the matter to be dealt with at that time by a court;
(b) police-issued protection orders are to act as an application to the
court for a protection order as well as a summons for the
person against whom it
is issued to appear before the court within a short specified time period. In
particular,
Family Violence Act 2004
(Tas)—which
allows police-issued protection orders to last for 12 months—should be
The role of police
and DPPs in applying to the court for protection orders
In NSW, Queensland, and Western Australia, family violence legislation places
express obligations on police to investigate family
violence. NSW and Western
Australia have the strongest legislative directions in relation to
pro-protection policing. In contrast,
for example, in the ACT, police are not
obliged to investigate on the basis of reasonable suspicion or to apply for
protection orders.
ACT police are empowered to apply for emergency orders, and
are required in certain circumstances to make a written record of reasons
not applying for emergency orders.
The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder views on whether family
violence legislation should impose express duties on
police to investigate
family violence matters and whether, in certain circumstances—for example,
where a person’s life
or safety is at serious risk—police should be
required to apply for protection orders.
The Commissions tend to the view that, at the least, an approach similar to
that taken in the Model Domestic Violence Laws should
be adopted—that is,
police should be required to investigate family violence where they have reason
to believe or suspect family
violence has been, is being or is likely to be
committed. The Commissions endorse the approach advocated in the Model Domestic
Laws, adopted by a small number of jurisdictions, that following an
investigation police should be required, in those cases where
they did not take
action, to record the reasons why.
The Commissions also endorse the views expressed by the VLRC that it is
essential that victims can apply for protection orders without
involving the
police, and that there should be increased Indigenous-specific support services
in courts to enable Indigenous people
to apply for protection orders without
police involvement. The Commissions are particularly interested in hearing the
views of Indigenous
stakeholders in each state and territory on this issue.
Proposal 5–5
State and territory family violence legislation,
to the extent that it does not already do so, should
(a) impose a duty on police to investigate family violence where they have
reason to suspect or believe that family violence has
been, is being or is
likely to be committed; and
(b) following an investigation, require police to make a record of their
reasons not to take any action such as apply for a protection
order, if they
decide not to take action.
Question 5–7
In what circumstances, if any, should police be required to apply for
protection orders on behalf of victims? Should such a requirement
be imposed by
state and territory family violence legislation or by police codes of
Question 5–8
Should all state and territory
governments ensure that there are Indigenous-specific support services in courts
to enable Indigenous
people to apply for protection orders without police
involvement?
Role of DPPs
Most legislation regulating DPPs is silent on their role in protection order
proceedings under family violence legislation. A notable
exception is the
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1986
(NSW), which expressly empowers
the NSW DPP to institute and conduct an application for a protection order under
NSW family violence
legislation in the local court, children’s court or
district court. It also empowers the NSW DPP to institute and conduct any
appeals in any court arising from such proceedings on behalf of the
Director of Public Prosecutions Act
also provides that it applies
to any proceedings for a protection order under NSW family violence legislation
as if the proceedings
were a prosecution or proceedings in respect of an
Initial inquiries by the Commissions suggest that the NSW DPP does not often
exercise its power to institute protection order proceedings
under family
violence legislation. The Commissions are interested in hearing the
circumstances in which the NSW DPP has exercised
or would exercise such powers.
The Commissions are also interested in hearing whether DPPs in other states
and territories take an active role in protection order
proceedings under family
violence legislation. The Commissions heard in consultation that the Queensland
DPP does not deal with protection
orders under family violence legislation, and
that they are normally handled by police prosecutors.
Question 5–9
In what circumstances, if any, has the NSW Director of Public Prosecutions
instituted and conducted protection order proceedings under
family violence
legislation or conducted a related appeal on behalf of a victim? Do Directors of
Public Prosecutions in other states
and territories play a role in protection
order proceedings under family violence
legislation?
[back to top]
Interaction with
criminal law procedures
Although protection orders are a civil remedy, and the standard of proof to
obtain them is the civil standard of the balance of probabilities,
procedures followed are those usually associated with criminal matters.
Police powers of
entry, search and seizure
In most Australian jurisdictions, the police have specific legislative powers
to enter premises without warrants in cases of family
violence. The family
violence Acts of Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern
Territory each confer powers of entry
on police. South Australian family
violence legislation confers a comparatively narrower power of entry on police.
If a protection
order requires a person to surrender specified weapons and
articles, then police may enter and search any premises or vehicle where
weapon or article is reasonably suspected to
In most jurisdictions, family violence legislation, or other legislation
governing criminal procedure, confers on police powers to:
person’s possession’ if the officer reasonably suspects
person has any object that may cause injury or damage or may be used to escape;
powers of arrest and detention
Usually, the police only exercise the power of arrest if they intend to
charge the person with an offence. This requires some evidence
and a judgment as
to whether prosecution will be successful. However, since in family violence
cases arrest ‘provides a measure
of safety’, the law of arrest has
been modified in some jurisdictions to provide greater powers of arrest and
detention in
family violence cases. These powers may be conferred either by
family violence legislation or by other legislation governing criminal
For example, in NSW an authorised officer may issue a warrant for arrest if
an application for a final protection order has been made,
even though the
person is not alleged to have committed an offence. In Victoria, a magistrate or
registrar may issue a warrant for
arrest on an application for a protection
order on the basis of a reasonable belief that it is necessary to achieve
certain objects,
including: ensuring the safety of the victim and the protection
of child victims; preserving the property of a victim; or ensuring
person’s attendance at court for a mention.
In the majority of Australian jurisdictions, there are powers to enable
police to detain people who have used family violence, principally
exclusively for purposes associated with issuing, serving or applying for
protection orders. The precise form of these powers
differs. In NSW, Victoria,
Western Australia and South Australia, these powers take the form of a power to
direct or require a person
to remain in a designated place in default of which
the person may be arrested.
In NSW, for example, if a police officer makes or is about to make an
application for a provisional order he or she has a power to
direct a person to
remain at the scene of the incident or, in a case where the person has left the
scene, at another place where
the police officer locates the person. If a person
refuses to remain at the specified place, the police officer may arrest and
the person at the scene of the incident or other place, or arrest and
take the person to a police station and detain the person there
provisional protection order is made and served. There is no maximum limit on
the time of this detention.
The maximum time limit of these ‘holding’ powers varies, with
Tasmania providing no limit; South Australia limiting the
time of detention
after arrest at two hours, with an extension allowing an aggregate of eight
hours by court order; Queensland, the
ACT and the Northern Territory allowing
four hours; and Victoria providing for up to six hours on the authority of the
a maximum of ten hours by order of a court.
Failure to identify primary
The Commissions also heard
that, apart from any specific issues concerning the exercise of special police
powers, there are some concerns
on the part of advocates in the family violence
sector that police may be failing to identify the primary aggressor and the
victim when attending incidents, resulting in a significant number of
women being charged with family violence offences and having
protection order
applications taken out against them in inappropriate cases.
Commissions’
Police powers
The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder views about whether
issues arise in practice concerning the availability, scope
and exercise of
police powers of entry, search, seizure, arrest and detention in family violence
cases, and whether any such issues
require legislative redress.
The Commissions note the concerns expressed about the practical implications
of the provisions in NSW family violence legislation
empowering police in
certain circumstances to direct a person who has used violence to remain at the
scene of an incident, particularly
where the incident occurs in a remote
There may be serious
implications for a victim’s safety and wellbeing, particularly in an
emotionally charged atmosphere in
the aftermath of violence. A victim should be
able to remain in the home while the police, if necessary, can remove the person
has used violence from the scene, or direct that person to leave the scene
and remain in another designated place for the purpose
of the police applying
for, issuing or serving a protection order. The Commissions are interested in
hearing from stakeholders in
other jurisdictions where police do not have such
removal powers as to whether this causes any problems in practice.
The Commissions are also interested in stakeholder views about whether there
is some merit in the approach of those jurisdictions
that empower police to
detain persons who have used violence to detain such persons for a reasonably
short period for the purpose
of making arrangements to secure the safety of
victims and affected children once the purpose of detention associated with
a protection order has been fulfilled. In such cases, however, the
period of detention must be as short as reasonably practicable
to allow the
objective of safeguarding victim safety to be fulfilled.
Failure to identify primary aggressor
The Commissions note concerns about police potentially failing to identify
primary aggressors and primary victims, resulting in the
inappropriate charging
of victims or the making of applications for protection orders against primary
victims. The Commissions consider
that this is an area appropriately addressed
by improved police education and training about the dynamics of family violence.
and training of police officers, and the benefits that may flow from
specialised police officers or police units dealing with family
violence are
discussed in Chapter 20. The Commissions also endorse the suggestion made by the
WA review of family violence legislation
that consideration should be given to
having skilled counsellors attend family violence incidents together with
police. The Commissions
are, however, interested in views about whether
legislative reform is needed in this area, noting that this question has been
in the review of the Queensland family violence legislation.
Question 5–10
Do any issues arise in relation to the availability, scope and exercise in
practice of police powers in connection with family violence
(b) search for and seize firearms or other articles; and
arrest and detain persons?
Proposal 5–6
State and territory legislation which confers on
police powers to detain persons who have used family violence should empower
to remove such persons from the scene of the family violence or direct
them to leave the scene and remain at another specified place
for the purpose of
the police arranging for a protection order.
Question 5–11
Should state and territory legislation which confers on police power to
detain persons who have used family violence empower police
to detain such
persons for a reasonably short period for the purpose of making arrangements to
secure the safety of victims and affected
children to the extent that it does
not already do so?
Question 5–12
Is there a need for legislative
amendments to provide guidance in identifying the primary aggressor in family
violence cases?
Presumption against bail
Once arrested for an offence related to family violence, a person may be
released on bail—either by the police or the court.
The release of the
person arrested may be dangerous for the victim of family violence. In response,
special bail laws have been enacted,
for example, the family violence
legislation of Tasmania contains a presumption against bail. A person is not to
be granted bail
unless a court, judge or police officer is satisfied that the
release of the person on bail would not be likely to affect adversely
safety, wellbeing and interests of an affected person or affected child.
The Commissions are interested in hearing views about the operation in
practice of provisions which contain a presumption against
bail or displace
presumptions in favour of bail in the context of family violence offences. The
Commissions are interested in hearing
whether the application of such provisions
in practice strikes the right balance between ensuring the safety and wellbeing
of victims,
as well as safeguarding the rights of accused persons. In
particular, the Commissions note that the presumption against bail in the
Tasmanian family violence legislation is relatively broad in its scope,
especially in its potential application to non-physical violence.
As economic
abuse and emotional abuse are offences in Tasmania, an accused charged with such
offences may be refused bail. The Commissions
are interested in hearing views
Notifying victims of bail
It is imperative that victims of family violence—including those who
are the subject of a protection order under family violence
legislation—are informed of decisions to grant or refuse bail. Where an
offender is released on bail, victims should be informed
of the conditions of
bail. The Commissions note concerns expressed to the Inquiry that, in practice,
victims in the ACT are not being
informed of bail outcomes despite a statutory
obligation to do so. The Commissions are interested in hearing whether, in
victims of family violence who are involved in protection order
proceedings under family violence legislation are being informed
conditions imposed on the offender.
The Commissions note that there is precedent for a legislative obligation to
notify victims of bail decisions in the
Bail Act 1992
(ACT) and consider
that such an obligation should be imposed in other jurisdictions. However, any
legislative obligation to inform
victims of bail decisions must be supplemented
by other measures—including education and training of police and
prosecutors—to
ensure it is implemented. Therefore, a legislative
obligation should be reinforced by practical directions to police and
prosecutors
in, for example, police codes of conduct or operating procedures;
and prosecutorial guidelines or policies.
Overlap between bail and protection
Inconsistent bail and protection order conditions may lead to an accused
inadvertently breaching bail, and being exposed to arrest
and potentially being
refused bail. The Commissions are interested in hearing whether, in practice,
judicial officers are imposing
inconsistent bail and protection order conditions
and, if so, what measures can be taken to address this. For example, the
of imposing a bail condition on an accused to abide by the conditions
contained in a protection order appears to be one way of avoiding
inconsistency.
The Commissions consider that where conduct constituting family violence
gives rise to concurrent protection order and criminal proceedings,
officers should be able to impose either or both protective bail conditions and
protection orders. The Commissions endorse
the recommendation made by the Law
Reform Commission of WA to amend the
Bail Act 1982
(WA) to allow a
judicial officer on grant of bail to consider whether specific purposes of bail
might be served or assisted by a
protection order, protective bail conditions or
Question 5–13
In practice, does the application of provisions which contain a presumption
against bail, or displace the presumption in favour of
bail in family violence
cases, strike the right balance between ensuring the safety and wellbeing of
victims, and safeguarding the
rights of accused persons?
How often are victims of family violence involved in protection
order proceedings under family violence legislation not informed about
decision to release the offender on bail and the conditions of
Proposal 5–7
State and territory legislation, to the extent
that it does not already do so, should impose an obligation on the police and
prosecution
to inform the victim of a family violence offence of: (a) decisions
to grant or refuse bail to the offender; and (b) where bail is
granted, the
conditions of release. The
Bail Act 1992
ACT) provides an instructive
model in this regard. Police codes of practice or operating procedures and
prosecutorial guidelines or
policies as well as appropriate education and
training programs should also address the obligation to inform victims of family
of bail decisions.
Question 5–15
How often are inconsistent bail requirements and protection order
conditions imposed on a person accused of committing a family violence
Proposal 5–8
Judicial officers should be allowed, on a grant of bail, to consider
whether the purpose of ensuring that the offender does not commit
while on bail or endanger the safety, welfare or property of any person might be
better served or assisted by a protection
order, protective bail conditions or
both, as recommended by the Law Reform Commission WA in relation to the
Criminal Code
Violence Protection Act 2008
Criminal Code
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1986
Intervention Orders
(Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
6. Protection Orders and the
Criminal Law
Concurrent proceedings under family violence laws and the criminal law
Liability and use of evidence issues
Use of evidence
Court-initiated protection orders in criminal proceedings
Protection order conditions and the criminal law
Exclusion orders
Rehabilitation and counselling conditions in protection orders
Other interactions between protection orders and sentencing
Breach of protection orders
Aid and abet provisions
Consent to breaches
Charging for breach of protection order rather than underlying offence
Penalties and sentencing for breach of protection orders
6. Protection Orders and the
Criminal Law
[back to top]
proceedings under family violence laws and the criminal law
Liability and use of
evidence issues
Most state and territory family violence legislation—while recognising
the potential for concurrent civil and criminal proceedings—does
address the relationship between the two sets of proceedings. There are a few
exceptions to this. The Western Australian family
violence legislation provides
that, except as provided by that Act, neither making nor varying a protection
order affects the civil
or criminal liability of a person bound by the order in
respect of the conduct out of which the application for the protection order
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that there should be greater
legislative clarity about how the making, variation, revocation
or refusal to
vary or revoke a protection order impacts on the civil or criminal liability of
a person for the conduct that gave
rise to the protection order. State and
territory family violence legislation should make it expressly clear that such
actions concerning
protection orders do not affect the civil or criminal
liability of a person subject to the order. The Western Australian family
legislation is an instructive model, however, the Commissions consider
that such provisions should also extend to the revocation
and refusal to vary or
revoke a protection order.
The Commissions consider that there should be legislative clarity about the
use in criminal proceedings of evidence of the following
based on conduct that
gave rise to proceedings under family violence legislation:
the making, varying, or revocation of a protection order or the
refusal to take any of those actions; and
the fact that evidence of a particular nature was given in
proceedings under family violence legislation.
There are a number of
factors at play in considering whether evidence concerning protection orders
should be able to be used in criminal
proceedings. These include balancing the
desirability of a victim not being cross-examined about prior
evidence—which is a
factor weighing against using evidence about
protection orders in criminal proceedings—with the desirability of a
having to give evidence in more than one proceeding—which may
be a factor supporting the use of evidence about protection orders
in criminal
proceedings. The need to avoid prejudicing criminal proceedings is also an
important factor. Witnesses can be cross-examined
on prior inconsistent
statements—both in jurisdictions in which the uniform Evidence Acts apply
as well as jurisdictions, such
as Queensland, which have their own evidence
legislation.
The Commissions are
interested to hear about how
Domestic and Family Violence
Protection Act 1989
(Qld), which limits the use of evidence about protection
orders in criminal proceedings, is operating in practice. In particular,
does it interact with
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld) which
provides that ‘proof may be given’ that a witness made a prior
inconsistent statement? The Commissions are
also interested in hearing
stakeholder views about whether a provision based on
could be adopted
in other jurisdictions. The Commissions tend to the view that evidence about the
making of protection orders should
not be admissible in criminal
proceedings—other than:
for the purposes of considering bail and bail conditions;
in sentencing; and
in proceedings for breach of protection orders, where clearly the
making of protection orders is a relevant fact to be established.
Evidence about whether protection orders were made, varied or
revoked, or applications for such orders were rejected, could improperly
influence juries in their deliberations in matters concerning offences related
to family violence. In contrast, judicial officers
deciding bail conditions and
imposing sentence should be aware of protection orders made under family
violence legislation and the
restrictions which they place on accused persons
and offenders before them.
An important advantage of this approach is that it enables courts, on their
own initiative, to make protection orders where it is
appropriate to do so, at
any point in time during criminal proceedings without risking prejudice to the
fair conduct of those proceedings.
In other words, the suggested approach would
accommodate the systemic objectives of victim protection and ensuring that an
receives a fair trial.
This proposal aims to achieve legislative clarity about the use of evidence
of protection orders in criminal proceedings. At this
stage, however, the
Commissions do not propose that evidence of such orders should be inadmissible
in criminal proceedings except
in the circumstances outlined above, because the
Commissions would like to hear more about the operation in practice of the
provision, which limits the use of such evidence.
Court-initiated
protection orders in criminal proceedings
Some provisions in family violence or sentencing legislation expressly permit
a court, on its own initiative, to make protection orders
when a person pleads
guilty, is found guilty after a contested hearing, or is convicted of an offence
that involves family violence.
These important provisions may circumvent the
need for a victim to make a separate application for a protection order.
of protection order
The Commissions are of the preliminary view that provisions empowering courts
in criminal matters to make protection orders on their
own initiative are an
extremely important way of alleviating the need for a victim—already
involved in criminal proceedings
as a witness—to initiate an application
for a protection order, and potentially having to give further evidence. The
Commissions
consider that the family violence legislation of each state and
territory should contain an express provision empowering courts in
this way. The
Commissions note that the Victorian family violence legislation does not contain
such a provision.
The Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group did not support provisions
enabling courts to make protection orders of their own
volition against accused
persons where criminal proceedings against them were continuing. This was
because the making of such orders
on the basis of ‘untried facts’
would amount to a ‘denial of
Commissions’ preliminary view, however, a court should be able to make
such orders of its own initiative where it considers
it is appropriate to do so
to protect a victim. The legitimate concern about denying justice to an accused
in criminal proceedings
can be alleviated if, as the Commissions are tentatively
considering, family violence legislation makes it clear:
that the making of a protection order does not affect the criminal
or civil liability of a person in respect of conduct the subject
of the order;
that a protection order is inadmissible in criminal
proceedings—other than for the purpose of imposing bail, in sentencing,
in proceedings for breach of protection orders.
An alternative
approach is to limit courts to make interim protection orders in such
circumstances.
As a preliminary matter, the Commissions are interested in ascertaining the
extent to which courts which have the power to make protection
orders on their
own initiative are exercising such power.
The Commissions note the disparity between the jurisdictions concerning
whether court-initiated protection orders are mandatory or
discretionary. The
Commissions tend to the view that it would be preferable for there to be
uniformity of approach across the jurisdictions
regarding the circumstances in
which courts make protection orders in criminal proceedings. The Domestic
Violence Legislation Working
Group expressed concern that the making of
mandatory orders could lead to inappropriate or unnecessary orders being issued.
The Commissions
are therefore interested to hear how the provisions in NSW and
Western Australia, which mandate courts to make protection orders
circumstances, are working in practice. In particular, the Commissions are
interested in hearing:
whether such provisions have resulted in the issuing of
inappropriate or unnecessary orders;
the types of circumstances that satisfy judicial officers in NSW
that the mandatory making of the protection order is not required;
whether, if provisions mandating courts to make protection orders in
certain circumstances are to remain, such provisions should
contain an express
exception for when a victim objects to the making of the order.
relation to the last bullet point above, the Commissions note that the Western
Australian family violence legislation has such
an exception, whereas the NSW
family violence legislation does not. The Domestic Violence Legislation Working
Group recommended the
inclusion of such an exception in provisions conferring
discretion on courts to make protection orders.
The Commissions are also interested in stakeholder views on whether it would
be beneficial for legislation to empower prosecutors
to seek protection orders
where a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of an offence involving family
violence. In this regard,
they are particularly interested in hearing about the
extent to which prosecutors in the Northern Territory make applications for
protection orders when a person pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, an
offence involving family violence.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, a court before which a person
pleads guilty or is found guilty of an offence involving
family violence, should
be required to consider:
any existing protection order; and
whether, in the circumstances that protection order needs to be
varied to provide greater protection for the person against whom
the offence was
committed—irrespective of whether or not an application has been made to
vary the order.
This approach does not require the court to vary an
existing protection order. Its intended impact is to focus a court exercising
criminal jurisdiction on an existing protection order, to ascertain whether its
conditions remain appropriate and sufficient to protect
the affected victim.
Proposal 6–1
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended, where necessary, to make it clear that the making, variation
revocation of a protection order or the refusal to make, vary or revoke such
an order does not affect the civil or criminal liability
of a person bound by
the order in respect of the family violence the subject of the order.
Is it common for victims in criminal proceedings to be
cross-examined about evidence that they have given in support of an application
to obtain a protection order under family violence legislation when the conduct
the subject of the criminal proceedings and the protection
substantially the same?
Proposal 6–2
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended to clarify whether, in the trial of an accused for an offence
out of conduct which is the same or substantially similar to that upon
which a protection order is based, references can be made
(a) the making, variation, and revocation of protection orders in
proceedings under family violence legislation;
(b) the refusal of a court to make, vary or revoke a protection order in
proceedings under family violence legislation;
(c) the existence of current proceedings for a protection order under
family violence legislation against the person the subject
of the criminal
proceedings;
(d) the fact that evidence of a particular nature or content was given in
proceedings under family violence legislation.
Such provisions will need to address separately the conduct which constitutes
a breach of a protection order under family violence
legislation.
Domestic and Family Violence Protection
(Qld)—which renders inadmissible in criminal proceedings
certain evidence about protection orders where those proceedings arise
conduct upon which a protection order is based—working in practice? In
particular:
(a) how is it interacting in practice with
Evidence Act 1977
(Qld) which states that ‘proof may be
given’ of a previous inconsistent statement;
(b) does it provide a
model for other states and territories to adopt in their family violence
legislation in order to provide legislative
clarity about the matters raised in
Proposal 6–2 above; and
(c) is there a need to make express exception
for bail, sentencing and breach of protection order proceedings?
In practice, to what extent are courts exercising their powers to
make protection orders in criminal proceedings on their own initiative
discretion to do so is conferred on them?
Question 6–4
current provisions in family violence legislation which mandate courts to make
either interim or final protection orders on: charging;
a finding or plea of
guilt; or in the case of serious offences, working in practice? In
particular:
(a) have such provisions resulted in the issuing of unnecessary
or inappropriate orders; and
(b) in practice, what types of circumstances
satisfy judicial officers in NSW that such orders are not
Question 6–5
If provisions in state and territory
family violence legislation mandating courts to make protection orders in
certain circumstances
remain, is it appropriate for such provisions to contain
an exception for situations where a victim objects to the making of the
Question 6–6
To what extent are prosecutors in the
Northern Territory making applications for protection orders where a person
pleads guilty or
is found guilty of an offence that involves family violence? Is
it desirable for legislation to empower prosecutors in other states
territories to make an application for protection orders where a person pleads
guilty or is found guilty of such an
Proposal 6–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should include an express provision conferring on courts a power to make a
order on their own initiative at any stage of a criminal
proceeding—including prior to a plea or finding of guilt.
Proposal 6–4
State and territory legislation should provide that
a court, before which a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of an offence
involving family violence, must consider any existing protection order obtained
under family violence legislation and whether, in
the circumstances, that
protection order needs to be varied to provide greater protection for the person
against whom the offence
was committed, irrespective of whether an application
has been made to vary the order.
[back to top]
order conditions and the criminal law
of conditions
The types of conditions that are authorised by family violence legislation to
be imposed typically include any that the court considers
necessary: to protect
the victim and any child from family
or to encourage the
person to accept responsibility for the violence committed against the victim,
or to change his or her behaviour.
Directions not to breach the criminal law may be attached as conditions to a
protection order. For example, conditions which provide
that a person is not to
threaten, assault or stalk another person, or damage another person’s
property, essentially articulate
what is, in any event, conduct typically
prohibited by the criminal law. A condition to be of good behaviour is also
essentially
a condition to abide by the law. Other conditions, however, prohibit
conduct which, but for the prohibition in the protection order,
infringe the law. For example, persons are usually free to contact, communicate
with, approach and locate family members,
and free to enter and live in their
own residence—conduct which can be proscribed by a protection order that
includes an exclusion
Professor Rosemary Hunter’s study of the handling of family violence
protection order proceedings in magistrates courts in Victoria
found that the
median hearing time for protection order applications, other than contested
final orders, was three minutes.
She observed that the speed with which protection order applications were dealt
with resulted in judicial officers not giving particularised
attention to the
conditions attached to a protection order. She concluded that conditions were
not tailored to the particular allegations
The Commissions are
interested in hearing whether this experience is common to other jurisdictions
and, in particular, the extent
to which protection order conditions are tailored
to the circumstances of particular cases across the jurisdictions.
The application forms for protection orders in most jurisdictions set out the
conditions that may be attached to the making of a protection
order, with an
option for applicants to tick the conditions which they seek. However, the
application form for a protection order
in Western Australia does not set out
the conditions which may be imposed on the making of a protection order.
The Commissions consider that in making protection orders it is particularly
important that judicial officers are able to impose conditions
that proscribe
conduct that is not otherwise criminal. All citizens are, in any event, under an
obligation not to breach the criminal
law. There are, of course, benefits in
attaching conditions to protection orders that are, in essence, directions not
to breach the
criminal law. A breach of a protection order is a criminal
offence, and as discussed later in this chapter, it may be easier to prove
breach than to prove the underlying offence to the requisite degree of proof.
In considering the conditions which courts can impose to proscribe conduct
which is otherwise not criminal, the Commissions note that
only the family
violence legislation of Queensland includes express reference to a prohibition
on locating or attempting to locate
the victim. The Commissions consider that
such a condition is of particular importance in the context of victims fleeing
family violence
and attempting to sever ties with those who have used violence
against them. In the Commissions’ preliminary view, all state
territory family violence legislation should include a condition to this
effect—and such a condition should be specified
on all state and territory
application forms for protection orders, thereby allowing victims the option of
electing conditions to
be considered by the court.
As a practical matter, it is important that applications for protection
orders clearly set out the full range of conditions that a
court may attach to a
protection order. This acts as a checklist for the court and the victim applying
for the order. The forms should
be drafted in such a way as to enable victims to
indicate the types of conditions they seek. For example, the application for a
order in Western Australia should be amended to set out the range of
conditions that a court may impose in making a protection order.
In practice, are the conditions which judicial officers attach to
protection orders under state and territory family violence legislation
sufficiently tailored to the circumstances of particular
Proposal 6–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide expressly that one of the conditions that may be imposed by a
making a protection order is to prohibit the person against whom the order
is made from locating or attempting to locate the victim
of family violence.
Proposal 6–6
Application forms for protection orders in each
state and territory should clearly set out the full range of conditions that a
may attach to a protection order. The forms should be drafted to enable
applicants to indicate the types of conditions that they
would like imposed. In
particular, the application form for a protection order in Western Australia
should be amended in this regard.
Family violence legislation makes provision for protection order conditions
which allow a court to prohibit a person who has used
violence from entering and
remaining in a residence shared with the victim including, in some cases, the
power to terminate an existing
tenancy agreement and replace it with one for the
benefit of the victim. In other words, a court can impose a condition requiring
the person against whom the protection order is made to vacate the premises,
notwithstanding any ownership rights in relation to
such premises.
In some jurisdictions, including Victoria, Queensland, and NSW, courts are
directed to consider specific requirements before making
an exclusion order.
These requirements are in addition to those considered in making a protection
order. In other jurisdictions,
the factors a court is to consider in making a
protection order are the same regardless of whether the protection order
an exclusion order. The Commissions consider that state and territory
family violence legislation should address separately the factors
which courts
are required to take into consideration in making or declining to make an
exclusion order—over and above the factors
that are to be considered in
making a protection order generally.
The combined effect of these two options for reform is to require courts to
actively consider whether to make an exclusion order and
may increase the
likelihood of judicial officers making exclusion orders in appropriate
circumstances. Judicial officers should be
required to give reasons for not
making an exclusion order where such an order has been sought. The family
violence legislation of
NSW provides an instructive model in this regard.
Making exclusion orders can impose severe hardship—a person who is
excluded from the home may become homeless. Equally, not
making an exclusion
order in appropriate cases can cause severe hardship—women and children
subjected to severe violence may
need to flee the home. Escaping family violence
has been identified as a leading cause of homelessness for women and children.
Commissions therefore consider that judicial officers should explicitly be
required to consider the effect that making or declining
to make such an order
will have on the accommodation needs of all the parties to the proceedings and
on any children. This approach
is consistent with that recommended by the ALRC
in its 1986 Report,
The Commissions are
interested in hearing views about whether police who make exclusion orders
should also be required to take reasonable
steps to secure temporary
accommodation for the excluded person, as is the case in Victoria.
Only the Northern Territory family violence legislation contains an express
presumption that where a victim, a person who has used
family violence against
the victim, and a child reside together, the protection of the victim and the
child are best achieved by
their living in the home. The presumption does not
act to prevent a protection order including a condition allowing the person
whom the protection order is made from visiting the child at the
Such a presumption acts to
implement a central objective of the legislation referred to in the Second
Reading Speech of the
Domestic and Family Violence Bill 2007
(NT), namely
‘to ensure minimal disruption to the lives of families affected by
Significantly, the
presumption only operates where there is a child involved. It has no application
in the case of family violence
between partners living in the same residence
without a child.
The Commissions are interested to hear:
how the presumption in the Northern Territory family violence
legislation is working in practice;
whether the family violence legislation of other states and
territories should include a similar presumption.
State and territory family violence legislation should require
judicial officers considering the making of protection orders to consider
whether or not to make an exclusion order—that is, an order excluding a
person against whom a protection order is made from
premises shared with the
victim, even if the person has a legal or equitable interest in such
Proposal 6–8
State and territory family violence legislation
should specify the factors that a court is to consider in making an exclusion
is, an order excluding a person against whom a protection order
is made from premises shared with the victim, even if the person
has a legal or
equitable interest in such premises. Judicial officers should be required to
consider the effect that making or declining
to make an exclusion order will
have on the accommodation needs of the parties to the proceedings and on any
children, as recommended
by the ALRC in the Report
Domestic Violence
(ALRC 30) 1986.
If state or territory family violence legislation empowers police
officers to make an order excluding a person who has used family
violence from
premises in which he or she has a legal or equitable interest, should they be
required to take reasonable steps to
secure temporary accommodation for the
excluded person?
Proposal 6–9
State and territory family violence legislation
should require a court to give reasons for declining to make an exclusion
is, an order excluding the person against whom a protection
order is made from premises in which he or she has a legal or equitable
interest—where such order has been sought.
How is the presumption in the family violence legislation of the
Northern Territory—that where a victim, person who uses family
and child reside together, the protection of the victim and child is best
achieved by their remaining in the home—working
in practice? In
particular, has the application of the presumption resulted in the making of
exclusion orders?
Question 6–10
Should state and territory family
violence legislation include an express presumption that the protection of
victims is best served
by their remaining in the home in circumstances where
they share a residence with the persons who have used violence against
Rehabilitation
and counselling conditions in protection orders
Five jurisdictions address the power of courts to attach conditions to
protection orders involving either rehabilitation or counselling.
differences between the jurisdictions include: whether such orders are mandatory
or voluntary; whether they are available only
on sentencing; and their
The Commissions tend to the view that it is important for family violence
legislation to expressly allow for courts making protection
orders to impose
conditions requiring persons to attend rehabilitation or counselling programs,
where such persons are suitable and
eligible to participate in such programs. A
common purpose of family violence legislation should be to ensure that persons
family violence accept responsibility or are made accountable for their
conduct. One important way of achieving this objective is
to endeavour to
rehabilitate the offender and stop the cycle of violence. Rehabilitation
programs are an essential measure for treating
the causes rather than the
symptoms of family violence.
Application forms for protection orders, in those jurisdictions where there
are legislative provisions concerning the imposition of
conditions relating to
rehabilitation or counselling, do not generally set out conditions relating to
rehabilitation or counselling.
One exception is the application form for a
protection order in Victoria which allows an applicant to indicate that she or
like the court to encourage the person against whom the order is sought
to contact the Men’s Referral
The Commissions also
tend to the view that there may be some benefit in application forms for
protection orders specifying conditions
relating to rehabilitation or
counselling—or that at least allow a victim to indicate whether she or he
wishes the court to
encourage the person who used family violence to contact an
appropriate referral service. The Commissions are interested in hearing
stakeholder views in this regard.
The Commissions are also interested in hearing whether, in practice, judicial
officers in those jurisdictions whose family violence
legislation does not
specify expressly the imposition of rehabilitation or counselling programs as
potential conditions attaching
to a protection order—such as NSW and
Queensland—in fact, impose such conditions as part of their general power
any orders that they consider to be necessary or desirable.
In certain jurisdictions, rehabilitation orders may be made as part of the
criminal process in the pre-sentencing phase or on sentencing
where offenders
have committed family-violence related offences. The Commissions are interested
in hearing whether, in practice,
there are overlapping or conflicting
obligations placed on persons as a result of conditions imposed by protection
orders requiring
attendance at rehabilitation or counselling programs and any
orders to attend such programs as part of the sentencing process.
Proposal 6–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should be amended, where necessary, to allow expressly for courts making
orders to impose conditions on persons against whom protection orders
are made requiring them to attend rehabilitation or counselling
programs, where
such persons are suitable and eligible to participate in such programs.
Proposal 6–11
Application forms for protection orders should
specify conditions relating to rehabilitation or counselling or allow a victim
to indicate
whether she or he wishes the court to encourage the person who has
used violence to contact an appropriate referral service.
Do judicial officers in jurisdictions, such as NSW and
Queensland, in which family violence legislation does not specify expressly
rehabilitation or counselling programs as potential conditions attaching to a
protection order, in fact, impose such conditions as
part of their general power
to impose any orders that they consider to be necessary or
Question 6–12
Are overlapping or conflicting
obligations placed on persons as a result of conditions imposed by protection
orders under family violence
legislation requiring attendance at rehabilitation
or counselling programs and any orders to attend such programs either
pre-sentencing
or as part of the sentencing
interactions between protection orders and sentencing
Taking protection order conditions into
account in sentencing
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether, in practice, courts
sentencing offenders for family-violence related offences are
made aware of and
take into account any existing protection order conditions to which the offender
to be sentenced is or has been
In the Commissions’ view it is appropriate for courts to consider any
protection order conditions to which an offender is subject,
where those
conditions arise out of the same or substantially the same conduct giving rise
to the prosecution for the offence. It
is particularly relevant for courts to
take into account those conditions which may have caused significant
hardship—such as
exclusion orders.
To avoid making overlapping orders concerning rehabilitation or counselling
programs a court sentencing an offender must know whether
the person has or is
attending such a program pursuant to a protection order condition. It is also
relevant, in this regard, for
the court sentencing an offender for a
family-violence related offence to take into account the duration of any
protection order
to which the offender is subject.
The Commissions note, however, that concern has been expressed about relying
on attendance at rehabilitation programs as a mitigating
factor in sentencing,
and are interested in hearing other stakeholder views in this regard, as well as
any suggestions about possible
options for reform.
Place restriction orders
In Tasmania, a court may make an ‘area restriction order’ if it
finds a person guilty of an offence. An ‘area restriction
an order that the offender must not loiter in an area or class of area specified
in the order at any time or during
such periods as specified in the order. In
NSW, place restriction orders are only available on sentencing for offences
by imprisonment for six months or more. A place restriction order
prohibits the offender from frequenting or visiting a specified
district for a specified term and can be made by the court if it is satisfied
that it is reasonably necessary to make such
an order to ensure that the
offender does not commit any further
Place restriction or area restriction orders imposed on sentencing for a
family-violence related offence can overlap with or conflict
with conditions
attached to a protection order prohibiting or restricting a person’s
access to certain premises. The Commissions
are interested in hearing whether
such interactions have arisen in practice.
In practice, are courts sentencing offenders for family-violence
related offences made aware of, and do they take into account, any
order conditions to which the offender to be sentenced is or has been
Question 6–14
Have there been cases where there has been
overlap or conflict between place restriction or area restriction orders imposed
on sentencing
and protection order conditions which prohibit or restrict the
same person’s access to certain
Proposal 6–12
State and territory legislation should provide
that a court sentencing an offender for a family-violence related offence should
into account in sentencing the offender:
(a) any protection order conditions to which the person being sentenced is
subject, where those conditions arise out of the same
or substantially the same
conduct giving rise to the prosecution for the offence; and
(b) the duration of any protection order to which the offender is
[back to top]
of protection orders
In each state and territory, the breach of a protection order is a criminal
offence and, as such, can result in the parties to protection
order proceedings
under family violence legislation entering into the criminal justice system,
either as accused persons or witnesses.
and abet provisions
An issue for this Inquiry is the extent to which police may threaten to, or
actually charge, a victim with aiding, abetting, counselling
or procuring a
breach of a protection order where they believe the victim consented to the
breach. The VLRC recommended that if the
police believe that a victim has
consented to a breach, they should explain the procedure for varying or revoking
an order. If necessary,
police should apply for a variation or revocation on
behalf of the victim with his or her
The WA review
recommended an amendment to the
Criminal Code
(WA) to preclude victims
for whose benefit a protection order has been made from being charged with
aiding and abetting a breach
It also recommended that
the court should be given power to grant leave to proceed in an application to
vary or cancel a protection
order, of its own motion, at the hearing of an
allegation of a breach, where there is evidence of the person protected being
In the Commissions’ view, it is inappropriate for victims to be charged
with aiding and abetting breaches of protection orders
because it overshadows
the fact that a protection order is made against a person who uses family
violence—not the victim. Relevant
state and territory
legislation—whether family violence legislation or criminal
legislation—should be amended to provide
that a person protected by a
protection order under family violence legislation cannot be charged with, or
found guilty of, an offence
of aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the
breach of such an order.
The Commissions consider that there is some merit in allowing a court hearing
an allegation of breach of a protection order to be
empowered to grant leave to
proceed in an application to vary or cancel a protection order of its own
motion, where (a) there is
evidence that the victim for whose benefit the
protection order was made gave free and voluntary consent to the breach; and (b)
court is satisfied that the victim, in fact, wants to vary or revoke the
protection order.
Proposal 6–13
State and territory legislation should be amended,
where necessary, to provide that a person protected by a protection order under
family violence legislation cannot be charged with or guilty of an offence of
aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the breach
of a protection order.
Proposal 6–14
State and territory family violence legislation
should empower a court hearing an allegation of breach of a protection order to
leave to proceed in an application to vary or cancel a protection order of
its own motion where:
(a) there is evidence that the victim for whose benefit the protection order
was made gave free and voluntary consent to the breach;
(b) the court is satisfied that the victim wants to vary or revoke the
protection order.
Conspiracy to
pervert the course of justice
An unfortunate corollary to charging victims of family violence with aiding
and abetting the breach of a protection order is charging
such victims with
conspiracy to pervert the course of justice for conduct engaged in by them to
reduce the culpability of the offender—such
as withdrawing their
statements. The Commissions have grave concerns about this practice and are
interested in hearing of any circumstances
where this has occurred.
The charging and prosecution of victims of family violence for conduct
seemingly undertaken by them to mitigate the culpability of
offenders ignores
the nature of family violence—particularly the features of coercion and
control, and the damaging psychological
impact that this has on victims, as well
as the fear which it instils. It also overlooks the cyclical and complicated
nature of family
violence relationships, ‘which often lead victims to
withdraw charges or understate the harm of particular conduct during periods
calm in their
relationship’.
Above the Commissions propose legislative amendment to ensure that victims of
family violence cannot be guilty of aiding and abetting
the breach of a
protection order—or cannot be charged with such offences. It is a logical
extension of that policy stance also
to propose legislative amendment to ensure
that victims of family violence cannot be charged with or be guilty of
offences—such
as conspiracy or attempt to pervert the course of
justice—where the conduct alleged to constitute the elements of those
is essentially conduct engaged in by a victim to reduce or mitigate the
culpability of the offender.
It is imperative that any legislative change in this area is accompanied by
cultural change. This will necessitate education and training
of police and
prosecutors. The proposed legislative amendment should be reinforced by
guidelines governing police and prosecutors—for
example appropriate
directions could be incorporated in police codes of practice or operating
procedures, and prosecutorial policies
or guidelines.
Proposal 6–15
State and territory criminal legislation should be
amended to ensure that victims of family violence cannot be charged with, or be
found guilty of, offences—such as conspiracy or attempt to pervert the
course of justice—where the conduct alleged to
constitute such offences is
essentially conduct engaged in by a victim to reduce or mitigate the culpability
of the offender. Legislative
reform in this area should be reinforced by
appropriate directions in police codes of practice, or operating procedures and
prosecutorial
guidelines or policies.
There is no defence of consent to breach of a protection order in any
Australian state or territory. A related issue that arises on
breach of a
protection order is whether it is inappropriate to allow a person who has used
violence to rely on the consent of the
victim to the breach of the order as a
mitigating factor in sentencing. The WA review of family violence legislation
found that although
consent could no longer be relied upon as a defence to a
breach, consent was still being raised by way of a plea of mitigation and
accepted by courts. The WA review recommended that consent be removed as a
mitigating factor in sentencing on conviction for breach
of a protection
The Commissions are interested in ascertaining whether, as a matter of
practice, consent to breach of a protection order is being
raised and accepted
as a mitigating factor in sentencing proceedings. The Commissions are also
interested in stakeholder views on
whether there should be a legislative
prohibition on considering consent as a factor in sentencing for breach—or
whether such
prohibition would infringe on the discretion of judicial officers
to take into account relevant circumstances surrounding the commission
In practice: (a) are persons who breach protection orders raising
consent of the victim to the breach as a mitigating factor in sentencing;
(b) are courts treating consent of a victim to a breach of a protection order as
a mitigating factor in sentencing?
Question 6–16
Should state and
territory family violence or sentencing legislation prohibit a court from
considering the consent of a victim to
breach of a protection order as a
mitigating factor in sentencing?
for breach of protection order rather than underlying offence
There will be cases where a person breaches a protection order and the only
charge available to police is breach of that order because
no underlying offence
has been committed—for example, if a person breaches a condition of an
order not to contact the victim
within a certain period of time of being
intoxicated. However, where the breach of a protection order also amounts to a
offence, one issue for this Inquiry is the extent to which police, in
practice, are charging persons with breach of a protection
offence under family violence legislation—as opposed to any potential
offence under state or territory criminal
law—such as assault.
The Commissions are interested in ascertaining the extent to which charges
for breach of protection orders are being laid as an alternative
to charges for
any applicable underlying offence, in circumstances where it would be possible
for the police to lay both charges.
If this is an issue in practice, the
Commissions are interested to hear about suggestions for reforms. Is this an
area appropriately
targeted by non-legal measures such as police training,
police codes of practice, and prosecutorial guidelines, or is there also
for legislative redress?
Proper data capture is essential to the formulation and development of
policy. This complements the key strategy of building the evidence
recommended in
Time for Action
. The Commissions consider that it would be
beneficial for state and territory courts to capture separately statistical data
criminal matters lodged or criminal offences proven in their jurisdictions
that arise in a family-violence related context.
In practice, where breach of a protection order also amounts to
another criminal offence to what extent are police in each state and
charging persons with breach of a protection order, as opposed to any applicable
offence under state or territory criminal
Question 6–18
there is a practice of police preferring to lay charges for breach of a
protection order, as opposed to any applicable underlying
criminal offence, how
can this practice best be addressed to ensure victims’ experiences of
family violence are not underrated?
Proposal 6–16
State and territory courts, in recording and
maintaining statistics about criminal matters lodged or criminal offences proven
criminal matters or offences that occur in a family-violence related
and sentencing for breach of protection orders
The maximum penalties for breach of a protection order vary significantly
across state and territory jurisdictions. Under the Model
Domestic Violence
Laws, breach of a protection order was made a summary offence which attracted a
maximum penalty of:
$24,000 or imprisonment for one year for a first offence; and
imprisonment for two years for a second
the maximum penalty for breach of protection orders, a key issue is how such
breaches are treated in sentencing. For example,
the WA review of family
violence legislation noted a concern that breaches of protection orders are
being treated leniently.
noted that despite legislative amendments to increase penalties for breaches, in
some cases actual penalties imposed are low and
do not reflect the gravity of
the breach and its consequences.
The NSW family violence legislation provides that a person who breaches a
protection order must be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
constituting the offence was an act of violence against a person, unless the
court orders otherwise. Where the court determines
not to impose a sentence of
imprisonment it must give its reasons for doing
The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder views about
the lack of consistency of maximum penalties for breach of
protection orders across the jurisdictions is problematic in practice;
it is desirable that there be consistent maximum penalties across
the jurisdictions for breach of protection orders, and if so, what
the maximum
penalty should be;
in practice, there are concerns about the sentences that courts
impose on offenders for breaching protection orders—in terms
of both the
level of penalty and the type of sanction imposed; and
it is desirable for jurisdictions to adopt provisions which direct
courts to adopt a particular approach on the sentencing for breach
protection order—for example such as the provision in NSW—which
requires a court to sentence offenders to imprisonment
for breach of protection
orders involving acts of violence.
The Commissions are also
interested in hearing stakeholder views about what type of non-financial
sanctions are appropriate to impose
on offenders for breach of protection orders
where the breach does not involve violence or involves comparatively low levels
of violence.
The Commissions have heard that a typical non-violent breach may
involve a husband—prohibited by a protection order from going
metres of the victim’s residence—turning up, drunk, on the doorstep,
asking to see his child. Would it be
appropriate in such circumstances, for
example, to impose a bond which mandated an intervention program such as an
alcohol program?
Should there be consistency of maximum penalties for breach of
protection orders across the jurisdictions? If so, why, and what should
maximum penalty be?
Question 6–20
In practice, what issues or
concerns arise about the sentences actually imposed on offenders for breach of
protection orders?
Question 6–21
Should state and territory
family violence legislation contain provisions which direct courts to adopt a
particular approach on sentencing
for breach of a protection order—for
example, a provision such as that in
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
(NSW), which requires courts to sentence
offenders to imprisonment for breach of protection orders involving violence,
unless they
otherwise order and give their reasons for doing so?
What types of non-financial sanctions are appropriate to be
imposed for breach of protection orders where the breach does not involve
violence or involves comparatively low levels of
Restraining Orders Act 1997
Domestic Violence
Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence Laws
For example,
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
For example,
and Family Violence Act 2007
s 21(1)(b).
Rosemary Hunter,
Domestic Violence Law Reform and Women’s Experience in Court
(2008), 81.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Domestic Violence
, ALRC 30 (1986), [100],
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 17
October 2007, 4846 (S Stirling—Attorney-General),
Magistrates’ Court of
Information for Application for an Intervention Order
<www.magistratescourt.vic.gov.au> at 2 February
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), Rec 33.
Western Australia
Department of the Attorney General,
A Review of
Division 3A of the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
H Douglas, ‘The
Criminal Law’s Response to Domestic Violence: What’s Going
[2008] SydLawRw 22
Sydney Law Review
, 454 (citation
Western Australia Department
of the Attorney General,
A Review of Part 2 Division 3A of the Restraining
Orders Act 1997
(2008), Rec 4.
The Commissions further discuss
sentencing factors in Ch 7.
Domestic Violence Legislation Working Group,
Model Domestic Violence
(1999), s 64.
Australia Department of the Attorney General,
A Review of Part 2 Division 3A
of the Restraining Orders Act 1997
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
7. Recognising Family Violence in
Criminal Law
Introduction
Family violence as an offence
Aggravated offences occurring in a family violence context
Course of conduct
Family violence as an aggravating factor?
Sentencing guidance
Family violence as a defence
7. Recognising Family Violence in
Criminal Law
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 7 considers whether
there should be an expanded role for the criminal law in recognising family
violence as an offence, in
sentencing, or as a defence to homicide.
[back to top]
violence as an offence
Criminal law deals best with incident-focused behaviour rather than patterns
of controlling non-physical behaviour. The relative absence
of a concept of
‘family violence’ in criminal law means that the criminal
law—unlike the civil law—typically
responds only to parts of the
overall pattern of family violence. This may limit the role the criminal law can
play in addressing
family violence, and may distort the handling of family
violence within the criminal system.
Commentators have argued that the limited focus of the criminal law means
that it fails to recognise in family violence cases both
‘the patterns of
power and control’ and the ‘full measure of injury that these
patterns inflict’.
number of consequences. In particular, it means that the criminal law does not
adequately punish the harm done. This may
be attributed to a number of reasons,
including the fact that family violence may occur over a long period of time; is
under-reported and under-enforced, and may occur in non-physical
forms. As a result, it may be difficult to prove each particular
incident of
family violence. This effect flows on to other legal frameworks that depend on
the criminal law, such as victims’
compensation, with the effect that
family violence victims are also typically under-compensated.
The Commissions acknowledge that the creation of an umbrella offence of
‘family violence’ may be fraught with difficulties—not
that associated with conceptualising the exact parameters of the offence and, in
particular, whether such offence should be
framed to include conduct of a
non-physical nature that is captured by the definition of ‘family
violence’ in family
violence laws—such as emotional and economic
The Commissions are, however, interested in stakeholder views about whether
it is necessary and feasible to create an umbrella offence
of family violence
and how such an offence could be framed. For example, would it be feasible to
create a two-tiered offence which
captures both coercive conduct and physical
violence in a family violence context?
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, there may be alternative ways for
the criminal law to deal better with cases of family
violence, short of creating
an offence of family violence but nonetheless responding to the seriousness of
the conduct. These include
options exercisable at the point of charging a person
for an offence, as well options which emphasise family violence on sentencing.
These options are discussed below.
Is it necessary or feasible for state and territory criminal laws
to introduce a specific offence of committing family violence? If
so, how should
such an offence be conceptualised? For example, would it be feasible to create a
two-tiered offence which captures
both coercive conduct and physical violence in
a family violence context?
[back to top]
offences occurring in a family violence context
An alternative to formulating an umbrella offence of family violence is to
create aggravated offences that occur in a family violence
context. This is the
case in some jurisdictions. For example, South Australia’s criminal
legislation provides that it is an
aggravated offence if the offender committed
the offence knowing that the victim was:
a spouse, former spouse, domestic partner or former domestic partner
of the offender; or
a child in the custody of, or who normally resides with: the
offender, a spouse, former spouse, domestic partner or former domestic
of the offender.
the Commissions’ preliminary view, the creation of aggravated offences
within a family violence context is a more feasible
and practical option for the
criminal law to recognise family violence than the creation of an umbrella
offence of family violence—although
it would not preclude the creation of
such an offence.
However, the Commissions have some concerns about the approach taken in South
Australia and Western Australia to offences of a violent
nature committed
against certain family members. The creation of a two-tiered maximum penalty
scheme—depending solely on whether
the victim is a family member of the
offender—signals that victims of family violence suffer inherently more
than victims of
stranger violence. It is not without controversy to suggest that
an attack by an intimate partner is more deserving of censure than
an attack by
a stranger.
If aggravated offences in a family violence context are to be created, the
Commissions are of the preliminary view that, in order
to make the offence
aggravated, there needs to be more than the mere fact that an alleged offender
was in a particular family relationship
with the victim. One option for the
creation of an aggravated offence carrying a higher maximum penalty is to
require not only the
fact of a particular family relationship between offender
and victim, but also evidence that the offence was committed as part of
pattern of controlling, coercive or dominating behaviour. Evidence of the latter
provides justification for treating an offence
as aggravating due, in part, to
the inability of a victim to extract herself or himself from future
An alternative approach would be to create separate offences—which may
not necessarily carry higher penalties—but which
emphasise the fact that
an offence—such as assault or sexual assault—was committed by one
family member against another
family member. Creating separate offences could
arguably serve as an educative measure in increasing the visibility and censure
crimes committed in a family context. However, the creation of additional
offences—especially if they do not attract higher
maximum penalties than
their existing counterparts—may also unnecessarily clutter state and
territory criminal statutory schemes.
The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder views in relation to
these two alternative options for reform. In relation to
each option, the
Commissions are also interested in hearing views about the types of family
relationships that should be included.
Which, if either, of the following options for reform should be
(a) state and territory criminal legislation should provide that an
offence is aggravated—and therefore a higher maximum penalty
applies—if an offender is in a family relationship with the victim and the
offence committed formed part of a pattern of controlling,
coercive or
dominating behaviour; or
(b) state and territory criminal legislation should
be amended to include specific offences—such as assault and sexual
assault—which
are committed by an offender who is in a family relationship
with the victim, but which do not attract a higher maximum
Question 7–3
What kind of family relationships should be
included for the purposes of the offences referred to in Question
Question 7–4
Should federal criminal legislation be
amended to include specific offences committed by an offender who is in a family
relationship
with the victim? If so, which offences should be included and
should they carry a higher maximum
[back to top]
Most state and territory sentencing legislation does not expressly refer to a
course of conduct as an express sentencing factor. One
exception is the
sentencing legislation of the ACT, which provides that a court sentencing an
offender must take into account, where
relevant and known ‘if the offence
forms part of a course of conduct consisting of a series of criminal acts of the
a similar character—the course of
There is an issue about whether a court, in sentencing, can take into account
conduct in respect of which an offender has not been
charged. The ACT provision
referred to above is expressed in the same terms as the
Crimes Act 1914
s 16A(2)(c).
relevant because there has been case law in respect of the latter which reveals
judicial disagreement about the meaning and
s 16A(2)(c).
Weininger v The Queen
Kirby J stated that the section did not allow
‘uncharged criminal acts’ to be taken into account in sentencing and
the view that the section was an attempt to express the totality
Callinan J, however,
expressed the view that the section allowed a court to consider relevant
albeit that it might involve criminal acts which in turn might not have resulted
in charged and established (by verdict or plea)
facts constituting other
Submissions and consultations in the course of the ALRC’s inquiry into
the sentencing of federal offenders expressed confusion
operation of
s 16A(2)(c)
, and the ALRC recommended that the section be
redrafted to provide greater
A provision allowing a course of conduct to be taken into account is also
relevant where representative charges are used—that
is, where a court
sentences an offender for a limited or representative number of offences on the
basis that those offences are part
of a wider course of conduct. Representative
charges are used in relation to sexual assault cases.
The Commissions consider that, to the maximum extent possible in criminal
matters involving a course of conduct of family violence,
police and prosecutors
should be encouraged to pursue the option of using representative charges as a
way of presenting a course
of conduct to the court. The court should also, at
the least, consider:
whether the offence forms part of a series of proved or admitted
criminal offences of the same or similar character; and
where an offender has pleaded guilty to charges and has acknowledged
that they are representative of criminality comprising uncharged
conduct as well
as the charged offences—the course of conduct comprising that criminality.
The Commissions consider that there is also merit in the specific
context of sentencing for family-violence related offences for a
consider evidence that an offender engaged in a pattern of family violence
against a victim—even if this includes
violence of a non-physical nature
against the victim—such as emotional or economic abuse, which is
typically, not of itself,
criminal. Such evidence should be able to be taken
into account for the purpose of rejecting any claim to mitigation. The
Commissions
are interested in hearing stakeholder views on this.
Further, the Commissions are interested in hearing whether:
representative charges in family-violence related offences are
under-utilised as a matter of practice;
the extent to which guilty pleas entered to a family-violence
related charge are accompanied by an acknowledgement that they are
representative of criminality comprising uncharged conduct as well as the
charged conduct;
courts are sentencing family-violence related offences taking course
of conduct issues into account, and if so, the parameters of
any course of
conduct considered by the court; and
whether the sentencing legislation of states and territories needs
to be amended to allow expressly for courses of conduct to be
taken into account
in sentencing. Such an amendment may have repercussions beyond the sentencing of
offenders for family-violence
related incidents.
The answers to
several of the questions posed above will be affected by the exercise of
prosecutorial decisions. In difficult to prove
cases prosecutors may be tempted
to accept a plea to a single incident assault. Therefore, the Commissions
consider that appropriate
prosecutorial guidelines will need to be developed, in
addition to training and education in order to encourage more frequent and
appropriate use of representative charges in family violence prosecutions.
In practice, are representative charges in family-violence related
offences under-utilised? If so, why, and how can this best be
Question 7–6
In practice, are courts imposing
sentences for family-violence related offences taking into account, where
applicable, the fact that
the offence formed part of a course of conduct of
family violence? If so, are courts taking into account (a) uncharged criminal
or (b) non-criminal family violence? Should they do so?
In practice, to what extent are guilty pleas entered to a
family-violence related charge accompanied by an acknowledgement that they
representative of criminality, comprising uncharged conduct as well as charged
Commonwealth, state and territory governments, and Commonwealth,
state and territory directors of public prosecution respectively,
should ensure
that police and prosecutors are encouraged by appropriate prosecutorial
guidelines, and training and education programs,
to use representative charges
to the maximum extent possible in family-violence related criminal matters where
the charged conduct
forms part of a course of conduct.
Should the sentencing legislation of states and territories be
amended to allow expressly for a course of conduct to be taken into
sentencing, to the extent that it does not already do
violence as an aggravating factor?
Aggravating factors increase the culpability of an offender and act to
increase the penalty to be imposed on sentencing—but
never beyond the
maximum penalty for an offence. Mitigating factors decrease the culpability of
an offender and act to decrease the
extent to which the offender should be
punished. A more limited way of recognising family violence in sentencing is
either to treat
the fact that a crime was committed in the context of a family
relationship as an aggravating factor in sentencing, or prevent it
considered a mitigating factor in sentencing.
Some overseas jurisdictions treat the fact that the crime occurred in the
context of a family relationship as an aggravating factor
in sentencing. In
Canada, the
Criminal Code
was amended in 1996 to provide that it is an
aggravating factor if there is evidence that the offender, in committing the
abused the offender’s spouse or common-law
On 3 April 2006, the
Parliament of Iceland passed an amendment to art 70 of the General Penal
Code with regard to family violence,
as follows:
In the event that an infraction was directed against a man, woman or child
closely related to the perpetrator and their family connection
is believed to
have aggravated the violence of the act, this should generally be taken into
account to increase the severity of the
punishment.
The Commissions consider that, in some cases, it will be appropriate for a
court to consider that the fact that an offender was in
a relationship with, or
the parent of the victim, as an aggravating factor in sentencing. However, the
Commissions have some preliminary
concerns about introducing a legislative
requirement that would take away a judicial officer’s discretion in this
regard. For
example, if courts were always mandated to treat as aggravating the
fact that an offence was committed in the context of a family
relationship, this
would conceivably apply in circumstances where it may not always be just and
appropriate, such as in the case
children who commit acts of violence against their parents, siblings
or other family members;
mothers suffering post-natal depression who commit acts of violence
against their children; or
any person with a mental illness who commits an act of violence
against a family member.
The Commissions are therefore interested in
hearing stakeholder views on the appropriateness or otherwise of treating as
aggravating
the fact that an offence was committed in the context of a family
relationship. For example, would it be appropriate to adapt the
approach taken
in Iceland, which makes a specific link between a family relationship and an
escalation of violence? If such an approach
were considered appropriate, the
Commissions are also interested in hearing how ‘family relationship’
should be construed
for such purposes and, in particular, whether the definition
of ‘family’ in family violence legislation should be adopted.
The Commissions are of the preliminary view that it would, however, be
appropriate for sentencing legislation to specify expressly
that the fact that
an offence has been committed in the context of a family or domestic
relationship should not be treated as a mitigating
factor. The Commissions heard
in consultation that courts have treated a family relationship as a mitigating
factor on sentencing
in circumstances where domestic partners or spouses have
reconciled.
To treat such a factor
as mitigating can be seen to trivialise violence committed in a domestic
Should the fact that an offence was committed in the context of a
family relationship be an aggravating factor in sentencing? If so,
family relationships should this apply? Is making a specific link between a
family relationship and the escalation of violence
an appropriate
Proposal 7–2
State and territory sentencing legislation should
provide that the fact that an offence was committed in the context of a family
relationship
should not be considered a mitigating factor in sentencing.
Another option for reform is the use of specific guidance on sentencing in
the context of family violence. Guidance on sentencing
is provided in a number
of ways in Australian states and territories. For example, the Judicial
Commission of NSW and the Judicial
College of Victoria each produce sentencing
bench books. The Commissions support the production of a model bench book, in
consultation
with jurisdictions, and as part of a national professional
development program for judicial officers on family violence. A model
could play a significant role in guiding judicial officers in sentencing in
family violence matters, by drawing attention
to the particular features and
dynamics of family violence of which judicial officers should be aware in
sentencing offenders, as
well as promoting national and intra-state
consistency.
The Australian Government—in conjunction with state and
territory governments, the National Judicial College of Australia, the
Commission of NSW, and the Judicial College of Victoria—should develop,
and maintain the currency of, a model bench
book on family violence, which
incorporates a section on sentencing in family violence matters.
[back to top]
Family violence as a
This section considers the extent to which the criminal law should recognise
family violence as a concept relevant to a defence for
homicide, in
circumstances where a victim of family violence kills the family member who was
violent towards him or her. This raises
the related issue of whether current
defences to homicide for victims in violent family relationships are
Many Australian jurisdictions have given substantial consideration to
recognising family violence in the context of defences to homicide.
A number of
important statutory reforms have resulted from this, with a view to better
accommodating the experiences of family violence
victims who kill. These reforms
reforms to the defence of self-defence—including removal of
the requirement for the threat to be imminent (Western Australia);
reforms to the defence of provocation—including the removal
for the requirement for the defendant to have ‘acted on the
before there was a time for his passion to cool’ (Northern Territory), and
removal of the requirement for the provocative
conduct of the deceased to have
occurred immediately prior to the act or omission causing death (for example,
abolition of the defence of provocation in part because of its
unsuitability for female victims of family violence (Victoria, Western
Australia, Tasmania);
expanding self-defence to take family violence into account,
including express provision for the leading of evidence about family
(Victoria); and
creating a new defence of family violence
(Queensland).
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on
whether current defences to homicide for victims in violent family relationships
are adequate in each Australian state and territory jurisdiction.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view it is essential for the criminal
law to recognise family violence as relevant to a defence
to homicide, and that
provisions—along the lines of
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic)—should allow defendants to lead evidence of family violence in the
context of a defence to homicide.
The Commissions support the development of a consistent or harmonious
approach by the states and territories to the recognition of
family violence as
a defence to homicide but do not propose a prescriptive approach as to how each
recognition of family violence as a defence to
homicide. State and territory criminal legislation should provide defences to
that accommodate the experiences of family violence victims who kill,
recognising the dynamics and features of family violence. This
can be achieved
by introducing a separate defence of family violence—the Queensland
model—or by expanding self-defence
to take family violence into account
expressly, or by ensuring that any existing defences of provocation and
self-defence are otherwise
reformed in a way which accommodate the experiences
of family violence victims who kill. The Commissions are interested in
stakeholder
views on how the criminal law can best recognise family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide, and whether there are any
problems with
current models.
The Commissions note, for example, that the recommendations of the NSWLRC in
1997 concerning provocation, which would have assisted
victims of family
violence from availing themselves of this defence, have not been implemented.
This is of some concern given that
NSW, unlike Victoria, does not give explicit
recognition to family violence in the context of self-defence; nor does it have
defence of family violence. These matters are relevant factors to be
considered in ensuring that defences to homicide in NSW accommodate
experiences of family violence victims who kill.
Are current defences to homicide for victims in violent family
relationships adequate in each Australian state and
Proposal 7–4
State and territory criminal legislation should
provide defences to homicide which accommodate the experiences of family
victims who kill, recognising the dynamics and features of family
Proposal 7–5
State and territory criminal legislation should
expressly allow defendants to lead evidence about family violence in the context
a defence to homicide.
Section 9AH
Crimes Act 1958
is an instructive model in this regard.
How can the criminal law best recognise family violence as
relevant to a defence to homicide? For example, should family violence
expressly accommodated within an expanded concept of self-defence or should
violence? What problems or
issues arise from current models which recognise family violence as relevant to
a defence to homicide?
D Tuerkheimer, ‘Recognizing and
Remedying the Harm to Battering: A Call to Criminalize Domestic Violence’
Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
s 5AA(1)(g).
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1914
sets out factors a court must take into
account in the sentencing of federal
Weininger v The Queen
[2003] HCA 14
(2003) 212 CLR 629
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
[6.61], [6.65]–[6.66],
Criminal Code
RSC c C–46 (Canada) s 718.2(a)(ii). It is also an
aggravating factor if the person abused a position of trust or authority in
relation to the victim: s 718.2(a)(iii).
Australian Domestic & Family
Violence Clearinghouse,
Consultation
, Sydney, 27 January 2010.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
8. Family Violence Legislation and
Parenting Orders
Introduction
Awareness of pre-existing orders
Parenting proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Protection order proceedings under family violence laws
Consideration of pre-existing orders
Parenting proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Consent orders under the
Family Law Act
Protection order proceedings under family violence laws
Resolving inconsistencies between existing orders
Obligations on federal family courts to specify and explain any inconsistency
Powers of state and territory courts to resolve inconsistency
Western Australia
Relevant considerations in modifying or revoking a parenting order
A power to make parenting orders?
Interim family violence protection orders
Cooperative responses
A gap in protection?
Protection orders subject to parenting orders
No existing protection order
No existing parenting order
8. Family Violence Legislation and
Parenting Orders
[back to top]
Introduction
The Terms of Reference direct
the Commissions to consider the interaction in practice of state and territory
family violence laws
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). Under
Family Law Act
, federal family courts are empowered to
make orders dealing with the treatment of children in
Family Law Act
proceedings, including parenting orders. A key area where this interaction
occurs is in the making of parenting orders that include
conditions for contact
(broadly referred to in this chapter as parenting orders). The
sets out detailed considerations to which a family court must have
regard in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order
any family violence involving the child or a member of the
child’s family;
any family violence order that applies to the child or a member of
the child’s family, provided the order is a final order
or its making was
principal legislative mechanism for dealing with inconsistent family violence
orders and certain orders, including parenting orders,
made under the
is set out in
div 11 of the Act. A substantially
identical scheme is set out in pt 5 div 10 of the
Family Court Act
The purpose of
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
(a) to resolve inconsistencies between:
(i) family violence orders; and
(ii) certain orders, injunctions and arrangements made under this Act that
provide for a child to spend time with a person or require
or authorise a person
to spend time with a child; and
(aa) to ensure that orders, injunctions and arrangements of the kind referred to
in subparagraph (a)(ii) do not expose people to
family violence; and
(b) to achieve the objects and principles in section 60B.
[back to top]
Awareness of
pre-existing orders
Parenting proceedings
Family Law Act
‘Friendly parent’
Concerns have been raised that certain provisions of the
may impede the extent to which family courts are informed about any
history or risk of family violence. In particular, concerns have
been raised
s 60CC(3)(c)
—which requires the court to consider the
willingness and ability of each of the child’s parents to facilitate and
a close and continuing relationship between the child and the other
parent, the ‘friendly parent’ provision; and
s 117AB—which requires a court to make costs orders
against a party who knowingly makes false allegations or statements in
proceedings.
Extensive reforms to these provisions have
been recommended in the Chisholm Review and the Family Law Council advice. The
Commissions
endorse the recommendations for reform of the ‘friendly
parent’ provision and costs orders requirement set out in these
However, in the event that the recommendations of the Chisholm Review and the
Family Law Council are not adopted, then consideration
should be given to other
practices that may ensure that parents who have sought protection orders are not
disadvantaged in family
law proceedings. For example, state and territory child
protection laws should be amended to impose a requirement on child protection
agencies that advise parents to seek a child protection order to provide written
advice to this effect. This will help to ensure
that family courts do not
construe the parent’s action as ‘unfriendly’ for the purposes
s 60CC(3)(c).
Proposal 8–1
State and territory child protection laws should be
amended to require a child protection agency that advises a parent to seek a
order under state or territory family violence legislation for the
purpose of protecting the child to provide written advice to this
ensure that a federal family court does not construe the parent’s action
as a failure to ‘facilitate, and encourage,
a close and continuing
relationship between the child and the other parent’ pursuant to
s 60CC(3)(c)
Family Law Act 1975
Form 4—Notice of Child Abuse or Family
Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence
filed by parties raising allegations of family violence, or a risk of family
violence, in proceedings in the family courts.
The Family Law Council
recommended that the federal family courts consider revising Form 4,
including making it more user-friendly.
In comparison, the Chisholm Review
recommended that the form should be replaced by a completely new approach to
raising allegations
of family violence in federal family courts—namely, a
targeted identification and risk assessment process.
The Commissions consider that there is scope for improving Form 4, which
does not include a designated space for parties to note existing
orders. In the event that Form 4 is retained by the federal family courts,
the form should be amended in this way. If
retained as a component of
proceedings in federal family courts, Form 4—
Notice of Child Abuse
or Family Violence
—should be amended to include a designated space for
parties to note information about current protection orders obtained under
and territory family violence legislation or applications for such orders.
Initiating Application (Family
The Commissions are also concerned about the lack of prominence given to
protection orders, and pending proceedings for protection
orders, in the
Initiating Application in the family courts. This form uses the one question to
deal with court orders in relation
to family law, child support, family violence
or child welfare. In comparison, some state and territory protection order
application
forms separately ask for details about, for example,
children’s court orders, intra- and inter-state protection orders, and
family court orders. In the Commissions’ view, it would be beneficial for
the matters currently listed in Part F of the Initiating
Application to be
separated out into discrete questions. Such an approach may highlight more
clearly to parties the need to include
information about relevant protection
Proposal 8–2
Application forms for initiating proceedings in the
federal family courts and the Family Court of Western Australia should clearly
seek information about existing protection orders obtained under state and
territory family violence legislation or pending proceedings
Protection order
proceedings under family violence laws
Making state and territory courts aware of
family law orders
With the exception of the ACT, the family violence legislation in each of the
states and territories includes provisions to ensure
that courts gain access to
information about parenting orders. This information is central to ensuring that
proceedings for protection
orders are conducted on an informed basis.
The most common approach is to impose a legally enforceable obligation on
parties to inform the court about pre-existing orders. However,
this mechanism
may not always be effective—for example, where parties are unrepresented,
or where orders have been made
. Particular difficulties may also
arise where applicants are from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds or other vulnerable
groups, such as persons with a disability.
In comparison, the Victorian family violence legislation places an obligation
on a court that decides to make a protection order to
enquire as to whether a
parenting order or a child protection order is in force in relation to any child
of the protected person.
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on extending the
Victorian model to other states and territories. This requirement
could either
replace, or operate in addition to, any obligation on parties to inform the
court about protection orders of which they
Proposal 8–3
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide mechanisms for courts exercising jurisdiction under such
legislation
to be informed about existing parenting orders or pending
proceedings for such orders. This could be achieved by:
(a) imposing a legally enforceable obligation on parties to proceedings for a
protection order to inform the court about any such
parenting orders or
proceedings;
(b) requiring courts making protection orders to inquire as to any such
parenting orders or proceedings; or
(c) both of the above.
Police-issued protection orders
A separate issue arises in relation to police-issued protection orders. Under
the Northern Territory family violence legislation,
a police officer who is
considering making a police ‘domestic violence order’ must make
‘reasonable enquiries’
relevant parenting orders in force, or pending applications for such
If asked by an officer, a
person must inform the officer about any such parenting orders or
applications.
Elsewhere the Commissions propose that police-issued protection orders should
only apply for a limited period of
If such orders operate for a
short length of time the need for police who issue them to ascertain whether any
parenting orders are
in existence, or whether proceedings for such orders are
pending, is not as great. However, if state and territory governments retain
police-issued protection orders that operate for significantly longer time
periods, then these should be accompanied by safeguards
for obtaining
information about parenting orders.
In practice, what steps does a police officer who issues a
protection order have to take in order to make ‘reasonable
order’, pursuant to the
Domestic and Family Violence Act 2007
Should this requirement apply to police who issue protection orders in other
states and territories?
Application forms
In the Commissions’ view, application forms for protection orders
should clearly and specifically ask about the existence of
family court orders
or pending proceedings for such orders. For example, the Queensland
Protection Order Application
asks whether a court has made any other
orders involving the victim and the person who has allegedly used violence, or
if there are
other proceedings that are yet to be decided in another court
involving these people. Individual check boxes are then set out for
current and
non-current: children’s court orders; Queensland ‘domestic
violence’ orders; interstate or New Zealand
domestic violence orders; and
family court orders.
Proposal 8–4
Application forms for protection orders in all
states and territories, including applications for variation of protection
should clearly seek information about existing parenting orders or
pending proceedings for such orders.
[back to top]
Consideration of
pre-existing orders
Parenting proceedings
Family Law Act
An ongoing challenge in the interaction between family violence protection
orders and conditions for contact under parenting orders
is the evidentiary
weight to which protection orders—as distinct from family violence
—should be accorded in parenting proceedings. The
currently involves a compromise position, whereby all protection orders
must be notified to family courts, but only final and contested
independently taken into account in determining what parenting orders would be
in a child’s best interest. In the
Commissions’ preliminary view,
the distinction between considering final and contested protection orders on the
one hand, and
interim and uncontested orders on the other, should be
The Commissions have considered two options for implementing such a reform.
First, that the requirement to consider protection orders
should be removed
altogether and, instead, reliance placed on a general requirement to consider
the need to protect the child from
family violence or, as recommended in the
Chisholm Review, a child’s safety and wellbeing. A potential downside of
this option,
however, may be to decrease the visibility of family violence as a
factor in making parenting orders.
An alternative approach would be to include a requirement to consider
‘any family violence, including as indicated by the existence
protection order’, which removes the distinction in law between final and
contested orders, and interim and consent
orders. This approach is intended to
highlight the probative value of the full range of protection orders in making
parenting orders.
Proposal 8–5
The ‘additional consideration’ in
s 60CC(3)(k)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which directs a court
to consider only final or contested protection orders when determining the best
interests of a child
in making a parenting order, should be:
(a) repealed, and reliance placed instead on the general criterion of family
violence contained in
s 60CC(3)(j)
(b) amended to provide that any family violence, including evidence of such
violence given in any protection order proceeding—including
proceedings in
which final or interim protection orders are made either by consent or after a
contested hearing—is an additional
consideration when determining the best
interests of a child.
Consent orders under
Family Law Act
Parenting orders that are inconsistent with protection orders can be made by
family courts on the basis of the consent of the parties.
Community lawyers and
family violence workers have reported instances where women felt pressured into
agreeing to consent-based parenting
orders that were inconsistent with
protection orders and that, as a result, exposed them to the risk of
Rule 10.15A
Family Law Rules
imposes requirements on
parties seeking to make consent orders in the Family Court where there are
allegations of child abuse. Pursuant
to the rule, in any application for consent
orders a party, or the party’s lawyer, must advise the court whether there
been any allegation of child abuse, or risk of abuse, that has been raised
in the proceedings. The Chisholm Review has suggested
that consideration should
be given to extending r 10.15A to the context of family violence
allegations. It further suggested that
the rule be adopted in the Federal
Magistrates Court.
Rule 10.15A
does not apply where parties apply for consent orders
without having commenced parenting proceedings in the Family Court. The Family
Court has published an
Application for Consent Orders Kit
, which notes
that, if the proposed consent orders are inconsistent with an existing
protection order, the Family Court will not make
the orders unless parenting
proceedings are instituted. The Kit also advises parties to seek legal advice in
this situation.
Issues also arise in relation to interim parenting proceedings because there
is insufficient opportunity for the court to properly
consider issues of family
violence. The Commissions are interested in hearing whether any additional
measures are necessary to ensure
that allegations of family violence are given
adequate consideration in the context of interim parenting proceedings.
Proposal 8–6
Rule 10.15A
Family Law Rules
(Cth) should apply to allegations of family violence in addition to
allegations of child abuse. A substantially equivalent rule should
proceedings in the Federal Magistrates Court.
How often do federal family courts make consent orders that are
inconsistent with current protection orders without requiring parties
institute parenting proceedings? Are additional measures needed to prevent
this—for example, by including a requirement
Family Law Rules
(Cth) for parenting proceedings to be initiated where parties propose
consent orders that are inconsistent with current protection
Question 8–3
Are additional measures necessary to ensure
that allegations of family violence in federal family courts are given adequate
consideration
in interim parenting proceedings? If so, what measures would be
beneficial?
Protection order
proceedings under family violence laws
The 1998 Kearney McKenzie Report considered the legislation passed by states
and territories to make it possible for judicial officers
to consider any
relevant parenting orders in proceedings for a protection order. Most
submissions to that review agreed that imposing
a clear duty on parties to
inform the court of a parenting order was useful. However, some concerns were
raised that requiring the
magistrate to consider parenting orders could impact
adversely on the protective role of proceedings under family violence
legislation.
For example, protection orders may be framed in order to be
consistent with parenting orders but may provide a lower standard of
protection,
or may not be made at all because they would be inconsistent with existing
parenting orders. The Commissions are interested
in stakeholder views on whether
this issue is arising in practice.
The Commissions consider that courts should not significantly lower the
standard of protection afforded by a protection order for
the purpose of
facilitating consistency with a parenting order. This could be set out in
legislation. A similar outcome could be
achieved by including such a requirement
in bench books.
Proposal 8–7
State and territory courts hearing protection order
proceedings should not significantly lower the standard of protection afforded
by a protection order for the purpose of facilitating consistency with a current
parenting order. This could be achieved by:
(a) a prohibition to this effect in state and territory family violence
legislation; or
(b) guidance in relevant state and territory bench books.
[back to top]
inconsistencies between existing orders
Obligations on federal family courts to
specify and explain any inconsistency
Section 68P
Family Law Act
applies if a parenting order
requires or authorises a person to spend time with a child, and the order is
inconsistent with an existing
family violence order. The court must specify in
the order that it is inconsistent with an existing family violence order; and
to the parties the court’s reasons for making an inconsistent
order. The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views about
the operation,
in practice, of this requirement
In particular, is it overly burdensome
on family courts or overly complex for persons affected by inconsistent
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which
requires a family court to specify any inconsistency between a family law order
and a family violence protection order,
working in practice? Are any reforms
necessary to improve the section’s
Section 68Q
provides that where a parenting order is inconsistent with a
family violence order, the family violence order is invalid. Parties
to the court for a declaration of inconsistency. These declarations are a
potentially valuable mechanism for ensuring that
persons affected by the orders,
and police charged with enforcing them, are confident about which order
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which
permits certain persons to apply for a declaration of inconsistency between a
family law order and a family violence
protection order, working in practice?
How frequently is this provision
Powers of state and territory courts to
resolve inconsistency
Family Law Act
, state and territory courts
making or varying protection orders may revive, vary, discharge or suspend a
parenting order made under
Family Law Act
. The Commissions have heard
extensive anecdotal evidence about the reluctance of state and territory courts
to use this power. The
Commissions are seeking further views of stakeholders on
whether state and territory courts remain hesitant to use the
and, if so, what factors are contributing to this reluctance.
Do state and territory courts exercise their power under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to revive, vary, discharge or
suspend a parenting order to give effect to a family violence protection
The family violence legislation in Victoria and South Australia makes express
reference to the power of a magistrate to vary or suspend
a parenting order when
making or varying a protection order.
Section 16(1)
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(SA) states that:
An intervention order is invalid to the extent of any inconsistency with a
Family Law Act
order of a kind referred to in
section 68R
Family Law Act 1975
of the Commonwealth (but the Court may resolve the
inconsistency by exercising its power to revive, vary, discharge or suspend the
Family Law Act
order under that section).
This provision serves to bring the Commonwealth law to the attention of
judicial officers but does not change the effect of that law.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) goes further, by requiring
The court must, to the extent of its powers under
section 68R
, revive, vary, discharge or suspend the
Family Law Act
to the extent that it is inconsistent with the family violence intervention
At this stage, the Commissions are of the view that the approach adopted in
the South Australian legislation is sufficient, but are
interested in
stakeholder views on whether courts should be
to make use of the
full extent of their powers to revive, vary, discharge or suspend
Proposal 8–8
Family violence legislation should refer to the
powers under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to revive, vary,
discharge or suspend a parenting order to give effect to a family violence
protection order by:
(a) referring to the powers—the South Australian model; or
(b) requiring the court to revive, vary, discharge or suspend an inconsistent
parenting order to the extent that it is inconsistent
with a family violence
protection order—the Victorian model.
Without more, legislative amendment alone may be insufficient to achieve
significant change. In particular, the Commissions consider
that there is an
ongoing need to provide additional tools and resources to judicial officers and
others about the capacity to revive,
vary, discharge or suspend
The Commissions are interested in whether there is a need for any systematic
changes to enable div 11 to operate effectively. In particular,
would it be
desirable for matters involving inconsistent orders to be referred to a
specialist court? For example, the Family Violence
Court Division specialist
court pilot at Heidelberg and Ballarat Magistrates Court hears matters including
parenting and protection
orders. The use of specialist courts could overcome
some of the current concerns about the unwillingness of state and territory
officers to intervene in family law issues. However, potential
disadvantages may include delays, depending on the length of time
applicants must wait for proceedings to commence in a specialist court.
Specialist courts are discussed in Chapter 20.
Should proceedings for a protection order under family violence
legislation, where there is an inconsistent parenting order, be referred
specialist state and territory court?
In the Commissions’ view, support should also be provided to other
persons involved in seeking protection orders under state
and territory family
violence legislation—that is, victims of violence and legal practitioners.
As regards victims, a clear
option should be included in application forms for
protection orders allowing an applicant to request that the magistrates court
vary, suspend, or discharge a parenting order. The Commissions anticipate that
such a reform would be especially useful to a self-represented
party, who may
otherwise not be aware that such an option is available.
Proposal 8–9
Application forms for protection orders under state
and territory family violence legislation should include a clear option for an
applicant to request a variation, suspension, or discharge of a current
parenting order.
Legal practitioners may also be reluctant to advocate the use of
The Commissions have heard anecdotal evidence that legal practitioners may be
unwilling to invest time in seeking a variation of
parenting orders because of
the potential that the variation will be overridden in a federal family court.
Further, where a variation
is sought in proceedings for an interim protection
order, any variation will expire after 21 days.
Are legal practitioners reluctant to seek variation of parenting
orders in state and territory courts? If so, what factors contribute
reluctance?
Western Australia
The jurisdiction to revive, vary, discharge or suspend a parenting order in
Western Australia differs depending on whether the order
was made under the
Family Law Act
Family Court Act 1997
(WA). Jurisdiction in
relation to parenting orders made under the
Family Law Act
is limited by
(Cth), issued in accordance with
. The Proclamation provides that proceedings within the Perth
metropolitan area in relation to matters arising under
Family Law Act
may only be instituted in, or transferred to, the
Magistrates Court of Western Australia constituted by a Family Law Magistrate of
Western Australia (Magistrates Court of Western Australia).
The Principal Registrar of the Family Court of Western Australia has queried
the effect of this Proclamation on WA magistrates seeking
to adjust parenting
orders made under the
Family Law Act
. Principal Registrar Monaghan
advised that the Proclamation could be interpreted to support three potential
outcomes. First, it may
mean that all magistrates sitting in the Perth
metropolitan region retain the
power. Secondly, it may mean that
magistrates sitting in the Perth metropolitan region other than at the
Magistrates Court of Western
Australia, retain the
power only when
making an interim protection order. Thirdly, it may mean that magistrates
sitting in the Perth metropolitan region
other than at the Magistrates Court of
Western Australia having no
The consequences of this jurisdictional issue are exacerbated by s 65 of
Restraining Orders Act
, which specifies that a court which does not
have jurisdiction to adjust a parenting order must not make a protection order
conflicts with that parenting order.
Proclamation
may be discouraging WA magistrates from using their s 68R
power in protection order proceedings. In the Commissions view, the Proclamation
should be reviewed to clarify its intended application.
Proclamation 2006
(Cth) should be reviewed to clarify its intended
application to magistrates courts in Western Australia seeking to exercise their
powers under div 11 of the
Family Law Act 1975
considerations in modifying or revoking a parenting order
Section 60CG
Family Law Act
imposes an obligation on
family courts making parenting orders to achieve consistency with family
violence orders and avoid exposing
people to the risk of family violence. This
requirement is not, however, repeated in
, div 11 of the Act in relation
to state and territory courts reviving, varying, discharging or suspending
parenting orders.
The Kearney McKenzie Report expressed the view that this objective is
‘critical to achieving the purposes of Division 11’
recommended it be repeated in that division. The Family Law Council did not
agree, advising that this objective applies to courts
making parenting orders,
where the paramount consideration is the best interests of the child, but that
Division 11 deals with situations
in which contact orders are being considered
where family violence orders are in existence or are about to be made. The
Council was of the view that in this situation, while the court must
have regard to the best interests of the child, such interests
are not the
paramount consideration and must give way to the right of other family members
to be protected from threat of violence.
Instead, the Family Law Council recommended that the considerations to which
a court must have regard in varying a parenting order
should be amended to
include the need to protect all family members from family violence and the
threat of family violence and, subject
to that, to the child’s right to
interests of
Neither suggestion was taken up in the 2006 redraft of div 11. However,
a note to s 68R(5) was inserted cross-referring to the principles
in ss 60CB–60CG for determining a child’s best interests.
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on whether any further
reforms are desirable or necessary to the considerations
to which a court must
have regard in varying a parenting order? In particular, should the
be amended to direct state and territory courts varying parenting
orders to give priority to the protection of family members against
violence and
the threat of family violence over a child’s interest in having contact
with both parents?
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) be amended to direct
state and territory courts varying parenting orders to give priority to the
protection of family members
against violence and the threat of family violence
over a child’s interest in having contact with both
A power to make
parenting orders?
In 2006 the
Family Law Act
was amended to repeal the power of state
and territory judicial officers to
parenting orders, on the basis of
recommendations of the Kearney McKenzie Report and the Family Law Council.
Consequently, new parenting
orders can only be issued in state and territory
protection order proceedings with consent and on an interim basis. In this
some stakeholders have expressed the view that this power should be
reinstated, on the basis that it enables state and territory
courts to deal
comprehensively with protection order proceedings involving children. The
Commissions are interested in further stakeholder
views on this issue.
Family Law Act 1975
amended to empower state and territory courts to make parenting orders in those
circumstances in which they can revive,
vary, discharge or suspend such
Interim family
violence protection orders
Where a state or territory court making an
family violence
protection order revives, varies or suspends a parenting order,
Family Law Act
provides that the variation ceases to have effect when
the interim order ends or after 21 days, whichever is earlier. The Kearney
McKenzie Report recommended that this period be extended to 90 days on the
basis that 21 days is insufficient time in which to obtain
new orders from
a court exercising family law jurisdiction.
The Family Law Council did not agree with this recommendation, on the basis
that a 90 day period during which no contact would occur,
and which is not
subject to appeal or scrutiny by a court exercising family law jurisdiction,
could not be justified. The Council
further suggested that—in
circumstances where a magistrates court has varied or suspended a parenting
order when making an
interim protection order—a court would be unlikely to
find that a parenting order has been breached, where a parent withholds
beyond the 21 day period, while an application to vary or discharge the
parenting order is awaiting hearing.
A possible option for reform would be to set out in legislation the policy
position set out in the Family Law Council’s advice—that
is, that it
should be a defence to a breach of a parenting order where a parent withholds
or suspension of a parenting order
made by a state or territory court is awaiting hearing in a family court.
Do applicants for interim protection orders who seek variation of
a parenting order have practical difficulties in obtaining new orders
court exercising family law jurisdiction within 21 days? If so, what would
be a realistic time within which such orders could
be obtained?
Should there be a defence to a breach of a parenting order where
a parent withholds contact beyond 21 days due to family violence
while a variation or suspension of a parenting order made by a state or
territory court is awaiting hearing in a federal
family court or the Family
Court of Western Australia?
Cooperative
In Tasmania, a protocol has been negotiated between the police, the Tasmanian
Magistrates Court and the Tasmanian Registry of the
Family Court in response to
police concerns about victim safety where protection orders operate alongside
family court orders. Under
the protocol, if a family court contact order poses a
risk to the safety of a victim of family violence, the police prosecutor alerts
the magistrate of this concern. The magistrate can suspend the order for a
period of days and make the protection order. The Magistrates
Court file with
the grounds for suspension is transferred to the Family Court for review of the
suspension. A review of the
Violence Act 2004
(Tas) by Urbis recommended that the effectiveness of this
protocol be evaluated over
Proposal 8–11
The Tasmanian Government should undertake an
evaluation of the protocol negotiated between the Magistrates Court of Tasmania
Tasmanian Registry of the Family Court in relation to coexisting family
violence protection orders and parenting orders. On the basis
evaluation, other states and territories should consider whether adopting
cooperative models would be an effective strategy
to deal with coexisting
[back to top]
protection?
Protection orders
subject to parenting orders
The Family Law Council has noted that, as a matter of practice, state and
territory judicial officers often avoid inconsistency between
territory protection orders and parenting orders by making contact ordered under
Family Law Act
an exception to the prohibitions contained in the
protection order. This may expose women and their children to violence at the
of access or at access handover.
The Kearney McKenzie Report noted that the effect of this is that local
courts are handing over the responsibility for ensuring contact
does not expose
women and children to violence to the Family Court. They also noted, however,
that as any subsequent Family Court
family violence order that includes the exception, the protection offered by
11 does not apply, leaving a gap in protection.
In Tasmania, applications for protection orders provide for applicants to ask
the court to impose a condition prohibiting respondents
from approaching them.
Applicants can choose whether to include an exception ‘for the purpose of
named above as agreed or as ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction’. In Victoria, applicants can tick a box requesting
Family Law Act
order be revived, varied or suspended.
Proposal 8–12
Application forms for family violence protection
orders should include an option for applicants to indicate their preference that
there should be no exception in the protection order for contact required or
authorised by a parenting order.
Should contact required or authorised by a parenting order be
removed from the standard exceptions to prohibited conduct under state
territory protection orders?
No existing
protection order
Concerns have been raised about the potential for the existence of parenting
orders under the
Family Law Act
to limit an applicant’s capacity to
commence proceedings for a family violence protection order in a state or
territory court.
For example, in their study on family violence and child
participant who applied for a protection order for herself and her children:
The Local Court decided not to deal with the matter because [the victim’s]
ex-partner had started proceedings in the Family
Court. The magistrate commented
that the ‘Family Court was looking into it now’ and that her interim
Family Court orders
for supervised contact ‘covered the situation’.
… The magistrate went on to comment that, in any event, he
overrule the Family
There is no legislative basis for a state or territory court to decline to
make a protection order simply because proceedings have
commenced for parenting
orders in a family court. In the Commissions’ view, the most effective
initiative is likely to involve
judicial education and training.
No existing
parenting order
Imposition of parenting orders by state and
territory magistrates
Issues may arise where a party seeks to obtain a protection order under state
and territory family violence legislation where children
are involved but no
parenting order is in place. Reforms to
Family Law Act
included removal of the power for state and territory courts to make new
parenting orders in the course of protection order
proceedings. A key reason for
repealing the power of state and territory courts to make new parenting orders
was the limited time
and expertise of magistrates courts to perform this
However, pursuant to
of that Act, courts of summary jurisdiction
can make parenting orders with the consent of the parties. Contact orders made
basis by state and territory courts in the context of a protection order
can be a useful stop-gap measure. The Commissions propose
a role for further
training and development programs in this area.
Proposal 8–13
The Australian Government—in conjunction
with state and territory governments, the National Judicial College of
Australia, the
Judicial Commission of NSW and the Judicial College of
Victoria—should provide ongoing training and development for judicial
officers in state and territory courts who hear proceedings for protection
orders on the exercise of their powers under the
Family Law Act 1975
Other possible inconsistencies
Protection orders may be inconsistent with responsibilities imposed under the
Family Law Act
other than by ‘an order, injunction or
undertaking’, for example, the parental responsibility obligation. Each
of a child who is under 18 has parental responsibility for the child.
There is no legislative provision for parental responsibility
to be displaced by
a protection order in a state or territory court.
A related question arises where protective conditions are set out in laws
other than state and territory family violence laws—for
example, as a
protective condition of bail. In the case of
[2004] WASCA 239
the Supreme Court of Western Australia noted that the provisions of the
(WA) dealing with protective bail conditions had not been
prescribed for the purposes of reg 12BB of the
Regulations
. Pursuant to s 109 of the
Constitution
state law or court order will be overridden, to the extent of any proper
exercise of the jurisdiction of a federal court, which
is inconsistent with the
state law or court order. However, Malcolm CJ noted authority from
[1994] HCA 20
(1994) 181 CLR 583
at 602 that:
A law of the Commonwealth conferring jurisdiction upon a federal court in
general terms will, in the absence of a clear legislative
intent to the
contrary, ordinarily be construed as not intended to confer jurisdiction to make
an order authorising or requiring
the doing of an act which is specifically
prohibited and rendered criminal by the ordinary criminal law of the State or
in which the act would be done.
Malcolm CJ expressed the view that there is nothing in
Family Law Act
to indicate that the powers to confer a parenting
order are to be exercised other than in conformity with the general law of the
state, including the
. McClure J issued a concurring order.
Special leave to appeal to the High Court was refused.
The Commissions are interested in hearing further views on the potential for
inconsistencies between rights and responsibilities under
and state and territory family violence laws other than those covered by
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
. In particular, is there a
need to expand the division’s operation to encompass a broader scope of
potential inconsistencies?
Division 11 could also be expanded to cover inconsistencies between
protective bail conditions and parenting orders under the
Family Law Act
A potential advantage of extending the operation of div 11 to protective
bail conditions could be, for example, enlivening the requirements
for courts to make declarations of inconsistency. Any such amendment could also
clarify which requirements should take precedence
where protective bail
conditions conflict with parenting orders.
Should the provisions for resolving inconsistent orders under
div 11 of the
Family Law Act
expanded to include inconsistencies resulting from:
(a) a party’s
rights or responsibilities under the
Family Law Act
other than those
pursuant to an order, injunction or undertaking, such as those deriving from the
concept of parental responsibility;
(b) laws other than family
violence laws prescribed in reg 12BB of the
Family Law Regulations
(Cth), such as protective bail
conditions?
Family Law Act 1975
s 60CC(3)(j).
s 60CC(3)(k).
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Domestic and Family Violence
(NT) s 90(2)(a)(i),
Urbis (for the Tasmanian
Government Department of Justice),
Review of the
Family Violence Act 2004
(2008), [3.5].
Stubbs and J Tolmie, ‘Domestic Violence and Child Contact
Arrangements’ (2003) 17
Australian Journal of Family Law
93, 98. See also Kearney McKenzie & Associates,
Division 11
(1998), 15.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
9. Family Violence Legislation and
the Family Law Act: Other Family Law Act Orders
Introduction
Protection orders and injunctive relief
Injunctions available under the
Family Law Act
Interaction with protection orders
Injunctions to relieve a party to a marriage from rendering conjugal rights
Financial proceedings under the
Family Law Act
Family violence as a factor in property disputes
Property conditions in protection orders
Relocation and recovery orders
Relocation orders
Recovery orders
9. Family Violence Legislation and
Family Law Act:
Family Law Act
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 9 considers a number of issues that arise from the interaction
between protection orders and orders that may be made under
other than parenting orders. First, the chapter examines the sections of
Family Law Act
that allow a family court to grant an injunction for
the personal protection of a victim of family violence, and considers how such
injunctions interact with the similar jurisdiction of state and territory courts
to make protection orders. Secondly, the chapter
considers ways in which family
violence is relevant to financial proceedings under the
such as proceedings relating to property and spousal
maintenance—and how conditions in protection orders regarding the use of
property relate to final property settlements by a family court. Finally, the
Commissions consider the relationship between protection
orders under state and
territory family violence legislation and family law disputes about the
relocation of a family member or the
recovery of a child.
[back to top]
Protection orders and
injunctive relief
Injunctions
available under the
Family Law Act
Section 68B
Family Law Act
permits a court to grant an
injunction to protect the welfare of a child. The injunction may be:
for the personal protection of the child, the child’s parent,
a person with a parenting order in respect of the child, or a
person who has
parental responsibility for the child; or
to restrain a person from entering or remaining in the place of
residence, employment or education or other specified area of the
child’s parent, a person with a parenting order in respect of the child,
or a person who has parental responsibility
for the child.
Family Law Act
permits a court to grant an injunction in
circumstances arising out of the marital relationship, either in separate
proceedings or
in family law proceedings already before the court. An injunction
may be granted:
for the personal protection of a party to the marriage;
to restrain a party to the marriage from entering or remaining in
the matrimonial home or the other party’s residence or place
for the protection of the marital relationship;
in relation to the property of a party to the marriage; or
in relation to the use or occupancy of the matrimonial
In addition,
permits a court to make an order
‘relieving a party to a marriage from any obligation to perform marital
services or render
conjugal rights’.
Family Law Act
injunction is breached, it is up to the person
protected by the injunction to file an application to seek an order from the
regarding the contravention.
Sections 68C
provide an automatic power of arrest where a person
breaches an injunction for personal protection. In the report,
Before the Law
(ALRC 69), the ALRC reiterated a recommendation it made
in an earlier inquiry into contempt that a wilful breach of an order for
personal protection should be a criminal
Breach of a protection order under state or territory family violence
legislation is a criminal offence. In addition, the processes
for seeking a
protection order under state and territory family violence legislation are
generally quicker and cheaper than an application
for an injunction under the
Family Law Act
The Commissions consider that
Family Law Act
injunctions perform an
important role in the
Family Law Act
, and should continue to be available
to provide protection to victims of family violence who fall within the
family courts, particularly where other family law
proceedings are anticipated or on foot. It is desirable that victims of family
violence are able to resolve their personal protection, parenting and property
issues in the one court, thereby minimising victims’
exposure to multiple
proceedings in different jurisdictions, and avoiding personal and financial
costs associated with reiterating
the same facts before different courts.
Therefore, the Commissions consider that reforms should make
Family Law Act
injunctions more accessible and effective.
The Commissions are interested in hearing about ways in which the procedures
for obtaining a
Family Law Act
injunction may be improved so that they
are less complex and more effective. This may include removing filing fees, or
an application for an injunction for personal protection without an
The Commissions are aware that
injunctions may be sought for
purposes other than the personal protection of a victim of family violence. The
Commissions are therefore
interested in whether there should be different
procedures depending on whether a person is seeking an injunction for personal
from family violence or an injunction that does not relate to family
violence, for example, regarding the use of property.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the contravention of a
Family Law Act
injunction for personal protection should be a criminal
offence, consistent with the position regarding breach of protection orders
under state or territory legislation. Importantly, this would clearly remove the
onus from the victim of the violence to bring the
application for contravention
of the injunction. It would relieve the victim of having to undertake costly
family law proceedings
to enforce the injunction and reinforce the message that
family violence is not a private matter, but a criminal offence of public
In order to improve the accessibility of injunctions for personal
protection under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) to victims of family
violence, should the
Family Law Act
provide separate procedures in
relation to injunctions for personal protection and other family law injunctions
available under s
114 of the Act? If so, what procedures would be
appropriate?
Proposal 9–1
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that a wilful breach of an injunction for personal protection
is a criminal offence, as recommended by the ALRC in
Equality Before the Law
Interaction
with protection orders
Injunctions granted under
Family Law Act
may operate alongside protection orders made under state and territory family
violence legislation. This gives rise to the potential
for inconsistencies
between orders.
Section 114AB
Family Law Act
provides that, if a
person has sought, or is seeking, a protection order under prescribed state or
territory family violence laws,
he or she is not entitled to seek, in addition,
an injunction under the
Family Law Act
, unless the protection order
proceedings have lapsed, been discontinued or dismissed, or the orders are no
longer in force.
Conversely, there is no bar to a person who is seeking, or has obtained, a
Family Law Act
injunction to apply for a protection order under state or
territory family violence legislation. Neither is there a formal prohibition
one party seeking a
Family Law Act
injunction even though a related party
has already obtained a protection order under state or territory family violence
legislation.
The effect is that ‘the prohibition under
extends to the same party using both procedures and then only when the State or
Territory procedure has been used
A person who has sought or obtained a protection order under state or
territory legislation is not prohibited from seeking a
Family Law Act
injunction in relation to family law matters not able to be dealt with by a
protection order. This is because
Family Law Act
prohibits applications for an injunction ‘in respect of a matter’
for which a protection order has been sought or
In order to determine whether inconsistent orders arise in practice, the
Commissions are interested in comment on whether there are
any cases in which a
person, who has obtained a
Family Law Act
injunction for personal
protection, also needed to seek additional protection under state or territory
family violence legislation.
The Commissions also note that precluding a person from bringing proceedings
for a protection order if he or she has already sought
Family Law Act
injunction, or vice versa, does not eliminate the potential for inconsistency
between orders. This is because a respondent, or other
person affected by the
order, would still be able to seek an injunction or protection order in the
alternative jurisdiction to which
the initial order was made.
In practice, how often does a person who has obtained an
injunction under the
Family Law Act
(Cth) subsequently need
to seek additional protection under state or territory family violence
legislation?
Question 9–3
Should a person who has sought or
obtained an injunction for personal protection under the
Family Law Act
(Cth) also be able to seek a protection order under state or
territory family violence
legislation?
Section 68R
Family Law Act
allows a state or territory court
that is dealing with a protection order to revive, vary, discharge or suspend an
injunction granted
, to the extent to which it expressly
or impliedly requires or authorises a person to spend time with a child. The
Commissions consider
that the mechanism in
is a useful way for courts
to address inconsistencies with orders under the
Family Law Act
making a protection order under state or territory legislation. However,
currently only applies to injunctions that expressly or impliedly
require or authorise a person to spend time with a child. In the
Commissions’ preliminary view, there might be merit in enacting a
provision similar to
to allow state and territory courts to revive,
vary, discharge or suspend a
Family Law Act
injunction for the personal
protection of a party to a marriage or other person.
Without such a provision,
Family Law Act
injunctions will prevail over
a protection order made under state or territory family violence legislation to
the extent of any inconsistency.
Allowing a state or territory court to amend a
Family Law Act
injunction when making a protection order would address
such inconsistencies and remove the need for a person to return to a federal
family court to revoke an injunction before applying for a protection order
under state or territory legislation.
In practice, do problems arise from the provisions dealing with
inconsistencies between injunctions granted under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and protection orders made under state and
territory family violence
legislation?
Proposal 9–2
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be
amended to provide that in proceedings to make or vary a protection order, a
state or territory court with jurisdiction
may revive, vary, discharge or
Family Law Act
injunction for the personal protection of a
party to a marriage or other person.
Injunctions
to relieve a party to a marriage from rendering conjugal rights
Section 114(2)
Family Law Act
provides a further power to
grant an injunction in the context of a marriage. It permits the court to
‘make an order relieving
a party to a marriage from any obligation to
perform marital services or render conjugal rights’.
Section 114(2)
implies that there is a continuing obligation to render conjugal rights and
provide marital services—obligations that no longer
exist in law and which
should not be assumed to form part of a marriage as a social or legal
institution.
Section 114(2)
gives the court power to relieve a person from performing
certain perceived obligations within a marriage. In the Commissions’
this purpose is adequately served by
alone. The need to protect a
party to the marriage from unwanted sexual intercourse, or to require that a
married couple not live
together, can be achieved using injunctions under
for the personal protection of a party to the marriage, or to
restrain a party to the marriage from entering or remaining in the
matrimonial
where it is just or convenient to do
so, and upon such terms and conditions as
the court considers appropriate, allows the court to tailor an injunction to the
needs of the parties.
The Commissions therefore consider that the power to make an order relieving
a party to a marriage from any obligation to perform
marital services or render
conjugal rights is unnecessary and inconsistent with current principles of
family and criminal law, and,
as such, should be repealed.
Proposal 9–3
Section 114(2)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), which permits a court to make an order relieving a party to a marriage
from any obligations to perform marital services or
render conjugal rights,
should be repealed.
[back to top]
Financial proceedings
Family Law Act
Family violence as a
factor in property disputes
Family Law Act
deals with property and spousal
maintenance orders, providing a mechanism for parties to alter property rights
that would otherwise
apply under common law and equity.
the court discretion to alter property rights to effect a just distribution
between the parties. Generally, the court considers
the contributions and future
needs of the parties in making this assessment.
In the Marriage of
provided clear authority that family violence is a relevant factor in
determining a party’s contribution under
. To satisfy the
criteria, a party must prove, on the
balance of probabilities, that he or she was subject to a violent ‘course
of conduct’
during the marriage, which had a ‘significant adverse
impact’ upon the party’s contributions or, in the alternative,
made those contributions ‘significantly more arduous’.
Existing or previous protection orders under state and territory family
violence laws do not appear to have been accorded specific
weight under
or subsequent case law. Commentators, law reform bodies and others
have raised strong arguments that the
Family Law Act
should be amended to
recognise family violence expressly as a relevant factor in property disputes.
The Commissions seek further
stakeholder feedback on whether, in practice,
protection order proceedings are considered in the context of property
disputes—for
example, whether evidence of family violence introduced in
protection order proceedings is being used for the purpose of
adjustments.
In ALRC 69, the ALRC recommended that the division of property under the
Family Law Act
should take into account the impact of family violence on
past contributions and on future
The Commissions express
their support for this recommendation.
The relevance of family violence to financial proceedings under the
was not considered in the 2009 reviews of family violence in the
federal family courts by Professor Chisholm and the Family Law Council.
Commissions’ preliminary view is that the Australian Government should
undertake a separate inquiry into the manner in
which federal family courts deal
with allegations of family violence in property proceedings, with a view to
proposing models for
legislative reform.
Is evidence of violence given in protection order proceedings
being considered in the context of property proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)? If so,
Proposal 9–4
The provisions of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) dealing with the distribution of property should refer expressly to
the impact of violence on past contributions and on future
needs, as recommended
by the ALRC in
Equality Before the Law
Proposal 9–5
The Australian Government should commission an
inquiry into the treatment of family violence in property proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). The inquiry should
consider, among other issues, the manner in which family violence should be
taken into account in determining
a party’s contribution under
and future needs under
; the definition of family
violence for the purpose of
proceedings; and interaction with other
schemes—for example, victims’ compensation.
Property conditions
in protection orders
Family violence legislation in each of the states and territories makes
provision for courts to issue protection orders which prohibit
a person from
entering or approaching the protected person’s residence. Most family
violence laws provide for a court to make
orders permitting an excluded person
or victim of violence to gain access to the premises for the purpose of taking
personal possessions,
usually by an arrangement or in the company of police. For
the purpose of the following discussion, these will be referred to as
‘personal property directions’.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, most property disputes should be
resolved in the federal family courts and other courts
with the expertise, time
and resources to address the issues comprehensively, including courts
responsible for resolving property
disputes under state and territory de-facto
relationships legislation. Protection order proceedings should only deal with
issues to the extent necessary to give effect to the protective
objectives of family violence legislation—for example, to ensure
excluded parties obtain access to personal possessions necessary for day-to-day
living so as to preclude the need for any further
access to the restricted
premises. This is consistent with the policy stated by the NSWLRC in its
Apprehended Violence Orders
report—that is, a personal property
is not designed to ‘create a jurisdiction by stealth’ for the Local
Court to intervene in family court property disputes,
but is an attempt to
address a ‘practical legal vacuum’ which arises almost everyday and
can give rise to significant
The interactions between personal property directions and property
proceedings under the
Family Law Act
are especially vexed where parties
take possession of property which they do not own or have a right to possess, or
wrongfully deny
the other party access to property—which may be done as a
part of coercive and controlling behaviour. The Commissions are interested
further feedback on the extent to which these scenarios arise in practice. This
information will provide an important evidentiary
basis for formulating
proposals for reform.
Influencing federal family court proceedings
The availability of comprehensive personal property directions may influence
property proceedings under the
Family Law Act
. In the Commissions’
preliminary view, this is only appropriate in very limited circumstances. The
property that a person may
recover pursuant to orders should be limited to that
which is necessary for daily living. At this stage, the Commissions support
recovery of the types of property listed under the
Domestic and Family
Violence Act 2007
(NT)—that is, clothes, tools of trade, personal
documents and other personal effects. For recovery of all other property, it
preferable for parties to commence proceedings in, for example, the federal
family courts. The Commissions are interested in stakeholder
views about whether
access to any other types of property should be available to excluded persons,
for example, the personal property
of a child of the excluded person—as in
Restraining Orders Act
The Commissions further consider that a court should decline to make a
personal property direction if the property is ‘reasonably
by the victim or a child of the victim. Recovery should not be allowed where
title to the property is genuinely in
dispute or other more appropriate means
are available for the issue to be addressed—for example, if there are
ongoing property
proceedings in a federal family court. The workability of this
provision depends upon a court having knowledge of family court proceedings.
Commissions propose that parties involved in protection order proceedings should
have an obligation to inform the court of property
orders made by a federal
family court, or pending proceedings for such orders. This information should be
sought in application forms
for protection orders.
Inconsistent orders about
Personal property directions may conflict with existing orders of a federal
family court made under pt VIII of the
Family Law Act
likely where a court is not informed about the existence of such orders.
Accordingly, there should be clear strategies in
place for courts making
protection orders to obtain information about, and consider, property orders
made under the
Family Law Act
. The South Australian family violence
legislation, which requires applicants for a protection order to inform the
court of any agreement
or order for the division of property, or any pending
application for such an order, may be instructive. Courts issuing personal
property directions should take into account any such agreement or order,
thereby avoiding the potential for inconsistency.
Family violence legislation may need to clarify the effect, if any, of
inconsistent orders. The Victorian and NSW legislation include
provisions to the
effect that a personal property direction in a protection order is subject to
any order to the contrary made by
a federal family court. To the extent of any
inconsistency, the order of the family court prevails.
Future federal family court proceedings
Personal property directions may have repercussions for subsequent property
proceedings in a federal family court. For example, where
an order provides for
furniture belonging to an excluded person to remain with the victim, there is
scope for this to be put forward
as a victim’s ‘property’ for
the purpose of a declaration under
Family Law Act
the Commissions’ view, it is inappropriate for protection order
proceedings to take the place of dedicated processes for
resolving property
disputes, such as those set out in
Family Law Act
Accordingly, the Commissions support a clear legislative statement in the family
violence laws of each state and territory that
a condition relating to personal
property in a protection order does not affect any rights the victim or person
who has used violence
may have in relation to the ownership of the property.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should
be referred to as a model in this regard.
How often are persons who have been the subject of exclusion
conditions in protection orders made under family violence legislation
victims of family violence taking possession of property which they do not own
or have a right to possess, or denying the other
person access to property? If
so, what impact does this have on any property proceedings or orders relating to
property under the
Family Law Act 1975
Proposal 9–6
Provisions in state and territory family violence
legislation dealing with exclusion orders should:
(a) limit the types of property which a court may order an excluded person to
recover to clothes, tools of trade, personal documents
and other personal
effects, and any other items specified by the court; and
(b) provide that any order to recover property should not include
(i) which are reasonably needed by the victim or a child of the victim;
(ii) in which title is genuinely in dispute; and
(c) provide that an order to recover property should not be made where other
more appropriate means are available for the issue to
be addressed in a timely
Are there any types of property other than those set out in
Proposal 9–6 which should, or should not, be subject to recovery
an excluded person under state and territory family violence
legislation—for example, should an excluded person be able
property of his or her child?
Proposal 9–7
State and territory family violence legislation
should require applicants for protection orders to inform courts about, and
to consider, any agreement or order for the division of property under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), or any pending application for such an
Proposal 9–8
Application forms for protection orders in family
violence proceedings should clearly seek information about any agreement or
for the division of property under the
Family Law Act 1975
any pending application for such an order.
Proposal 9–9
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that personal property directions made in protection order
proceedings
are subject to orders made by a federal family court or another
court responsible for determining property disputes.
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) should be referred to as a
model in this regard.
Proposal 9–10
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that personal property directions do not affect any ownership
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
should be referred to as a model in this regard.
[back to top]
Relocation and
recovery orders
Family Law Act
does not expressly address relocation
issues—that is, the problems which arise when one parent seeks to move a
long way away
from the other parent, for example, because of concerns about
their own safety or the safety of their children. Relocation disputes
determined in accordance with the general parenting order principles set out in
of the Act. Stakeholders have raised significant concerns with the
Commissions that, in practice, relocation orders are being refused
parent and his or her children are at risk of exposure to family violence.
In 2006, the Family Law Council recommended to the Attorney-General that
additional provisions should be inserted into the
Family Law Act
specifically with relocation. The recommended provisions included that a court
should consider what parenting arrangements
could be made if a party were to
relocate to ensure that the child maintains a meaningful relationship with both
parents, to the
extent consistent with the need to protect the child from
physical or psychological harm.
Refusing to make relocation orders in situations involving family violence
has serious repercussions for the safety of victims and
their children. Victims
in rural or remote areas of Australia may not be able to be (or feel to be) safe
from violence and yet remain
in close enough proximity to the person who has
used violence to keep child contact arrangements unchanged. For victims who have
been distanced geographically from their extended family or primary support
network, regaining this support could be crucial to moving
forward in their
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views as to whether any
additional legal or practical reforms are needed to address
issues related to
the practical interaction of protection order proceedings and relocation
disputes. For example, should there be
any presumption in legislation or
policy—for example, the
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting
Disputes when Family Violence or Abuse is Alleged
issued by the Family
—that, in cases where a
family court determines there has been family violence, it is likely to be in
the best interests of
a child to be able to relocate to a safe distance from the
person who has used violence? A broader question is whether the
should be amended to include provisions dealing with family violence in
relocation matters over and above the provisions of the Act
that apply to family
violence in parenting proceedings generally.
Any additional recognition of family violence in the context of relocation
disputes will need to be flexible enough to accommodate
the varying severity and
nature of the violence in a particular case. The Commissions seek stakeholder
views on whether any legal
or practical reforms in the context of relocation
disputes should apply in all or only some cases of family violence. If reform is
warranted in
cases of family violence, then a question arises as to
how this should be determined.
In practice, what issues arise from the interaction between
relocation orders and protection orders or allegations of family violence?
so, what legal or practical reforms could be introduced to address these issues?
For example, should there be a presumption that,
in some or all cases where a
family court determines there has been family violence, it is likely to be in
the best interests of
a child to be able to relocate to a safe distance from the
person who has used violence? If so, to which type of case should such
presumption apply?
Question 9–9
Family Law Act
(Cth) be amended to include provisions dealing with family violence in
relocation matters in addition to the provisions of the Act
that apply to family
violence in parenting proceedings?
Many relocation disputes are associated with unilateral moves after
separation but prior to court proceedings. This may give rise
to a recovery
order under pt VII of the
Family Law Act
Convention on the
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
(Hague Convention) as
implemented by the
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations
Hague Convention
is a multilateral treaty, which seeks to protect
children from the harmful effects of abduction and retention across
international
boundaries by providing a procedure to bring about their prompt
return. Signatories commit to the prompt return of children to the
which they habitually reside so that issues of parental responsibility can be
resolved by the courts in that country.
There is an exception to the requirement
for the immediate return of a child, however, if it is established that the
child would
be exposed to physical or psychological harm or otherwise be placed
in an intolerable situation.
The Commissions seek stakeholder feedback on whether issues arise in practice
from the interaction between protection orders under
state and territory family
violence legislation and recovery orders under div VII of the
Hague Convention
, as implemented by the
(Child Abduction Convention) Regulations
. If issues are identified, the
Commissions are interested to hear what reforms are necessary or desirable in
this context. One option,
for example, could be to institute a formal legal or
practical connection between undertakings sought as a condition of returning
child pursuant to the
Hague Convention
and protection orders under family
violence legislation. This could involve, for example, a formalised process
through which entry
into non-molestation undertakings pursuant to a
recovery order trigger proceedings for a protection order in
favour of the child under state and territory family violence legislation,
bringing all this information to the attention of magistrates.
In practice, what issues arise from the interaction between
protection orders under state and territory family violence legislation
recovery orders under div VII of the
Family Law Act 1975
return of a child pursuant to the
Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction
, as implemented by the
Family Law (Child
Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
(Cth)? If so, what legal or practical
reforms could be introduced to address these issues?
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) be amended to include
provisions dealing with family violence in recovery matters, in addition to the
provisions of the Act
that apply to family violence in parenting
proceedings?
Family Law Rules 2004
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women (Part 1)
, ALRC 69 (1994), Rec
9.12; Australian Law Reform Commission,
, ALRC 35 (1987),
R Alexander,
Domestic Violence
in Australia: The Legal Response
(3rd ed, 2002),
Family Law Act 1975
s 114AB(2).
In the Marriage of CK
and IW Kennon
[1997] FamCA 27
(1997) 22 Fam LR 1.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women
, ALRC 69 (1994),
New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103
(2003), [7.95].
Family Court of
Best Practice Principles for Use in Parenting Disputes When Family
Violence or Abuse is Alleged
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
October 1980, Hague XXVIII, (entered into force generally on 1 December 1983)
art 13(1)(b).
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
10. Improving Evidence and
Information Sharing
Introduction
Protection orders as a factor in decision making about parenting orders
Undertakings
Improving evidence in protection order proceedings
Written evidence
Oral evidence
Abuse of process
False or misleading evidence about family violence
Vexatious applications in protection order proceedings
Removing impediments to information sharing
Federal family court proceedings
Family dispute resolution information
State and territory family violence proceeding information
Agency information
Strategies to promote information sharing
Information-sharing protocols
A national protection order database
10. Improving Evidence and
Information Sharing
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 10 considers two key issues related to improving the information
available to courts dealing with family violence. First,
the chapter examines
the use of evidence and other information across family violence and family law
matters, including ways in which
protection orders granted under state and
territory family violence legislation, and evidence given in protection order
proceedings
can be used in concurrent or pending family law proceedings.
Secondly, the chapter considers ways to improve information sharing between
courts, practitioners, relevant government agencies and
other people and
institutions involved in the family violence and family law systems, while
protecting the privacy and safety of
people involved in family violence
litigation.
[back to top]
orders as a factor in decision making about parenting orders
As discussed in Chapter 8, a federal family court must have regard to a
number of considerations when making a parenting order including
the need to
protect children from physical or psychological harm as a result of being
subjected to, or exposed to, family
Additional considerations
that a court may take into account include:
any family violence involving the child or a member of the
child’s family
(s 60CC(3)(j))
any family violence order that applies to the child or a member of
the child’s family, provided the order is a final order
or its making was
(s 60CC(3)(k)).
Prior to amendments in 2006,
s 68F of the
Family Law Act
(the former equivalent of
directed the court to consider
family violence order that applied to
the child or a member of the child’s family. The amendments in 2006
narrowed this consideration
to only a final or a contested family violence order
in order to ‘address a perception that violence allegations are taken
account without proven foundation in some family law
proceedings’.
All state and territory family violence acts include provisions that allow a
court to make a final protection order by consent or
‘by consent without
admission of liability’. The making of such an order without admission of
liability enables a protection
order to be made urgently, while also protecting
a respondent’s legal rights with respect to any pending criminal charges
or she may be facing. However, the Commissions have heard that the notation
‘without admissions’ is commonly added to
orders by consent, even
where there are no pending or likely criminal charges.
During consultations, a number of stakeholders raised concerns that, in
family law proceedings, courts did not give sufficient weight
to the fact that
one party had obtained a protection order against the other. In particular, some
stakeholders expressed the view
that courts should be able to consider interim
protection orders, and protection orders made by consent, as well as final and
However, where a protection order is made by consent without admission of
liability, the court is not required to make any findings
as to whether the
grounds for making the order are satisfied—meaning that a court has not
determined whether there was in fact
family violence. In such cases, it is
argued that the fact of a protection order should have little or no weight in
family law proceedings
where family violence is alleged.
The Commissions note that making an order by consent without admissions will
be appropriate in some circumstances, such as where the
respondent is facing
criminal charges for related conduct and does not want to prejudice that trial.
There are a number of options
for reform to ensure that orders made by consent
‘without admissions’ are used appropriately. One option is to ensure
that the notation on protection orders and court files specifically states that
the order is made by consent ‘without admission
as to criminal liability
of the allegations in the application for the protection order’.
Other options for reform are directed to improving the scrutiny and quality
of the consent process. Judicial officers should be required
to ensure that the
victim agrees to the court making consent orders without admission of
liability—agreement to orders by consent
on such grounds should not be
implied from the application alone.
Secondly, courts should satisfy themselves that consent orders give attention
to the safety of victims of family violence. Courts
should assure themselves
that the victim of family violence has considered the practical implications of
consenting to the order
and, in particular, to any variations to the terms
sought in the original application. There may be circumstances where it would
appropriate for the court to request a safety plan in writing to accompany the
making of the protection order by consent. For
example, a safety plan may cover
matters such as how to facilitate contact with children safely, or access to the
family home.
Finally, courts should ensure that the parties are aware of the consequences
of consenting to a protection order without admission
of liability. This is
particularly important if parties are unrepresented or if there are concurrent
or pending family law proceedings.
Proposal 10–1
Judicial officers, when making a protection order
under state or territory family violence legislation by consent without
admissions,
should ensure that:
(a) the notation on protection orders and court files specifically states
that the order is made by consent ‘without admission
as to criminal
liability of the allegations in the application for the protection
(b) the applicant has an opportunity to oppose an order being made by consent
without admissions;
(c) the order gives attention to the safety of victims, and, if appropriate,
requires that a written safety plan accompanies the order;
(d) the parties are aware of the practical consequences of consenting to a
protection order without admission of liability.
Undertakings
The Commissions understand that a victim of family violence may wish to avoid
a contest in court and therefore agree to withdraw his
or her application for a
protection order on the basis that the respondent gives an undertaking to the
court not to engage in family
violence or other proscribed conduct. However, the
acceptance of undertakings can compromise the safety of victims of family
because a breach of an undertaking—unlike a breach of a
protection order—is not a criminal offence.
Accordingly, the Commissions consider that, prior to accepting an undertaking
from a respondent, the court should be satisfied that
the applicant understands
the implications of withdrawing the application and relying instead on
undertakings to the court from the
respondent. The respondent should also
understand that, in accepting an undertaking rather than pursuing an application
for a protection
order, the applicant is not precluded from making a further
application if the respondent does not honour the undertaking, or the
continues to be at risk of family violence.
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on how these objectives
may be achieved. Some options for reform include: legislative
directing judicial officers, when accepting an undertaking, to explain these
matters to the parties; judicial training
and education; or a requirement that
the court forms used to take written undertakings note that an undertaking is
not enforceable,
and that, by accepting an undertaking, the applicant is not
precluded from making a further application for a protection order.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, undertakings should generally be
given in writing, rather than orally to the court. Undertakings
given in writing
mean that both parties can have a copy of the undertakings, and reduce the
potential for ambiguity or confusion
undertakings.
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether proceedings in which
undertakings have been given, instead of a protection order
being made, return
to court on allegations of breach of the undertaking, or further family
violence. The Commissions are also interested
in hearing whether, in practice,
persons who have provided undertakings to the court, or victims of family
violence who accept such
undertakings, inform a federal family court of the
existence of such undertakings as part of their evidence of family violence in
family law proceedings.
Proposal 10–2
Before accepting an undertaking to the court from
a person against whom a protection order is sought, a court should ensure
(a) the applicant for the
protection order understands the implications of relying on an undertaking to
the court given by the respondent,
rather than continuing with their application
for a protection order;
(b) the respondent understands that the
applicant’s acceptance of an undertaking does not preclude further action
by the applicant
to address family violence, if necessary; and
undertaking is in writing.
Question 10–1
What practical reforms
could be implemented in order to achieve the objectives set out in Proposal
Question 10–2
In practice, do victims of family
violence, who rely on undertakings to the court from a person against whom a
protection order is
sought, often return to court because the undertaking has
been breached, or to seek further protection from family violence?
In practice, do victims of family violence who rely on
undertakings to the court from a person against whom a protection order is
sought inform federal family courts of the existence of such undertakings during
family law proceedings?
[back to top]
Improving evidence in
protection order proceedings
Information provided in application
A person seeking a protection order under state or territory family violence
legislation may apply for an order by completing an application
information and degree of detail sought in the application forms varies across
ask the applicant to set out the
grounds that he or she relies on. This approach assumes that the person seeking
a protection order
understands the legislative definition of family violence and
can frame his or her application accordingly.
The Commissions consider that application forms should include an
illustrative list of the kinds of conduct that constitute family
violence. This
will help make victims aware of the full range of conduct that may constitute
family violence and prompt them to provide
evidence of the types of family
violence they have suffered. It would also assist applicants to identify certain
violence which are currently less visible, such psychological or
emotional abuse. This is particularly important to assist victims
violence who are making an application for a protection order without the
assistance of lawyers or the police.
Proposal 10–3
Court forms for applications for a protection
order under state and territory family violence legislation should include
information
relevant jurisdiction.
Affidavit evidence in protection order
proceedings
In some jurisdictions, the application form completed by a person seeking a
protection order must be sworn or made on oath. For example,
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic) requires that an application
for a protection order made by a police officer must be made on oath or
certified by the police
officer, while an application made by a person other
than a police officer must be made on oath or by affidavit. To this end, the
final paragraph of the information form is headed ‘Affidavit’ and,
by signing, the applicant swears or affirms that ‘the
contents of my
application are true and correct to the best of my knowledge’. In other
that an application be supported by an
One reason for not requiring an application to be accompanied by an affidavit
is to make the application process more user-friendly
and accessible,
particularly to applicants without legal representation or police assistance.
However, the fact that an application
is unsworn can affect the evidentiary
value of the matters set out in the application. This is not an issue where
there is a court
hearing, because the courts will critically assess the
information provided in the application form, and confirm the content of the
written application. However, if a protection order is made by consent, the
evidentiary value of the matters set out in an unsworn
application form is
reduced—particularly in pending or concurrent family law proceedings.
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether there is value in the
approach taken in the Victorian and Tasmanian family violence
acts, which
require that the information form (in Victoria) and application form (in
Tasmania) be made on oath or sworn.
An alternative approach is that taken in the Western Australian family
violence legislation, which gives the applicant for a protection
option of providing affidavit evidence in support. This would give an applicant
who is currently involved in family law
proceedings, or who anticipates such
proceedings, the opportunity to provide stronger evidence in support of a
protection order that
may be relied on in later family law proceedings.
The Commissions are interested in hearing about other mechanisms that would
facilitate the use of evidence given in protection order
proceedings in pending,
concurrent or subsequent family law proceedings where family violence is
alleged. In particular, the Commissions
are interested in whether it would be
desirable to have a standard form of affidavit that could be used in protection
order proceedings
under state and territory family violence legislation.
In order to improve the evidentiary value of information
contained in applications for protection orders under state and territory
violence legislation, would it be beneficial for such legislation to:
require that applications for protection orders be sworn or affirmed; or
give applicants for protection orders the opportunity of providing affidavit
evidence in support of their application?
Question 10–5
the advantages or disadvantages of providing written rather than oral evidence
to a court when seeking a protection order?
Would a standard form of affidavit
be of assistance to victims of family violence?
Question 10–6
there any other ways to facilitate the use of evidence given in proceedings for
a protection order under state and territory family
violence legislation in
pending, concurrent or subsequent family law proceedings where family violence
is alleged?
Closed or open
court proceedings
Principles of open justice generally require that court proceedings should be
open to the public. Accordingly, most family violence
legislation contains an
express or implied presumption that protection order proceedings will be held in
open court, but also includes
provisions that allow or require the court to be
closed in certain circumstances. In contrast, the
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld) states that a court hearing an
application for a protection order ‘is not to be open to the public’
but notes that
the court ‘may open the proceedings or part of the
proceedings to the public or specified persons’.
Where open court proceedings inhibit victims of family violence or other
witnesses from giving evidence, inadequate or incomplete
evidence may be
adduced. This may have repercussions not only for the victim and the case in
issue, but also broader flow-on effects
where family violence is alleged in
pending, concurrent or subsequent family law proceedings involving the
On the other hand, conducting protection order proceedings in open court
ensures that the system is open to public scrutiny, may reinforce
the obligation
on all witnesses to tell the truth, and makes more visible the reality of family
violence in our community.
There is some variation in the provisions in state and territory family
violence legislation regarding the power to close the court.
However, the
Commissions note that, while the grounds to close the court vary, judicial
officers hearing protection order proceedings
in most states and territories
have a discretion to open or close courts in certain circumstances. The
Commissions are interested
in hearing how effective the different approaches of
each jurisdiction are in protecting vulnerable applicants and witnesses in
order proceedings, and, in particular, how the requirement under the
Queensland legislation that, generally, protection order proceedings
be heard in
closed court, works in practice.
Are the provisions in state and territory family violence
legislation that allow the court to hear protection order proceedings in
court effective in protecting vulnerable applicants and witnesses?
How is the requirement in
Domestic and Family
Violence Protection Act 1989
(Qld), that a court hearing an application for
a protection order should not generally be open to the public, working in
Cross-examination
by a person who has allegedly used violence
Many parties to protection order proceedings represent themselves, including
persons seeking protection and persons alleged to have
used violence. This is
often due to difficulties in obtaining legal representation. Unless legislation
provides otherwise, a self-represented
party will have a right to cross-examine
witnesses. This can be problematic where a person alleged to have used violence
is self-represented
and cross-examines the person seeking protection.
The Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) recommended that a person against
whom allegations of violence have been made should not
be able to personally
cross-examine the person seeking protection, any family members of the parties,
or any other person the court
declares to be a ‘protected witness’
in protection order proceedings.
This recommendation was implemented in
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
(Vic). Under the Victorian family violence legislation,
a court must adjourn proceedings to provide the party with a reasonable
opportunity
to obtain legal representation for the purpose of cross-examination.
If he or she does not obtain legal representation after being
given a reasonable
opportunity to do so, the court must order Victoria Legal Aid to offer legal
representation for that purpose.
Victoria Legal Aid is required to comply with
this order.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, state and territory family
violence legislation should prohibit a person, who has allegedly
used family
violence, from personally cross-examining a person against whom he or she is
alleged to have used family violence. This
is consistent with the
Commissions’ proposal in the context of sexual
For the reasons set out in
that chapter, the Commissions further propose that any person conducting such
cross-examination should
be a legal practitioner. The Victorian family violence
legislation provides an instructive model for how such a requirement could
implemented in practice.
Proposal 10–4
State and territory family violence legislation
(a) prohibit a person who has allegedly used family violence from personally
cross-examining, in protection order proceedings, a
person against whom he or
she has allegedly used family violence; and
(b) provide that any person conducting such cross-examination be a legal
practitioner representing the interests of the person who
has allegedly used
family violence.
[back to top]
or misleading evidence about family violence
Section 117AB of the
Family Law Act
requires a court to make a costs
order against a person who ‘knowingly made a false allegation or statement
in the proceedings’.
This section was included to address ‘concerns
expressed, in particular that allegations of family violence and abuse can be
easily made and may be taken into account in family law
proceedings’.
There is no
specific provision in the
Family Law Act
to deal with false denials of
family violence.
As discussed in Chapter 8, the Chisholm Review raised concerns that this
provision could impede the disclosure of family violence
in cases where a
vulnerable parent’s allegations of family violence cannot be corroborated
by reliable evidence.
The Chisholm
Review recommended that the costs order provision in s 117AB of the
Family Law Act
should be repealed and suggested that consideration should
instead be given to amending the general costs provision in s 117 of the
Act to direct a court to have regard to whether any person knowingly gave false
evidence in the proceedings.
kind of provision would cover both false allegations and false denials of family
violence. In addition, the Family Law Council
found that there is no evidence
that s 117AB ‘has achieved its purpose’ in relation to false
allegations of family violence
and recommended that the Attorney-General give
consideration to clarifying the intention of s 117AB, either through
legislative amendment
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that existing measures to sanction
persons who give false evidence of family violence are
sufficient. Such measures
include the courts’ power to dismiss vexatious applications and award
costs against a person who
brings a vexatious application. The Commissions
consider that these measures are sufficient safeguards against giving false
before courts generally and that there is no need for specific
provisions relating to false allegations of family violence.
The Commissions endorse the recommendations made in the recent reviews of the
Family Law Act
by Chisholm and the Family Law Council relating to s 117AB
Family Law Act
, and note that false denials of family violence, as
well as false allegations, should trigger the court’s discretion to make
costs order.
applications in protection order proceedings
Vexatious applications in protection order proceedings under state and
territory family violence legislation can be a means for a
person to misuse the
legal system to harass or intimidate a victim of family violence. In addition,
because the existence of certain
kinds of protection order is a relevant
consideration to be taken into account by a court when making orders under the
Family Law Act
vexatious applications for protection orders have the
potential to affect the operation of both the family law and state and territory
family violence regimes.
Courts exercising jurisdiction under state and territory family violence
legislation should be able to respond to the misuse of protection
provisions—in particular, vexatious applications for protection orders
made to harass or intimidate victims of family
violence or other persons. The
Commissions are particularly concerned about the risk that a person subject to
vexatious applications
may be pressured to consent to a protection order, or do
so in order to avoid repeated appearances in court.
The Commissions consider that there is merit in allowing courts to order that
a person who has brought several vexatious applications
or cross applications
for protection orders against the same person without reasonable grounds may not
make further applications
except with the leave of the court. The Victorian
family violence legislation—which has comprehensive vexatious litigant
provisions—and
the South Australian family violence
legislation—which allows a judicial officer to strike out an application
at a preliminary
stage before a respondent is served—provide instructive
models. The Commissions recognise that provisions that inhibit a person’s
ability to bring an application before a court can be inconsistent with the
principle that justice should be accessible and open
to all. However, such
provisions may be justified to protect people from having to defend unreasonable
and repeated applications
for protection orders and to prevent abuse of the
protection order system.
Should state and territory family violence legislation allow a
(a) make an order that a person who has made two or more vexatious
applications for a protection order against the same person may
further application without the leave of the court; and/or
(b) dismiss a vexatious application for a protection order at a preliminary
hearing before a respondent is served with that application?
Vexatious cross applications
The Commissions are also concerned about the misuse of cross applications for
protection orders, and in particular about the potential
for respondents to make
cross applications in order to harass a victim of family violence or to affect
concurrent or pending family
law proceedings. The Commissions note that cross
applications can be made for legitimate reasons—for example, where both
have engaged in violent conduct. The Commissions also note that courts
already have power to dismiss a cross application if it is
made without
reasonable grounds, or brought in order to harass or intimidate a person.
However, given concerns expressed about the misuse of cross applications, and
the difficulties involved in making and enforcing mutual
protection orders by
consent, the Commissions consider that safeguards are required to prevent the
misuse of cross applications.
The Commissions consider that the family violence
legislation in Victoria, based on recommendations by the VLRC, provides an
instructive
model, and propose that mutual orders should not be made by consent.
Instead, a court should make a mutual protection order only
where it is
satisfied that the grounds for a protection order have been made out by both
Proposal 10–5
State and territory family violence legislation
should provide that mutual protection orders may only be made by a court if it
satisfied that there are grounds for making a protection order against each
Vexatious applications to vary or revoke
protection orders
There are also concerns that some respondents make repeated applications to
vary or revoke a protection order as a way to harass or
intimidate a person who
has obtained a protection order against them. The Commissions consider that
there is merit in requiring that
a respondent to a protection order seek leave
from the court before making an application to vary or revoke a protection order
against them. A provision of this kind will ensure that a variation or
revocation is only sought by the respondent when there are
reasonable grounds to
do so—such as a change in the circumstances since the original order was
made—and protect against
vexatious applications against the victim of
family violence.
Proposal 10–6
State and territory family violence legislation
should require the respondent to a protection order to seek leave from the court
making an application to vary or revoke the protection order.
[back to top]
Removing impediments
to information sharing
Information sharing has been identified as an ongoing challenge in ensuring
the safety of victims of family violence in proceedings
in federal family courts
and state and territory courts.
Time for Action
recommended that
information-sharing systems and protocols should be developed and supported by
all organisations in response to
sexual assault and family violence. It also
considered that such protocols should give primacy to the safety of women and
their children.
Federal family court
proceedings
Access to records
Information included in federal family court records may be relevant to
proceedings under state and territory family violence laws.
This information
could include, for example, details of current or prior parenting orders,
reasons for making these orders, as well
as injunctions granted under the
Family Law Act
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) specify a range of
people who may search the court record relating to a case, or—with the
permission of the court—a
document forming part of the record.
The Family Law Council made a submission to the ALRC’
into Australian privacy laws
(ALRC 108),
commenting on
the challenge of information sharing in the context of family violence. It noted
In many cases information held by one part of the system is not available to
another part because of privacy considerations. Decisions
are therefore made in
the absence of a complete picture of the family circumstances. This lack of
transparency often leads to misguided
decisions being taken or problems being
ignored. This is particularly so when decisions have to be made on an urgent
basis and there
is no time for the leisurely process of subpoenas or information
orders to be sought.
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder feedback on the accessibility
and timeliness—in practice—of the record of
any relevant family
court proceedings to persons who have an interest in protection order
proceedings under state and territory family
violence legislation, including
police who may be involved in enforcing protection orders.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, there is adequate flexibility in
the provisions in the
Family Law Rules
to allow police officers and
others to access information for the purpose of protection order proceedings
under state and territory
family violence legislation. To the extent that
persons with a justifiable interest are not able to obtain access to family
records, this may indicate a need for formalised information-sharing
practices—for example, through information-sharing protocols.
However, information-sharing obligations could also be imposed at the
legislative level. The Commissions are interested in stakeholder
views about the
need for, or desirability of, a requirement in the
Family Law Act
rules under that Act, for a federal family court to provide details of
injunctions or orders to another court—for example,
a state or territory
court hearing proceedings under family violence legislation involving one or
more of the parties to the family
law proceedings.
In practice, are records of proceedings under the
(Cth) accessible—in a timely fashion—to persons seeking
access for the purpose of protection order proceedings under
state and territory
family violence legislation? If not, are any amendments to the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) necessary or
desirable—for example, to impose an obligation on federal family courts to
provide details of injunctions
or orders to a state or territory court hearing
proceedings under family violence legislation involving one or more of the
to the family law
proceedings?
Publication
Section 121
Family Law Act
makes it an offence to publish
an account of any proceedings under the Act that identifies a party to the
proceedings; a person who
is related to, or associated with a party to the
proceedings; or a witness in the proceedings. There are a number of exceptions
the publication offence in s 121—most relevantly, for disclosures
to persons concerned in proceedings in ‘any court’
connection with those
proceedings.
The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views about whether
Family Law Act
unduly restricts the sharing of information for the
purpose of protection order proceedings under state and territory family
legislation, including with police who enforce such orders.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the exception to allow
disclosure to persons concerned in any court proceedings for
use in connection
with those proceedings sufficiently enables the sharing of information for the
purpose of protection order proceedings
under state and territory family
violence legislation.
In practice, does the prohibition on publication set out in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) unduly restrict communication
under state
and territory family violence legislation, including police who
enforce such orders? If so, are any amendments to
necessary or
Family dispute
resolution information
Pursuant to
Family Law Act
, before applying for an
order under
of the Act (child-related proceedings), a person must
first make a genuine effort to resolve the dispute by family dispute resolution.
Subject to certain exceptions—including where the court is satisfied that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that there
has been, or there is a risk
of, family violence by one of the parties to the proceedings—a court must
not hear an application
for such an order unless the applicant has filed a
certificate from an FDR practitioner (a s 60I certificate).
Stakeholders have noted the benefit of s 60I certificates in signalling
that a proceeding under pt VII of the
Family Law Act
involves family
violence concerns.
The limited
amount of information currently included on
certificates, however,
constrains their potential for passing on information about family violence
risks to federal family courts.
The Commissions consider that the certificates should include additional
information about why family dispute resolution was inappropriate
unsuccessful—for example, because there has been, or there is a future
risk of, family violence by one of the parties to
the proceedings. In addition
to increasing the usefulness of
certificates in proceedings in courts
exercising family law jurisdiction, such a reform could also lead to a role for
certificates in protection order proceedings under state and
territory family violence legislation.
The Commissions note the concern that requiring additional information will
change the role of FDR practitioners. Some of these concerns—such
probability that FDR practitioners will have to testify—depend upon
whether the information in
certificates is treated as evidence of the
allegation, and the nature of other information gained during FDR processes
to courts exercising family law jurisdiction. The Commissions are
interested in hearing further from stakeholders about whether it
is desirable to
limit the use of information provided in
certificates, for example,
by providing that the information can only be used for the purposes of screening
and risk assessment by
courts; or whether such certificates should be used more
widely and, if so, in what ways.
Proposal 10–7
Certificates issued under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should include information about why family
dispute resolution was inappropriate or unsuccessful—for example, because
there has been, or is a future risk of, family violence by one of the parties to
the proceedings.
If more information is included in certificates issued under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) pursuant to Proposal
10–7, how should this information be treated by family courts? For
example, should such information
only be used for the purposes of screening and
risk assessment?
Communications to family counsellors and FDR
practitioners
Sections 10D
Family Law Act
information-handling obligations on family counsellors and FDR practitioners
respectively. These persons must maintain the
confidentiality of all
communications made to them except in limited situations, including
disclosure:
with the consent of the person who made the disclosure or, if the
person is under the age of 18, with the consent of each of the
parents or a court; or
where the counsellor or practitioner reasonably believes that
disclosure is necessary to:
protect a child from the risk of physical or psychological
prevent or lessen a serious and imminent threat to the life or
health of any person; or
report the commission, or prevent the likely commission, of an
offence involving violence or a threat of violence to a
Family counsellors and FDR practitioners
disclose a communication if they reasonably believe that the disclosure is
necessary to comply with a law of the Commonwealth or
a state or territory. This
includes, for example, mandatory reporting of child abuse.
Previous reviews have suggested the need to relax the confidentiality
provisions in
Family Law Act
Chisholm Review recommended that the Australian Government should consider
amending the confidentiality provisions in the
Family Law Act
information relevant to assessing the risks from family violence more readily
available to federal family
On 25 February 2010, the
Sydney Morning Herald
reported that
the Chief Justice of the Family Court had raised concerns with the
Attorney-General about the non-disclosure of FDR
information to the Family
Court. It was reported that Chief Justice Bryant argued that this information
should be made available
to family law judges making parenting orders where an
FDR practitioner believes there is a risk to a person’s safety—for
example, due to family violence, mental health or drug and alcohol
The Commissions seek further information about whether, in practice,
Family Law Act
operate to inappropriately
restrict the release of information relating to the risks of family violence to
courts—including
state and territory courts exercising jurisdiction under
family violence legislation.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the operation of the
confidentiality provisions should be relaxed. In particular,
ss 10D(4)(b)
(4)(b) should permit family counsellors and FDR
practitioners to disclose communications where they reasonably believe that
is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious threat to a
person’s life, health or safety.
This proposal would expand the present exception in two ways. The first is
removal of the ‘imminence’ requirement. In
the Commissions’
preliminary view, there are compelling policy reasons to permit the disclosure
of personal information in
such circumstances. Family violence often manifests
as controlling behaviour over a number of years, the threat from which may be
very difficult to characterise as ‘imminent’ even where it is
Secondly, the proposed changes would permit a family counsellor or FDR
practitioner to disclose communications where he or she reasonably
believes that
disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious threat to a
person’s safety. Safety has been described
as ‘the central concern
of domestic violence
intervention’.
The Commissions are also interested in stakeholder views on the merits of
permitting a family counsellor or FDR practitioner to disclose
communications
when he or she reasonably believes that disclosure is necessary to report
conduct that he or she reasonably believes
constitutes grounds for issuing a
protection order under state and territory family violence legislation. The
clearest application
of any such reform is in jurisdictions where police
officers apply directly for protection orders. A family counsellor or FDR
practitioner
who has been made aware of conduct that would constitute grounds
for issuing a protection order would have the option of reporting
information to the police.
The Commissions are also interested in stakeholder views on whether these
proposals are sufficiently broad to encompass the range
of information gained by
family counsellors and FDR practitioners that should be available to courts,
bearing in mind the competing
interests in the confidentiality of counselling
and dispute resolution processes. For example, should the exception be extended
preventing or lessening a serious threat to a child’s welfare?
Are the confidentiality provisions in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) inappropriately restricting family
counsellors and family dispute resolution practitioners from releasing
information relating
to the risks of family violence to:
exercising family law jurisdiction; and
(b) state and territory courts
exercising jurisdiction under family violence
legislation?
Proposal 10–8
Sections 10D(4)(b)
(4)(b) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should be amended to permit family counsellors
and family dispute resolution practitioners to disclose communications where
they reasonably believe that disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a
serious threat to a person’s life, health or safety.
Proposal 10–9
Sections 10D(4)(c)
(4)(c) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) should permit family counsellors and family
dispute resolution practitioners to disclose communications where they
believe that disclosure is necessary to report conduct that they
reasonably believe constitutes grounds for a protection order under
territory family violence legislation.
Should there be any other amendments to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) enabling the release of any other types of
information obtained by family counsellors or family dispute resolution
practitioners?
For example, should the legislation permit release where it would
prevent or lessen a serious threat to a child’s
Admissibility of communications to family
counsellors and FDR practitioners
Even where a family counsellor or FDR practitioner is permitted to disclose a
communication, it may not be admissible as evidence
in court proceedings.
Pursuant to
Family Law Act
, evidence of
anything said, or any admission made, by or in the company of a family
counsellor or FDR practitioner is inadmissible
‘in any court (whether or
not exercising federal jurisdiction)’ or ‘in any proceedings before
a person authorised
to hear evidence (whether the person is authorised by a law
of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or by the consent of the
parties)’. There are exceptions where:
an admission by an adult indicates that a child under 18 has been
abused or is at risk of abuse; or
a disclosure by a child under 18 that indicates that the child has
been abused or is at risk of abuse.
In its 2009 report, the Family
Law Council recommended amending s 10E of the Act to include an exception
allowing disclosure where
an adult or child discloses that a child has been
exposed to family
The Commissions support the Family Law Council’s recommendation that
Family Law Act
be amended to include an exception
allowing communications to a family counsellor or FDR practitioner to be
admitted in evidence when
an adult or child discloses that a child has been
exposed to family violence. This appears in line with the existing exceptions in
that provision protecting the interests of children. This amendment should also
apply to s 10J of the Act, which applies to communications
made to FDR
practitioners.
The Commissions are interested, however, in stakeholder views as to whether
ss 10E and 10J should be amended to enable the admission
of any other
evidence relating to family violence and, if so, what limits should be placed on
the admissibility of such evidence.
Another issue is whether the general prohibition on admission of
communications to family counsellors and FDR practitioners as evidence,
ss 10E and 10J, should be amended to expressly apply to state and territory
courts when they are not exercising family law jurisdiction.
(WA) v Department of Family & Children’s Services
, the Supreme
Court of Western Australia held that the prohibition on admissibility ‘in
any court (whether or not exercising
federal jurisdiction)’ set out in
s 19N of the
Family Law Act
—the predecessor to the current
—was limited by the definition of ‘court’ in
Family Law Act
—being the court exercising
Family Law Act
proceedings. Accordingly, the
inadmissibility provisions did not extend to proceedings in the Children’s
Court of Western Australia.
Similar reasoning was used by the majority of the Supreme Court of South
Australia in
R v Liddy (No 2)
to permit the admission of
counselling records in criminal proceedings. However, in a
dissenting opinion, Wicks J expressed the view that ‘any court
exercising federal jurisdiction or not)’ should be interpreted
more broadly.
There is no clear policy rationale for communications to family counsellors
and FDR practitioners being inadmissible in
Family Law Act
proceedings
but admissible in protection order proceedings under state and territory family
violence legislation. Such a policy also
appears to be out of step with the
inadmissibility of such communications in all federal, state and territory
tribunal, mediation,
and arbitration proceedings.
However, the Commissions are concerned about the potential for such a reform
to be detrimental to victims of family violence who are
involved in family law
proceedings and protection order proceedings under family violence legislation
in state and territory courts.
The Commissions seek feedback from stakeholders
on the merits of extending the inadmissibility of communications made to family
counsellors
and FDR practitioners to proceedings in other courts—for
example, courts hearing protection order proceedings under state and
family violence legislation.
Proposal 10–10
Sections 10E
Family Law Act
(Cth) should enable the admission into evidence of disclosures made by
an adult or child that a child has been exposed to family violence,
disclosures have been made to family counsellors and family dispute resolution
practitioners.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) permit the admission into evidence of communications made to family
counsellors and family dispute resolution practitioners
which disclose family
violence? If so, how should such an exception be framed?
Family Law Act 1975
amended to apply expressly to state and territory courts when they are not
exercising family law jurisdiction?
State and territory
family violence proceeding information
Non-publication provisions in family violence
legislation
The family violence legislation in every state and territory imposes
prohibitions on the publication of certain information about
persons involved
in, or associated with, protection order proceedings. However, jurisdictions
differ as to whether non-publication
is the default position or is triggered by
a court order, and the exceptions and defences available to permit publication.
Non-publication
provisions in state and territory family violence legislation
also differ as regards their duration—while some last indefinitely,
only apply until such time as a court has disposed of the proceedings.
Limiting the public disclosure of information relating to protection order
proceedings under family violence legislation is important
to protect the
proceedings. Arguably, the need for
secrecy in the context of protection order
proceedings may be greater than in the context of proceedings under the
Family Law Act
. By definition, protection order proceedings will require
parties to disclose highly sensitive information about physical and
psychological
harm which has been inflicted on them, and—where
relevant—their sexual relationship. These issues may be absent from,
peripheral to, many proceedings captured by
However, the Commissions are concerned about the possibility that
non-publication provisions in state and territory family violence
proceedings
unduly restrict communication about protection order proceedings—in
particular, with persons associated with family
law proceedings in federal
family courts. The Commissions are interested in stakeholder views on whether
this issue arises in practice.
In the event that there are such problems, the Commissions have identified
several legislative options which may facilitate greater
sharing of identifying
information about adults involved in or associated with proceedings for
protection orders, namely:
requiring the prohibition on disclosure to be activated by a court
order where the identifying information relates to an adult, rather
imposing a requirement that the disclosure of identifying
information must be reasonably likely to expose a person to risk of harm
precondition for a court to issue an order prohibiting publication—as
applies, for example, in proceedings under the Northern
Territory family
violence legislation that are not related to children; and/or
including an exception to prohibitions on publication for the
disclosure of pleadings, transcripts of evidence or other documents
to a police
officer or to persons concerned in any court proceedings for use in connection
with those proceedings—as applies,
for example, under the Queensland
family violence legislation.
The Commissions are interested in
stakeholder views on the merits or otherwise of any such reforms. The
Commissions do not suggest
any options for increasing the publication of
identifying information about children involved in protection order proceedings,
this would not be in the best interests of the child.
Ensuring that laws allow disclosure of information to, for example, federal
family courts may not be sufficient to ensure that information
is actually
shared in practice. This raises the question of whether state and territory
family violence legislation should
courts to provide information
aware of proceedings
underway in a federal family court involving one or more of
the parties to the protection order proceedings.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, a practical way, in the short
term, in which to impose information-sharing requirements
information-sharing protocols, rather than direct legislative obligations. Such
protocols allow the development of a more
nuanced framework that can accommodate
situations in which disclosing information would be inappropriate or should be
additional conditions. However, the Commissions are interested in
stakeholder views on whether there are some circumstances in which
necessary or desirable for state and territory family violence legislation to
require courts to disclose information which
may be relevant to proceedings in
federal family courts.
In practice, do prohibitions on publication in state and
territory family violence legislation unduly restrict communication about
protection order proceedings which may be relevant to proceedings in federal
family courts?
Question 10–18
Should prohibitions on publication
of identifying information about adults involved in protection order proceedings
under state and
territory family violence legislation be modified in one or more
of the following ways to
(a) require the prohibition
on disclosure to be activated by a court order;
(b) impose a requirement that
the disclosure of identifying information must be reasonably likely to expose a
person to risk of harm
as a precondition for a court to issue an order
prohibiting publication; and/or
(c) include an exception to prohibitions on
publication for disclosure of pleadings, transcripts of evidence or other
documents to
police or other persons concerned in any court proceedings, for use
in connection with those proceedings—for example, the exception
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
Are there any situations in which state and territory family
violence legislation should require courts to provide details of protection
order proceedings or orders to federal family
information
Information held by federal, state and territory government agencies may also
be relevant to protection order proceedings under state
and territory family
violence laws and
Family Law Act
proceedings. Legal obstacles to sharing
information may stem from privacy and secrecy laws. The extent to which these
laws impede
information sharing will also depend on the availability of
provisions in other laws that authorise or require information sharing
certain contexts. Some state and territory family violence legislation includes
such information-sharing provisions.
Time for Action
identified privacy laws as one of the ongoing
obstacles to an integrated and effective response to family violence. Many
stakeholders
consulted in this Inquiry have agreed that they encounter
difficulties sharing information because of privacy and secrecy laws. The
Commissions seek further stakeholder views on whether privacy and secrecy laws
are impeding federal, state and territory agencies
from disclosing information
which may be relevant to:
protection order proceedings under state and territory family
violence legislation; and
Family Law Act
proceedings in federal family courts, to the
extent that these give rise to family violence concerns.
Commissions are particularly interested in whether additional legal or practical
issues are encountered where information sharing
takes place across federal and
state and territory boundaries—for example, where a state or territory
government agency provides
information to a federal family court.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, the public interest in protecting
victims of family violence from further abuse should
take precedence over the
public interest in respecting an individual’s privacy. In particular,
federal, state and territory
agencies should be able to disclose personal
information, on a confidential basis, to other agencies and court officers where
information is necessary for the purpose of initiating or conducting
protection order proceedings. If limitations on use and disclosure
under privacy
laws are preventing this cooperation, then there is a strong argument for
relaxing the limitations.
In a 2008 report, the ALRC recommended substantial reforms in the privacy
area including a uniform set of privacy principles to apply
across private
sector organisations and federal, state and territory government
Implementation of
these recommendations would address many of the barriers currently raised by
recommended that the use and disclosure of
personal information should be possible where someone reasonably believes that
or disclosure is necessary to lessen or prevent a serious threat to an
individual’s life, health or safety. As noted above,
the Australian
Government substantially accepted this recommendation—with the caveat that
the agency should first obtain the
consent of the person to whom the information
relates, where reasonable and practicable.
The Commissions are concerned, however, that such a reform may not be
sufficient to enable information sharing in all circumstances
where such sharing
would be warranted. In particular, the Commissions consider there is merit in
state and territory family violence
legislation authorising certain information
sharing. Such provisions would mean that information sharing would be
or authorised by law’, and, therefore, an exception under
the purpose of
many secrecy laws. In the Commissions’ preliminary view,
information-sharing provisions should be included in
all state and territory
family violence legislation.
The Commissions do not intend to specify the manner in which such
information-sharing provisions should be drafted. The Commissions
consider that
each state and territory should have the discretion to draft such a provision as
an open-ended authorisation to disclose
information for the purpose of achieving
a specified purpose—the Tasmanian model—or a codified
information-sharing regime,
under which disclosure may only be made of certain
information and to specified persons—the Western Australian model.
several elements of the information-sharing provision warrant
The purposes for which information can be disclosed
: At this stage,
the Commissions endorse the purpose for information sharing set out in the
Western Australian family violence legislation—that
is, where the agency
reasonably believes that disclosure is necessary to ensure the safety of a
victim or the wellbeing of an affected
child. In effect, this modifies the
‘life, health and safety’ exception in privacy laws, discussed
above, by removing
the requirement that a specific threat be
‘serious’. The Commissions consider this change to be justifiable
nature and dynamics of family violence. As discussed in
Chapter 4, a central feature of family violence is that the person using
exercises control and power over the victim by inducing fear. In this way,
violence can involve a continuum of controlling behaviour
occurring over a
number of years, rather than single serious incidents that are the focus of the
relevant privacy exception.
To whom information may be disclosed
: This may not be an issue where
information-sharing provisions are drafted in accordance with the Tasmanian
model—that is,
where the only requirement for disclosure is that it
satisfies the requisite purpose. However, provisions modelled on, for example,
the Western Australian family violence legislation, may unduly constrain the
persons with whom information can be shared. In the
Commissions’
preliminary view, disclosure should be permitted to, at least, relevant
government officers in other jurisdictions—for
example, Commissioners of
Police—and officers of federal, state and territory courts.
Do privacy and/or secrecy laws unduly impede agencies from
disclosing information which may be relevant to:
(a) protection order
proceedings under state and territory family violence legislation;
(b) family law proceedings in federal family
Proposal 10–11
Legislative privacy principles applying to the
use and disclosure of personal information by Australian Government and state
and territory
government agencies should permit use or disclosure where an
agency reasonably believes it is necessary to lessen or prevent a serious
to an individual’s life, health or safety, as recommended by the ALRC in
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(ALRC 108).
Proposal 10–12
State and territory family violence legislation
should authorise agencies in that state or territory to use or disclose personal
information
for the purpose of ensuring the safety of a victim of family
violence or the wellbeing of an affected child.
Proposal 10–13
Information-sharing provisions introduced
pursuant to Proposal 10–12 should permit disclosure to, at least,
relevant government
officers in other jurisdictions and federal, state and
territory court officers.
[back to top]
Strategies to
promote information sharing
Many of the barriers to exchanging information are administrative and
cultural, rather than legislative, in nature.
Information-sharing
Information-sharing protocols formalise what information can be exchanged, to
whom, and on what conditions. A number of information-sharing
protocols have
been entered into between courts and child protection agencies. However, the
Commissions are only aware of one such
protocol in the context of family
violence—the protocol in Western Australia between the Family Court of
Western Australia,
the Magistrates Court (in particular, the specialist Family
Violence Court), and the Attorney-General’s Department, Corrective
Services Department and Legal Aid. The parties entered into the protocol in
February 2009.
Information-sharing protocols appear to have considerable potential to
improve information sharing between federal family courts,
state and territory
courts, and other relevant agencies and organisations. In particular, they can
clarify the situations in which
information sharing is desirable and necessary,
as well as the lawful boundaries of disclosure. In the Commissions’
preliminary
view, courts that hear protection order proceedings in each state
and territory should enter into an information-sharing protocol
with the Family
Court, Federal Magistrates Court, police and relevant government departments. It
may also be appropriate to include
non-government organisations such as family
violence support workers. The development of information-sharing protocols in
the context
of family violence is consistent with the views expressed in
Proposal 10–14
Courts that hear protection order proceedings in
each state and territory should enter into an information-sharing protocol with
Family Court of Australia, Federal Magistrates Court, police, relevant
government departments and other organisations that hold information
in relation
to family violence.
protection order database
Implementation of a national protection order database provides the
opportunity for a system-wide approach to information-sharing.
The impetus for a
national protection order database is closely connected to the Australian
Government’s commitment to work
with states and territory governments to
establish a national registration system for protection
A national protection order database would have at its core information about
protection orders, including the prohibitions or conditions
imposed by orders
and their duration. However, there may also be scope to extend the ambit of the
further—child protection information from state and territory agencies and
undertakings
entered into pursuant to Hague Convention recovery orders. The
Commissions are interested in stakeholder views about what information
included in a national protection order database.
A related issue is the persons and entities that may access information on
the national protection order database. The Commissions’
preliminary view
is that—at a minimum—access should be available to police officers,
federal family courts and state
and territory courts that hear protection order
proceedings. However, the Commissions are also interested in hearing about
for whom access may be beneficial—for example, child protection
agencies and children’s courts. The Commissions note
that privacy and
security concerns mean that access to such data should be on a ‘need to
know’ basis. Current safeguards
used in CrimTrac, such as audit logs,
should also apply.
Proposal 10–15
A national protection order database should be
established as a component of the Australian Government’s commitment to
the implementation
of a national registration system for protection orders. At a
minimum, information on the database should:
(a) include protection orders made under state and territory family violence
legislation as well as orders and injunctions made under
Family Law Act
(b) be available to federal, state and territory police officers, federal
family courts, and state and territory courts that hear
protection order
proceedings.
Is there any other information which should be included on, or
are there any other persons who should have access to, the national
order database, over and above those set out in
Proposal 10–15?
Family Law Act 1975
Explanatory Memorandum,
Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
Family Violence
Protection Act 2008
Explanatory Memorandum,
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Bill 2005
R Chisholm,
Courts Violence Review
(2009), 118.
Ibid, 108–120, Rec 3.2.
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law
System: An Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law
(2009), Rec 11.
Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action:
The National Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women
and their Children,
(2009), Rec 6.2.1.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008).
Family Law Council,
Submission to the Australian Law Reform Commission
Review of Australian Privacy Law
Family Law Act 1975
s 121(9)(a).
Magistrates Court,
Consultation
, Sydney, 3 February
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
C Nader, ‘Family
Court Wants Access to Mediation’,
Sydney Morning Herald
25 February 2010,
<www.smh.com.au>.
Risk Assessment in Domestic Violence
(2004) Australian Domestic &
Family Violence Clearinghouse, 1.
Family Law Council,
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law
System: An Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law
(2009), Rec 8.2.2.
case, the communications to the family counsellor were inadmissible due to
Family Court Act 1997
Anglicare (WA) v
Department of Family and Children’s Services
[2000] WASC 47
(2000) 26 Fam LR
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
Australian Government,
National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women—Immediate Government
(2009), 4.3.1.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
11. Alternative Processes
Introduction
Family dispute resolution and family violence
Appropriateness of FDR in cases of family violence
FDR practitioners and lawyers
Interactions between FDR and protection orders
ADR in family violence legislation
Dispute resolution in child protection
Restorative justice
11. Alternative Processes
[back to top]
Introduction
Disputes of all types are increasingly dealt with by methods of dispute
resolution that do not involve a decision by a court or tribunal
and instead
involve ‘alternative dispute resolution’ (ADR) or—even more
broadly—non-adversarial justice.
Chapter 11 examines ADR and
restorative justice in disputes involving family violence; processes that
operate within or alongside
family law and criminal law respectively, and which
thus affect the operation of some of the legal frameworks that are the subject
of this Inquiry.
The use of non-adversarial methods is controversial in disputes involving
violence and abuse. A major concern is that non-adversarial
methods are often
based on negotiations between parties and consensual agreements. In the context
of family violence, the power relationships
between the parties may make this
dangerous or produce unfair or unsafe agreements. Further, non-adversarial
methods often take place
in private and may thus conceal violence. Nevertheless,
much work has been done in recent years to develop non-adversarial methods
ways that provide protections for vulnerable parties.
[back to top]
Family dispute
resolution and family violence
Family dispute resolution (FDR) is defined broadly in
Family Law Act
(Cth) as any non-judicial process where an
independent FDR practitioner helps people affected, or likely to be affected, by
or divorce, to resolve some or all of their disputes with each
Broadly speaking, the current legislative framework encourages or requires
the use of FDR before court action and supports referral
to FDR after an
application to the court has been made, while providing exceptions in cases of
family violence and child abuse. Information
gained during the FDR process is in
general confidential and inadmissible in subsequent court proceedings, although
there are exceptions
relevant to child abuse and family violence.
Appropriateness of
FDR in cases of family violence
While there are a range of views on the appropriateness of FDR in family
violence contexts, there appears to be a degree of consensus
on certain matters.
First, using FDR in cases involving family violence carries particular risks.
Secondly, if family violence is
to be dealt with in FDR processes, it must be
handled by skilled and knowledgeable FDR practitioners using appropriate
safeguards.
Thirdly, in practice, some cases involving family violence
do—and will continue to—proceed to mediation.
With some exceptions,
Family Law Act
requires that
parties with a dispute about children must go to family dispute resolution
before they can go to court, and must make
a genuine effort to resolve their
dispute through FDR. The exceptions to the requirement to attend FDR include
where the parties
agree and are applying to court only for a consent order.
Importantly, they also include cases where violence is an issue, such as
the court is satisfied that there has been, or there is a risk of, child abuse
or family violence, or where there are circumstances
of urgency.
If the parties do not reach agreement through FDR and do not satisfy one of
the exceptions, the federal family courts can only hear
parenting cases if the
FDR practitioner provides a certificate relating to the parties’
attendance and effort in the FDR process.
FDR practitioners may give several
different types of certificates under
Family Law Act
including a certificate to the effect that the person did not attend FDR
because, having regard to the
Family Law (Family Dispute Resolution
Practitioners) Regulations 2008
FDR Regulations
practitioner considers that ‘it would not be appropriate’ to conduct
or continue FDR.
In determining whether a dispute is appropriate for FDR, the FDR practitioner
must take into account whether the ability of any party
to negotiate freely is
affected by a number of factors, all of which are potentially relevant to cases
of violence. These include:
any history of family violence among the parties;
the likely safety of the parties; the equality of bargaining power among the
the risk that a child may suffer abuse; the emotional, psychological
and physical health of the parties; or any other relevant matter.
Regulations
also require that an FDR practitioner must be satisfied of the
appropriateness of FDR in each case before providing FDR. An FDR practitioner
also obliged to terminate FDR if the practitioner is no longer satisfied it is
appropriate, or is requested to do so by a party.
The framework in s 60I applies only to parenting orders. In relation to
applications for financial disputes, the requirements are
set out in the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth). Consistently with s 60I, the Rules
include mechanisms for removing obligations to participate in FDR in cases of
family violence.
A key element of FDR in practice is the process of screening and risk
assessment which is designed to ensure that victims of family
violence are not
using FDR in inappropriate circumstances, or to identify and mitigate any risk
factors where FDR may be appropriate
despite such risks. Screening and risk
assessment are important for any agency handling family disputes, but it appears
agencies may be taking on this role for many professionals in the
family law system, and may be acting as gatekeepers in the family
Family dispute resolution practitioners have also become the gatekeepers to
the family courts in children’s cases because of
the requirements of s
60I, discussed above. The evaluation of the 2006 reforms of the family system
conducted by AIFS showed that
50% of parents, post-2006, reported they had
Importantly for this Inquiry, the AIFS evaluation indicated that the
legislative scheme may not be working well for victims of family
violence. One
of the problems relates to the way FDR practitioners are being used to issue
s 60I certificates. Some lawyers appear
to be sending victims of family
violence to FDR services as a method of getting a s 60I certificate. While
Family Relationship Centres
(FRCs) did not provide certificates ‘as a
matter of course’, some clients or legal advisers nonetheless saw
certificates as the primary function of FRCs or believed a certificate
should be issued as a default option.
Importantly, the AIFS survey also revealed that clients who clearly fall
within the exception to FDR in the family law legislation
infrequently referred to the FRCs by lawyers (and to a lesser extent by
courts)’. AIFS concluded it was likely
that the rate of issuing of
certificates had increased, and this was ‘in part connected with an
absence of triage by lawyers
and other professionals’. AIFS noted that
this may be linked to the ‘anxiety on the part of lawyers about clients
or being seen to be making deliberately false allegations’.
Three concerns arise from the AIFS study. First, there is evidence that some
victims of family violence are being encouraged to participate
in FDR processes
or obtain s 60I certificates, despite the exceptions for family violence in
Family Law Act
. Secondly, there is evidence that FDR practitioners
are becoming an entry point for ‘effective triage’ or an insurance
policy for victims of family violence. Thirdly, at least some victims of family
violence feel that FDR processes fail to identify
and manage the risk of family
violence effectively.
The first and second issues raise the question of whether reforms are needed
to the complex legislative scheme governing FDR in the
—in particular, to
—to ensure the appropriate
handling of disputes involving violence.
The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders how these
provisions could be improved. For example, as the AIFS evaluation
suggests, it
may be that the exceptions in
for cases of family violence are
under-used because it is simpler for lawyers to ‘tick a box’ by
submitting a
certificate, rather than performing the more difficult
task of screening and evaluating whether the risk of family violence will
satisfy the court that the exception can be invoked. In that case, the
legislation could be reformed (for example) to make it easier
for a lawyer to
know when a client can be exempted from the requirement to undergo FDR—for
example, the legislation could specify
that the exception applies if there is a
protection order in place.
It may also be the case that non-legislative reforms are necessary to ensure
the legislative scheme operates appropriately. Ideally,
all personnel in the
family law system should be capable of identifying violence and dealing with it
appropriately. The extent of
violence in the separating and divorcing population
is such that violence is likely to be core business for most professionals in
the family law system. Further, any agency or professional could be the first
port of call for a party who has been the target of
violence, and that agency or
professional needs to be able to identify, manage or refer cases appropriately.
In order to achieve this, family lawyers need training on how to identify and
manage family violence. Preferably, this training should
be conducted in
conjunction with FDR practitioners, in order to improve interdisciplinary
collaboration. Family lawyers also need
adequate support for this role. Family
lawyers need clear pathways for referring clients to other services, and a
support network
for dealing with issues of family violence. Family lawyers also
need clear guidance as to when it is appropriate to refer a matter
practitioner. This could be provided, for example, in the best practice
principles for family lawyers developed by the
Family Law Council.
The third issue, the inadequacy of at least some FDR processes to manage the
risk of family violence, highlights the need to ensure
best practice in
screening and risk assessment. Much valuable work has already been done in this
field, including the development
Screening and Risk Assessment
by the Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
and the publication by the Victorian Government of a comprehensive
screening and
risk assessment framework. In the Commissions’ view, these frameworks are
valuable resources that should be promoted
The Family Law Council recommended in its 2009 report that screening and risk
assessment frameworks, tools and materials be endorsed
by an expert panel and
reference group. The adoption of these frameworks and tools should be encouraged
through appropriate training,
inclusion in accreditation processes, and through
audits and evaluation.
Should any amendments be made to the provisions relating to
family dispute resolution in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)—and, in
particular, to
of that Act—to ensure that victims of family
violence are not inappropriately attempting or participating in family dispute
resolution? What other reforms may be necessary to ensure the legislation
operates effectively?
Proposal 11–1
Australian governments, lawyers’
organisations and bodies responsible for legal education should develop ways to
ensure that
lawyers who practice family law are given adequate training and
support in screening and assessing risks in relation to family violence.
Proposal 11–2
The Australian Government should promote the use
of existing screening and risk assessment frameworks and tools for family
resolution practitioners through, for example, training, accreditation
processes, and audit and evaluations.
FDR practitioners and
The level of cooperation and collaboration between FDR practitioners and
lawyers was raised as an issue by both the AIFS evaluation
and the 2009 report
of the Family Law Council. Research by Professor Helen Rhoades and others in
2008 on inter-professional relationships
between FDR practitioners and lawyers
demonstrated that, although some practitioners enjoy positive professional
little collaborative contact with the other profession and
there are some significant misunderstandings and tensions between the
In its 2009 report, the Family Law Council suggested a number of strategies
‘to develop and enrich inter-disciplinary cooperation
and collaboration,
particularly between family dispute resolution practitioners and family
lawyers’. These recommendations
were based on the work conducted by
Rhoades and others, and included:
building opportunities for positive personal contact;
building understanding of roles and responsibilities;
providing lawyers and judicial officers with information about
funded community based programs;
considering ways to improve communication and feedback about
clients; and
family violence training for both professions.
Family Law Council recommended the expansion of Australia-wide family pathways
networks to support cooperation and referrals across
the family relationship and
family law system.
FDR practitioners and lawyers are likely to be required to work together more
extensively as FDR develops. Although some lawyers and
FDR practitioners have
good relationships, there is room to improve relationships between the two
sectors. The Commissions support
the recommendations of the Family Law Council
in this respect. However, the Commissions are interested in hearing if any
strategies are desirable to improve relationships between the
Proposal 11–3
Measures should be taken to improve collaboration
and cooperation between family dispute resolution practitioners and lawyers, as
recommended by the Family Law Council.
Interactions between
FDR and protection orders
Definition of family violence
The definition of family violence in
Family Law Act
and proposals to amend the definition, are discussed in detail in Chapter 4
of the Consultation Paper. The definition is more restrictive
than that used in
some state or territory family violence legislation, and in practice-based
material such as the
Screening and Risk Assessment Framework
Family Court of Australia’s
Family Violence Strategy
A KPMG evaluation of FDR practices in the legal aid sector found that
screening questions tended to focus on physical forms of abuse,
and recommended
enhanced screening for non-physical forms of
The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders whether the
variations between the legislative definitions and practice-based
definitions in
FDR have had any practical impact in FDR practices.
Does the definition of family violence in the
Family Law Act
(Cth) cause any problems in family dispute resolution
Protection orders in FDR
Another potential issue is the use of protection orders in FDR processes. The
evaluation of FDR practices in the legal aid sector
noted that FDR practitioners
across all jurisdictions commented that failures to ask about and obtain copies
of protection orders
could ‘derail the conferencing
The existence of a protection order indicates that there are likely to be
issues of safety involved that need to be addressed, and
the conditions of a
protection order may provide useful information about the nature of the risks
involved. Further, it may be necessary
to obtain a copy of a protection order to
ensure that FDR practitioners are not making arrangements for FDR that require
to breach the order. For these reasons the Commissions’ consider
that it is necessary to include questions about the existence
of protection
orders, and to ask for copies of protection orders, as part of the process of
identification and risk assessment in
family dispute resolution.
The Commissions are interested to hear from stakeholders whether, in
practice, protection orders are identified and used in risk assessment
management in family dispute resolution processes and whether any reforms are
necessary to improve such identification and use.
In practice, are protection orders being used appropriately in
family dispute resolution processes to identify family violence and
risks associated with it? Are any reforms necessary to improve the use of
protection orders in such processes?
Breaches of protection orders by
Another issue that may arise is that the conditions of a protection order may
be inconsistent with arrangements made for, or the requirement
Family Law Act
to attend, family dispute resolution. A protection
order often will prohibit a person from directly or indirectly contacting or
approaching
another person. FDR processes conducted in the presence of both
parties could, therefore, breach a protection order. Most commonly,
is dealt with in the application forms for protection orders, which include an
exception to prohibitions on contacting
the protected person for the purposes of
FDR processes.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that protection order application
forms should include the option of an exception allowing
FDR processes. There is merit in making this a separate option that can be
selected by the applicant, as is
done in the ACT, rather than automatically
including it within the general prohibition on contact. This gives the
applicants (and
the court) the opportunity to consider the desirability of
advantages in an automatic exception, because family law proceedings may not be
contemplated at the time a protection order is obtained.
The Commissions are
interested in hearing stakeholder views on this issue.
This exception should apply to participation in FDR processes as ordered or
directed by the Family Court, or provided under the
Family Law Act
would cover the use of FDR to comply with
. The exception should not apply to informal attempts to mediate by
family or community members, as these do not necessarily include
appropriate
safeguards for addressing family violence, and may leave victims vulnerable to
pressures to mediate.
Proposal 11–4
State and territory courts should ensure that
application forms for protection orders include an exception allowing contact
purposes of family dispute resolution processes.
ADR in family
violence legislation
In most Australian jurisdictions, there is no specific provision in family
violence legislation empowering courts to refer parties
to mediation, although
there may be power to refer matters to mediation under other legislation. The
key exception is in the ACT,
where a registrar may refer a protection order
proceeding to mediation.
Explanatory Statement for the relevant bill explains ‘the importance of
alternative dispute mechanisms in preventing further
violence by facilitating
discussions between the parties to an
The ACT Magistrates
Court also has express power under
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
(ACT) to order the respondent or an aggrieved
person to take part in (among other things) mediation.
In NSW, there is legislative power to refer matters to mediation only in
relation to Apprehended Personal Violence Orders
but not in relation to
Apprehended Domestic Violence Orders (ADVOs). This reflects the recommendations
of the NSWLRC in its 2003
Apprehended Violence Orders
it expressed the view that ‘the fear and imbalance of power typically
characterising domestic violence makes mediation
in ADVO matters unsuitable,
unproductive and unsafe’.
Consistently with this view, the NSWLRC also considered that there should not
be a power of referral in the case of APVOs where there
was a history of, or
allegations of, personal violence, or conduct amounting to serious
harassment,
and this view is
reflected in the legislation.
The Commissions endorse the concerns expressed by the NSWLRC about the use of
alternative dispute resolution where family violence
is a factor. Only the ACT
specifically mandates referral of matters to mediation in protection order
proceedings involving family
violence. However, the Commissions are not aware of
how frequently this provision is used or whether in other jurisdictions ADR
are used in relation to similar proceedings. The Commissions are also
not aware whether the policies of ADR practitioners prevent
the use of ADR in
protection order proceedings involving family violence.
The Commissions are, therefore, interested in hearing from stakeholders
whether alternative dispute resolution mechanisms are used
in relation to
protection order proceedings under family violence legislation and, if so,
whether reforms are necessary to ensure
that they are used only in appropriate
circumstances.
In practice, are alternative dispute resolution mechanisms used
in relation to protection order proceedings under family violence
legislation?
If so, are reforms necessary to ensure these mechanisms are used only in
appropriate circumstances?
[back to top]
Dispute resolution in
child protection
In most Australian states and territories, child protection legislation
includes provisions designed to facilitate negotiated solutions.
In addition,
some government and community agencies use ADR procedures for child protection
cases and have developed policy and practice
in relation to ADR. There is a
great deal of variation in the processes and terminology used to describe them.
Two frequently used processes are family group conferencing and mediation.
Other examples of ADR in this area are conferences prior
to a court hearing; the
role of Family Consultants in the Family Court; and ADR processes developed for
Indigenous families, such
as Care Circles.
The ALRC and the (then) Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
examined the use of family group conferencing and pre-hearing
conferences in the
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
Seen and Heard
report discussed the benefits of such procedures and noted a number of concerns,
including the fact that ‘the vulnerability
of some family members within
violent and abusive families may mean that dynamics in conferences could hamper
appropriate resolutions’.
It recommended further research into effective
conferencing practices, and the setting down of procedures in child protection
legislation
based on this research. These recommendations have not yet been
implemented.
As stated in
Seen and Heard
, the use of ADR in child protection cases
‘hold[s] a good deal of promise for the resolution of disputes about the
protection of children’. Of particular relevance to this Inquiry
is the possibility that ADR can improve communication between
the many agencies
and individuals involved in making decisions in child protection matters. As
well as providing an opportunity for
professionals to meet and hear each
other’s perspectives, it may help children and young people and their
families understand
a system that has been described as a ‘maze.’
The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders how these potential
benefits can best be realised.
The Commissions note that, as with FDR, ADR in child protection matters
involves a number of challenges in the context of family violence.
These include
dealing with relationships of power; protection from violence, abuse and
intimidation; and ensuring that all voices
are heard, including the voice of the
child. Many of these concerns, however, may be addressed through training of
convenors and
ensuring best practice. The Commissions are interested in hearing
views on whether legislative or other reforms are needed to ensure
that family
violence is addressed appropriately in such practices.
How can the potential of alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms to improve communication and collaboration in the child protection
system best be realised?
Question 11–6
Is there a need for
legislative or other reforms to ensure that alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms in child protection address
family violence
appropriately?
[back to top]
Restorative
One widely accepted definition of restorative justice
is ‘a process whereby parties with a stake in a specific offence
collectively
resolve how to deal with the aftermath of the offence and its
implications for the
However, such
processes need not involve face-to-face meetings between victims and offenders,
and can be used for victims alone or
involve representatives of victims.
Restorative justice initiatives may be employed at any stage in the criminal
justice process,
including the sentencing stage. Other stages could include:
before or at the time a person is charged; after a person is convicted
before sentencing; and after a person has served his or her sentence.
There are a number of restorative justice practices, with the three most
common being victim-offender mediation, conferencing, and
circle and forum
sentencing.
Restorative justice practices in Australia differ widely in their application
to family violence. There are some general limits to,
and criteria for, these
programs that restrict their application to family violence. In addition, a
large number of programs have
specific exclusions, either by way of legislation
or guidelines, for conduct that might constitute family violence. In particular,
it is common for such programs to exclude sexual offences and certain violent
offences. For example, the NSW legislation establishing
youth justice
conferencing, the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW), excludes its
application to offences under the relevant family violence legislation
(including a breach of a protection order,
stalking and intimidation), and to a
range of other offences that may constitute family violence.
The most ambitious restorative justice legislation in Australia, the
Crimes (Restorative Justice) 2004 Act
(ACT), makes specific provision for
restorative justice practices to apply (in the case of both young and adult
offenders) to crimes
constituting family violence under its family violence
legislation.
However, these
provisions are part of the ‘second phase’ of the restorative justice
program, and to date have not been
brought into effect. The Restorative Justice
Unit of the ACT Department of Justice and Community Safety is currently
consulting and
planning for this second phase. The ‘first phase’ of
the program applies to ‘less serious offences’ committed
offenders. The restorative justice program in the ACT is broad, operating at
every stage of the criminal process and enabling
multiple agencies to refer
cases to such processes.
The Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) has considered the use of
restorative justice practices in the context of family violence
offences. In its review of family violence, it concluded that establishing a
restorative justice model in relation to
family violence depends on the
development of appropriate models based on rigorous
Time for Action
concluded that the perceived benefits of and concerns
violence has been almost entirely excluded from restorative justice processes in
Australia and internationally.
The National Council
recommended that trials should be undertaken and evaluated, ‘with
necessary caution … to explore
the utility and suitability of restorative
justice for cases of domestic and family violence and sexual
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the use of restorative
justice practices in the context of family violence is fraught
difficulties, and any use of such practices in that context requires extremely
careful thought and preparation. These difficulties
have, to date, caused family
violence to be excluded from the scope of a number of restorative justice
practices, or to be subject
to additional protocols. If restorative justice
practices are to be used in the family violence context, the Commissions’
preliminary
view is that these should be implemented only after extensive
community consultation in the development of protocols by restorative
professionals, as the Restorative Justice Unit in the ACT is currently
The use of restorative justice practices for sexual offences, however,
appears to the Commissions to be inappropriate generally. The
dynamics of power
in a relationship where sexual offences have been committed make it very
difficult to achieve the philosophical
and policy aims of restorative justice in
that context. The Commissions consider that restorative justice processes carry
risk of secondary victimisation for victims of sexual offences.
Nevertheless, in view of the availability of conferencing for sexual
certain jurisdictions, the Commissions are interested in hearing about the
experiences of participants. The Commissions
are also interested in hearing
whether conferencing is appropriate for a limited class of sexual offences or
offenders and, if so,
what safeguards are necessary or desirable.
The Commissions agree with the recommendations of the VLRC that appropriate
models need to be ‘based on rigorous research’.
Further research was
recommended by the VLRC and the Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee. As
well, the Restorative Justice
Unit in the ACT is presently exploring the
application of restorative justice processes in the context of family violence.
trials and evaluations were also recommended by the National Council to
Reduce Violence Against Women and their Children. In the
Commissions’
view, in light of these current and proposed developments it is premature to
make proposals in this area. This
issue should be revisited at a later
The Commissions are interested, however, in views from stakeholders as to the
appropriateness or otherwise of restorative justice
in the context of family
violence, including whether it is appropriate for particular types of conduct or
categories of people. If
it is appropriate at all, the Commissions are
interested in hearing what safeguards are necessary to ensure both the safety of
victims and the efficacy of the practice.
Is it appropriate for restorative justice practices to be used in
the family violence context? If so, is it appropriate only for certain
conduct or categories of people, and what features should these practices have?
Question 11–8
Is it appropriate for restorative justice
practices to be used for sexual assault offences or offenders? If so, what
limits (if any)
should apply to the classes of offence or offender? If
restorative justice practices are available, what safeguards should
H Rhoades, H Astor, A Sanson and M
Enhancing Inter-Professional Relationships in a Changing
Family Law System: Final Report
Family Dispute Resolution
Services in Legal Aid Commissions: Evaluation Report
(2008) Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Domestic Violence and Protection
Orders Act 2008
Explanatory Statement,
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Amendment Bill
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Act 2007
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Apprehended Violence Orders
, Report No 103 (2003),
Crimes (Domestic and Personal
Violence) Act 2007
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority
for Children in the Legal Process
T Marshall,
Restorative
Justice: An Overview
(1996) Home Office—United Kingdom,
Crimes (Restorative Justice) Act
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Family Violence Laws: Report
(2006), 84.
National Council to Reduce
Violence against Women and their Children,
Time for Action: The National
Council’s Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their
(2009), Rec 4.5.2.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
Protection—Introduction
12. Child Protection—Introduction
Protection—Introduction
Chapter 12 of the Consultation Paper provides an introduction to the extent
of the problem of child abuse in Australia, as well as
a discussion of
terminology. The chapter also provides a brief history of child protection, as
well as an overview of the child protection
system as it operates today. The
chapter also includes a discussion of particular aspects of the constitutional
framework for dealing
with child protection issues in the Australian federal
system and a consideration of the ‘best interests of the child’
Chapter 12 is intended to provide general background information and does not
contain any questions or proposals.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
13. Child Protection and the
Criminal Law
Grounds for bringing criminal proceedings
Penalties under child protection legislation
Identifying child abuse and neglect
The impact of mandatory reporting duties on criminal law
Permitting disclosure of identity of mandatory reporters
Responding to reports of child maltreatment
Consulting with child protection agency
Information sharing
Protection of children from family violence
Children and young people at risk and juvenile justice
Release on bail
Referring care and protection issues when they arise
13. Child Protection and the
Criminal Law
[back to top]
for bringing criminal proceedings
The failure of those with parental responsibility to provide for the basic
needs of children in their care, or to protect them from
harm as a result of
abuse or neglect, may constitute an offence under general criminal law or under
child protection laws, exposing
the parent or caregiver to criminal proceedings
and the consequences of a criminal conviction.
The crimes legislation in force in Queensland, South Australia, the ACT and
the Northern Territory contain offences against children
relating to their
welfare, whereas in Victoria and Western Australia similar offences are found in
their child protection statutes.
In NSW and Tasmania, the same conduct may give
rise to offences against children under both crimes and child protection
legislation.
A number of issues arise in relation to provisions dealing with offences
against children. One of the most significant is whether
the way in which the
offence provisions are currently drafted—which varies across all the
or whether practical difficulties arise for
law enforcement agencies, and how such problems affect decisions to bring
prosecutions.
In the past, child neglect offences outlined in child protection statutes
could be distinguished from those outlined in the general
criminal law in terms
of what was required to be proved by the prosecution. These differences are more
obscure today. Criminal neglect
offences often required the prosecution to prove
that the accused not only did something that put a child in danger, but also
intended to cause harm to the child. These requirements placed an
onerous burden on prosecuting authorities, which often proved too
difficult to
In recognition of the need to strengthen the criminal justice system’s
response to child neglect, a number of jurisdictions
have amended their criminal
laws to relax the prosecutorial burden in child neglect offences, thus enabling
relevant authorities
to pursue prosecutions in appropriate circumstances. For
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) was inserted in 2004 to
provide that a person with parental responsibility for a child who intentionally
or recklessly fails
to provide the child with the ‘necessities of
life’, without reasonable excuse, is guilty of an offence if the failure
causes a danger of death or serious injury to the child.
A major difference between offences created under child protection
legislation and those created in general criminal law is the application,
former, of objects and principles specific to child protection legislation.
Hence, unless specifically excluded, actions taken
or decisions made concerning
the investigation or institution of proceedings in relation to conduct giving
rise to offences under
child protection law should be made having paramount
regard to the best interests of the child. So, for example, in addition to other
matters it ordinarily considers when deciding whether to prosecute matters, a
law enforcement agency should take into account the
impact on the child of
bringing proceedings against a parent, and whether that would be in the
child’s best interests. This
may be an argument for including offence
provisions in the child protection statutes.
On the other hand, locating offence provisions in child protection statutes
may place greater responsibility on child protection agencies.
This raises a
question as to the compatibility of a law enforcement function with the child
protection agency’s main function
of working with families to ensure the
safety of children.
The Commissions are aware that, in practice, it is the police rather than the
child protection agency that initiates (and handles)
prosecutions against
parents or caregivers, although it may be a decision that they make jointly. One
reason for the division of
functions may be to disassociate the child protection
agency from the prosecution so that it does not jeopardise its relationship
the child and the family. Another reason may simply be to allow each agency to
focus on its areas of expertise.
The Commissions are interested to hear views about the appropriateness of
current offence provisions, what problems arise from the
way in which they are
drafted, and whether the offences are more appropriately placed in child
protection statutes or crimes acts.
Should offences against children for abuse and neglect be
contained in child protection legislation or in general criminal
Question 13–2
In practice, what issues, if any, arise from
the way in which the offence provisions are currently drafted?
In those jurisdictions where the same conduct may give rise to an
offence under both child protection or criminal legislation, what
factors are
taken into account in practice when determining whether to bring an action
against an alleged offender under child protection
or criminal
legislation?
Penalties under child protection
legislation
In NSW, questions have been raised about the appropriateness and adequacy of
the penalties prescribed for offences under the
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
(NSW), which currently attract maximum fines
of up to $22,000. It has been argued that a monetary penalty, regardless of how
substantial,
does not adequately reflect the seriousness of the offence, does
not sufficiently denounce child abuse and neglect and does not provide
effective deterrent. The question is whether, as is the case under other state
and territory legislation, the offences under the
NSW statute should be
punishable by a period of imprisonment, either in addition to, or as an
alternative to the monetary penalty.
The Commissions acknowledge that the jailing of a parent offender may
adversely affect the child and the family—in terms of
loss of income and
loss of contact with the parent. While hardship on an offender’s family is
a factor which courts may consider
when determining whether to jail the
offender, the current practice is for sentencing courts to consider hardship
only in exceptional
circumstances.
Criminal sentencing options have moved away from sentences of imprisonment in
recognition of a substantial body of research which
shows that imprisonment
neither rehabilitates offenders nor acts as an effective
There is a trend towards
community-based sentencing modules with built-in offender programs, supervised
by the government corrective
services body. The incentive for offenders to
comply with court orders to attend offender programs is the risk of being
imprisoned.
The Commissions are interested to hear views about what sentencing options
are currently imposed by courts when sentencing offenders
for offences against
children, and what range of penalties should be available for offences under
child protection legislation.
What range of penalties should be available to courts for
offences under child protection legislation?
Question 13–5
practice, what range of penalties are most regularly imposed, and if
conditional, what are the most usual conditions imposed by
[back to top]
Identifying child
abuse and neglect
A policy requiring child protection notification every time police respond to
an incident of family violence may have unintended consequences
in that it may
discourage women from reporting violence. Numerous studies have established that
one of the greatest barriers for
women to reporting violence or breaches of
protection orders is the fear of state intervention and the removal of children.
a police directive to make automatic reports to child protection
authorities—even though well-intentioned—could be
counter-productive.
The Commissions are interested in hearing views as to when it is appropriate
for police to make child protection notifications when
responding to incidents
of family violence.
In what circumstances is it appropriate for police to make child
protection notifications when responding to incidents of family
The impact of
mandatory reporting duties on criminal law
Mandatory reporting laws are a valuable mechanism for ensuring that cases of
child abuse and neglect are notified, so that protective
responses by both the
child protective agency and the police are activated. To ensure the highest
level of protection for children,
however, the Commissions consider that the
reporting thresholds need to be clear and sufficiently wide to ensure that
circumstances are not hidden. They also need to be sufficiently
finely tuned so that those subject to a mandatory reporting duty
are clear about
their responsibilities, and what matters are covered by their duties.
The Commissions note that reforms have increased the mandatory reporting
threshold in all jurisdictions but the ACT. The convergence
of the majority of
abuse has left the ACT out of step
with other jurisdictions. While the problems
of mandatory reporting laws may not be as marked in the territory, the ACT
may wish to review its legislative thresholds in light of reforms
elsewhere in Australia.
Permitting disclosure
of identity of mandatory reporters
The legislation in each jurisdiction contains a number of provisions to
encourage compliance with mandatory reporting duties, including:
protecting reporters from civil liability for breaches of duties or
defamation, among other things, where the reports are made in
good faith; and
provisions protecting the identity of reporters.
Reports made to child protection agencies are confidential. Except
to the extent that disclosure is required for the proper investigation
report, a reporter’s identity cannot be disclosed unless the reporter has
given his or her consent, or unless a court
permits it.
The general prohibitions on disclosure have substantial implications for the
capacity of agencies to share information about a child
or young person for the
purpose of investigating allegations of abuse and neglect. Requiring the police
to seek a court order to
authorise a child protection agency to disclose
protected information is an obstacle to the timely and effective investigation
allegations of child abuse and neglect.
The Commissions accept that protecting the confidentiality of reporters is
fundamental to encourage the disclosure of suspicions of
abuse and neglect to
the authorities. The reporter is generally entitled to maintain his or her
action. However, a general prohibition
on disclosure of the reporter’s identity or, more importantly, of
information contained
in the report (because the reporter’s identity could
be deduced from it) may hinder the proper conduct of an investigation
prosecution of an offence against a child or young person.
In the Commissions’ preliminary view, all states and territories should
permit a law enforcement agency to request, and receive,
information contained
in a report notwithstanding that it may result in the reporter’s identity
being disclosed, where it is
necessary for a proper investigation and subsequent
prosecution of offences against children.
As a matter of good practice, the reporter’s consent should always be
sought in the first instance. But where it is impractical
to obtain consent, or
where obtaining consent would prejudice the investigation of a serious offence,
a court should be able to permit
disclosure where it is satisfied that
disclosure of the information is critical for the investigation or prosecution
of a criminal
offence against a child or young person. Given that families may
move across jurisdictions, sometimes to avoid the reach of the law,
provisions should permit the information to be shared with police in other
states and territories, as well as the Australian
Federal Police.
Proposal 13–1
State and territory child protection legislation
should contain an exemption from the prohibition on the disclosure of the
of the reporter, or of information from which the reporter’s
identity could be deduced, for information disclosed to a law
enforcement agency
(a) the information is disclosed in connection with the investigation of a
serious offence alleged to have been committed against
a child or young person;
(b) the disclosure is necessary for the purpose of safeguarding or promoting
the safety welfare and wellbeing of any child or young
person, whether or not
the victim of the alleged offence.
Proposal 13–2
State and territory child protection legislation
should also provide that the exemption in Proposal 13–1 does not
apply unless
a senior officer of the law enforcement agency to which the
disclosure is made has certified in writing beforehand that:
(a) obtaining the reporter’s consent would prejudice the investigation
of the serious offence concerned; or
(b) it is impractical to obtain the consent.
Proposal 13–3
State and territory child protection legislation
should define law enforcement agency to be the police force of the relevant
the Australian Federal Police and the police force of any other state and
Proposal 13–4
State and territory child protection legislation
should provide that the person or body that discloses the identity of a
reporter—or
the information in a report from which the reporter’s
identity can be deduced— should notify the reporter of the disclosure
unless it is impractical to do so, or would prejudice the investigation of the
serious offence concerned.
[back to top]
Responding to reports
of child maltreatment
Whilst mandatory reporting obligations define the type of situations that
must be reported to child protection agencies, the legislation
defines the
circumstances and the threshold at which the state may legally intervene to
protect a child.
The two are not
aligned, although there is some support for aligning both thresholds.
In addition, not every report that justifies a statutory child protection
intervention will warrant a criminal justice response. That
determination is one
to be made by the police, or in more serious cases of abuse or neglect, the
office of the director of public
prosecutions, where different considerations
apply. The principal factor is whether the evidence would support a successful
prosecution.
In several jurisdictions including South Australia, the ACT and the Northern
Territory, reports of child abuse are directed to a centralised
intake service
or hotline. In Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia, reports are directed
to the district child protection department
office closest to the child’s
location, from which they are then referred to the police and/or an inter-agency
The systems in place for an initial assessment of a report and its referral
to the police and/or the inter-agency team differ in each
state and territory.
In a number of jurisdictions, there is a positive obligation on the child
protection agency to refer a report
immediately to the police where the report
contains allegations of harm that may involve a criminal
The police must investigate allegations of abuse or neglect when there is a
reason to believe that a criminal offence may have been
committed. Invariably
this involves interviewing the child or young person. The child or young person
must also usually submit to
an interview by community services caseworkers to
assess whether there are legislative grounds for making an application to the
for a care and protection order, and to determine what family, social
support and medical services should be provided.
The Commissions have heard in consultations that, even though there are
cooperative arrangements in place between agencies for dealing
matters, the police may not always understand the importance of their actions in
providing evidence of abuse when matters
of family violence or child abuse are,
for example, raised in family law proceedings.
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether the current inter-agency
protocols and memorandums of understanding are effective
in practice to ensure
that children are protected and that professionals in each part of the system
understand the consequences of
their actions for other parts of the system. The
Commissions are also interested in hearing what changes are required in law to
effective relationships between agencies.
In practice, are the inter-agency protocols and memorandums of
understanding between key agencies involved in child protection—such
the police and child protection agencies—effective to ensure that
professionals in each part of the system understand the
consequences of their
actions for other parts of the system?
Question 13–8
changes are required to facilitate effective relationships between agencies to
ensure that evidence is obtained in a way
that is appropriate not only for child
protection purposes but also for family law
with child protection agency
When matters are referred to a joint or inter-agency team, the decision as to
whether to initiate proceedings may be one made by the
police in consultation
with the child protection agency, or at least communicated to the child
protection caseworker involved as
directed under policy and procedure manuals.
In Queensland and Tasmania, the police are statutorily required to consult with
child protection agency before investigating an offence against a child who
is suspected to be in need of care and protection, or
before initiating
proceedings.
These provisions recognise that the child protection agency has an interest
in decisions to initiate proceedings against a parent
where such action may
conflict with their work with the family to address the underlying risk factors
that have given rise to the
abuse or neglect.
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether child protection
legislation should be amended to require police to consult with
the relevant
child protection agency before deciding whether to investigate an alleged
offence against a child.
Should child protection legislation be amended to require police
to consult with the child protection agency before deciding to investigate
alleged offence against a child where the child is suspected of being in need of
care and protection?
Question 13–10
Should child protection
legislation be amended to require police to consult with the child protection
agency before initiating proceedings
in relation to an alleged offence against a
[back to top]
Information
A central feature of an inter-agency response is the capacity of member
agencies to share relevant information about the child so
that a joint and
complementary strategy is agreed to provide services that the child needs.
In its recent report on privacy,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
(2008), the ALRC noted that a number of bodies have
identified instances where a child has been seriously injured or killed by a
where disclosure of information about the parent’s behaviour to
appropriate service providers could have helped to prevent
the injury or
Reviews into child deaths
have also highlighted the need for increased collaboration through information
sharing in order to protect
children from serious harm and death through abuse
and neglect.
It is now widely recognised in both Australia and abroad, that the best
outcomes for children and young people—in terms of their
development and safety needs—are achieved by adopting a collaborative
interagency response. The advantages of the major
players—namely the
police, the child protection agency and possibly the department of
health—collaborating are many,
and include:
the ability of agencies to combine the information that they have
the circumstances of the child;
requiring a child or young person to submit to one investigation and
interviewing process only rather than having to repeat the same
information to
different agency staff, thereby reducing the trauma and distress on the victim;
ensuring that the child or young person receives the services that
are needed, and that those services complement each other.
Commissions’ preliminary view is that all jurisdictions should ensure that
its legislative and administrative frameworks
facilitate a collaborative and
cooperative approach between human service and justice agencies. At a minimum,
all child protection
legislation should contain express provisions permitting
information about a child and his or her family to be shared between the
and prescribed bodies where the information relates to the safety, welfare and
wellbeing of a child, and where such information
is needed for the investigation
and prosecution of alleged offences against children. To facilitate information
sharing, consideration
should be given to establishing a shared database
containing basic information which intra-state agencies can access readily.
Proposal 13–5
States and territories should ensure that best
practice features of collaborative models of child protection are adopted,
(a) legislative provisions that allow agencies (including federal agencies)
to share relevant information about children and families
to make accurate
assessments of the needs of children and families and to ensure that appropriate
programs relative to those needs
are delivered in a timely and coordinated
(b) the establishment of a shared database which contains basic information
access to see quickly
which other agencies may be dealing with a particular child or family; and
(c) the development of guidelines to assist agencies to clarify their
respective roles and functions, to assist them when performing
functions under
the legislation, and to assist them to resolve any issues that may arise.
[back to top]
of children from family violence
Protection orders under family violence legislation can name children or
young people as an aggrieved family member, and in some jurisdictions,
applications for a protection order can be brought by, or on behalf of, a child
or young person. However, in NSW, the Children’s
Court is only able to
make a protection order in its criminal jurisdiction
young person, in order to protect other children or adults. It has no power to
make a protection order against an adult.
It also lacks power in its care
or young person,
pending final care and protection orders.
There is no question that a child who is exposed to family violence may be at
risk of serious physical or psychological harm. Allowing
a children’s
court to make a protection order in favour of a child, when the child or young
person is already subject to care
proceedings before the court, and final care
orders are pending, gives the court another tool to protect children from harm.
also consistent with the broad goal of this Inquiry of providing a more
seamless system for victims of family violence, including
children. The
Commissions are interested to hear views on this issue.
In care proceedings under child protection legislation, where
final orders are pending, should children’s courts in all states
territories be given power to make protection orders in favour of the child who
is the subject of proceedings before it, where
the court considers a protection
order necessary to protect the child from serious harm arising from the
child’s exposure to
family violence?
Question 13–12
a children’s court be able to make protection orders in favour of siblings
of the child who is the subject of care proceedings
before it? If so, should it
be able to make such an order of its own motion or should it be by application
by a party to the proceedings
or an advocate for the
[back to top]
Children and young
people at risk and juvenile justice
One specific area where the child protection system crosses the path of the
criminal justice system, and where poor outcomes for children
and young people
may result, is in relation to bail. Statistics show that more young people are
being held in detention on remand
for longer periods of time, and in part this
is because, quite simply, there is nowhere else for them to
Young people aged between 10
and 17 years are usually dealt with by the juvenile or youth justice system,
where detention is considered
a last resort and the emphasis is on diversion and
rehabilitation in order to break offending
However, the special
problems that many young people face when applying for bail tend to undermine
these principles.
The detention of children and young people on remand pending trial, where
bail would otherwise have been granted, clearly has a disproportionate
is contrary to the prevailing policies
and principles in the juvenile justice
arena of diversion and rehabilitation, and may exacerbate existing risk factors
for that class
of children and young people.
The solution recommended by the Wood Inquiry was an administrative one,
namely the establishment in NSW of an after-hours bail and
assistance service to
remanded in custody.
Residential
bail programs have also been suggested by advocacy bodies and service
Some of these
services and programs already exist in other jurisdictions including Victoria,
Queensland and Western Australia and
the Commissions support their availability
across all states and territories.
Referring care and
protection issues when they arise
Safety concerns for a child or young person who is a defendant in criminal
proceedings in a children’s or youth court could
be brought to the
attention of the child protection agency by giving the court a power to refer
the matter formally to the child
protection agency for investigation. The NSW
Children’s Court called for such a power in its submissions to the Wood
and to a previous review of the NSWLRC in relation to young
The Commissions understand that while magistrates may make reports to the
relevant child protection agency in these circumstances,
either via the usual
notification processes or by special arrangement with the relevant child
protection agency, this does not occur
often. One of the reasons for the
infrequent referral, as noted by the NSWLRC, is the court’s lack of power
to require the
child protection agency to report back to it on the results of
its investigation.
Children, Youth and Families Act
(Vic), the child protection agency is obliged to investigate any
matter referred to it by the Children’s Court, and must provide
of its investigation of the matter to the Court within 21 days of the
The report must set
out the outcomes of the investigation specifying, in particular, whether the
child protection agency has made
an application for a protection order, or a
therapeutic treatment order in relation to the child or if the investigation
that such action is not warranted.
The Commissions consider that there may be merit in giving courts a formal
power to refer their concerns for the safety of a child
or young person, who is
a defendant in criminal proceedings before it, to the child protection agency
for investigation.
Section 349
of the Victorian statute provides a useful model
in this regard. Such a power gives the court a clear pathway to take action
it is of the view that action is warranted, rather than relying on court
officers to make a report using the notification provisions.
It also ensures
that an investigation is carried out by the child protection agency.
There is also merit in ensuring the court can request relevant information
from a child protection agency in the exercise of its sentencing
This would assist it to identify any ongoing care and protection issues that it
ought to have regard to when sentencing
young offenders. Presently, in NSW, the
court may request this information under
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act
The Commissions are interested in hearing
from stakeholders about how often, in practice, courts request such
information.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that courts should also be able to
make a formal referral (with report back provisions)
to the child protection
agency when exercising its care jurisdiction, where it has concerns for the
safety of other children or siblings
of the child or young person who is the
subject of care proceedings before it.
Proposal 13–6
State and territory child protection legislation
should be amended to allow a court, in the exercise of its criminal jurisdiction
where a child or young person who is a defendant before it, to refer a matter to
the child protection agency for investigation where
it considers that there are
legislative grounds for a protection application, or an application for a
therapeutic treatment order,
to be made.
Proposal 13–7
State and territory child protection legislation
should require the child protection agency to provide, within 21 days of the
a report to the court setting out the outcomes of its investigation
into the matter, and specifying whether a care and protection
therapeutic treatment order is being sought, or if the investigation reveals
that such an order is not warranted.
Proposal 13–8
A court exercising care jurisdiction under state
and territory child protection legislation should have a power to refer its
for the safety of other children or siblings of the child or young
person the subject of care proceedings before it to the child
protection agency
for investigation, and to require the child protection agency to furnish it with
a report of its investigation
within a certain time period specified in the
legislation.
In practice, when sentencing young offenders, how often does the
court request information held by the child protection agency about
the offender
to be provided to it?
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
[6.121]–[6.127]. The Australian Law Reform Commission supported a more
liberal approach to be taken by the
courts when considering the impact of
sentencing on the offender’s family: see
[7.114]–[7.115].
L Bromfield and D
Higgins, ‘National Comparison of Child Protection Systems’
Child Abuse Prevention Issues
Child Protection Act 1999
Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008), [69.103].
Child Death Review Committee,
Annual Report of Inquiries into the Deaths of
Children Known to Child Protection
(2009), 47; NSW Ombudsman,
of Ebony: The Need for an Effective Interagency Response to Children at Risk
(2009), 53; NSW Ombudsman,
The Death of Dean Shillingsworth: Critical
Challenges in the Context of Reforms to the Child Protection System
M Dumbach, ‘Homes for Homeless
(2007) 32(3)
Alternative Law Journal
Children (Criminal
Proceedings) Act 1987
which excludes serious
children’s indictable offences from being determined in the NSW
Children’s Court.
Report of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in
(2008), Rec 15.1. The recommendation has been approved in principle by
the NSW Government, and an after-hours bail hotline, to operate
auspices of the NSW Department of Juvenile Justice, is expected to be
implemented by June 2010.
example, National Council of Social Services,
Bail Me Out: NSW Young People
(2010), Rec 1.4; UnitingCare Burnside,
Releasing the
Pressure on Remand: Bail Support Solutions for Children and Young People in New
South Wales
(2009); M Dumbach, ‘Homes for Homeless Children’
(2007) 32(3)
Alternative Law Journal
Report of the Special
Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
(2008), [15.76];
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Young Offenders
, Report No 104
(2005), [8.140].
Children, Youth
and Families Act 2005
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
14. Child Protection and the
Family Law Act
Introduction
Legal framework for interaction between the two systems
Notification of child maltreatment in Family Courts
Information flow
Administrative arrangements
Protocols and memorandums of understanding
Cooperative case management
14. Child Protection and the
Family Law Act
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 14 considers the interaction of state and territory child protection
laws with the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). The principal interaction issues
include: the jurisdictional overlap and intersections, and the determination of
which courts
should deal with parenting disputes that raise serious child
protection issues; the communication of information between the child
system and the family courts; the participation of child protection agencies in
family law matters; and the potential
for children to fall into the gaps between
the two systems.
[back to top]
intersections
Section 69J
Family Law Act
provides that each state and
territory court of summary jurisdiction can exercise federal family law
Section 69N
qualifies this in that a court of summary jurisdiction
cannot hear defended proceedings for a parenting order, other than a child
maintenance order, without the consent of all the parties. If consent is not
given, the court is obliged to transfer the proceedings
to the Family Court, the
Family Court of Western Australia, the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory,
or the Federal Magistrates
Court (FMC), as the case requires.
On the other hand, while federal family courts are not charged with
responsibility for investigating allegations of child maltreatment,
family violence and child abuse may be relevant to decisions about what is in
the best interests of the child in parenting
decisions. Child protection
agencies generally do not join these proceedings unless they are advised of the
family law proceedings
and judge the alleged issues of child maltreatment to be
serious enough to warrant intervention.
In a report to the Commonwealth Attorney-General in 2002, the Family Law
Council recommended that a decision should be taken as early
as possible whether
a matter should proceed under the
Family Law Act
or under child welfare
law with the consequence that there should be only one court dealing with the
In its 2009 advice, the
Family Law Council also recommended a referral of power to the Commonwealth
Parliament to allow federal family
courts to have concurrent jurisdiction with
the state courts to deal with all matters in relation to children including
family violence,
child protection and parenting
An alternative to a unified federal Family Court is to amalgamate the Family
Court with the various state courts. The exercise of
federal jurisdiction by the
Family Court of Western Australia is an example of this approach.
Section 36(6)
Family Court Act 1997
provides that where a child, who
is the subject of proceedings (between separating parents or parents and
extended family members)
appears to be in need of protection within the meaning
Children and Community Services Act 2004
(WA), the court
has, in relation to the child, all of the powers of the Children’s Court
in addition to the powers conferred
Family Court Act
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that, wherever possible, matters
involving children should be dealt with in one court—or
as seamlessly as
the legal and support frameworks can achieve in any given case. This was also
the outcome recommended by the Family
Law Council in 2002 as part of its
‘one court principle’—that is, that state and territory courts
should have a
broad power to make residence and contact orders under the
Family Law Act
in child protection proceedings so that one court can deal
with all substantive matters and ensure the child’s best interests
welfare are addressed.
The Commissions are interested in whether there is value in providing local
and magistrates courts with expanded jurisdiction under
. A practical limitation on the capacity of magistrates courts to hear
Family Law Act
matters is that they do not have the associated
counselling services or family dispute resolution processes of the Family Court
there are limited Family Court counselling services in rural areas. The
Commissions note however, that magistrates courts regularly
make interim
children’s orders under the
Family Law Act
, particularly in
regional areas.
Ideally, one court should be responsible for exercising jurisdiction in
relation to those matters where a substantial or permanent
shift of parental
responsibility for a child is first raised as an issue for resolution. The first
point of engagement should facilitate
the resolution of relevant issues as far
as possible, or assist in the smooth transition to other parts of the legal or
framework more suited to achieve such outcomes.
The power of children’s courts to make contact orders in proceedings
before them appears to complement their care and protection
power is necessary if governments are to adopt the Family Law Council’s
‘one court principle’.
Can children’s courts be given more powers to ensure orders
are made in the best interests of children that deal with parental
issues? If so, what powers should the children’s courts have, and what
resources would be required?
Question 14–2
Law Act 1975
(Cth) be amended to extend the jurisdiction which state and
territory courts already have under
to make orders for a parent to spend
time with a child?
Question 14–3
When should state and territory
children’s courts have power to determine contact between one parent and
another in matters
that are before the court in child protection
proceedings?
Question 14–4
What features of the Family Court of
Western Australia should be replicated in other jurisdictions?
Is there any role for a referral of legislative power to the
Commonwealth in relation to child protection matters? If so, what should
referral cover?
[back to top]
Legal framework for
interaction between the two systems
Another issue for this Inquiry is the need to ensure that each system knows
of child abuse or
neglect often end up being heard simultaneously in family law and child
protection proceedings. This can happen
if the fact that there are proceedings
in a court in one jurisdiction is not communicated to a court in the other.
Notification of child
maltreatment in Family Courts
The Initiating Application for proceedings in the Family Court and Family
Court of Western Australia requests information about ‘any
orders, agreements, parenting plans or undertakings’ to this or any other
court about ‘family law, child support,
family violence or child welfare
issues’ concerning any of the parties or children listed in the
application.
The purpose of the
form is to capture information about procedural, interim or final orders from a
federal family court. It intent
is to ensure that the court is aware of the
context in which orders are sought, for example, whether the party (and the
child) is already involved in parallel child protection
proceedings, or whether an order is in current effect under a state or territory
child welfare law. Contextual awareness enables the court to determine whether
to proceed with, adjourn or terminate the proceeding.
A related document is Form 4—Notice of Child Abuse or Family
Violence (Form 4). As noted on the form, it is to be used:
a) when allegations of child abuse or risk of child abuse are made and a
prescribed child welfare authority must be notified of
the allegations
Family Law Act 1975
b) if, in a case where an application is made to the court for a
in relation to a child, a person alleges that there has been abuse of a child or
family violence or there is a risk of abuse
of a child or family violence and
the allegation of abuse, family violence or risk of abuse or family violence is
relevant to whether
the court should grant or refuse the application
(Rule 2.04A
Family Law Rules 2004
The Family Law Council considered that Form 4 should remain the key means of
notification of child abuse issues in family law proceedings.
The Council
recommended some amendments to Form 4 to make it more
user-friendly.
The Chisholm Review
preferred a general screening of all cases for family violence and child abuse
The Commissions consider that there is scope for improvement to the existing
application forms. In preliminary consultations the Commissions
have heard that
Initiating Application (Family Law)
could be improved to make it
clearer to parties that the court needs to know, and they have a duty to
disclose, whether there are
child protection proceedings on foot, and whether
there is a current care order in relation to the child. It has been suggested
the reference to ‘child welfare issues’ in Part F of the
Initiating Application (Family Law)
is too opaque, and may lead parties
to overlook the function of the form in eliciting information about state or
territory child protection
proceedings and orders.
A question which targets significant concerns or fears the party has for
their safety, or for the safety of their child may elicit
more detailed
information. The purpose of a question with this focus is twofold. First, it
would clearly signal to the court the
possibility that there are current child
protection or family violence concerns in the proceeding which require
investigation and
assessment. Secondly, the focus on ‘significant
concerns’ raises the bar to approximate state and territory child
thresholds, so that if an affirmative answer were given, the court
has a prima facie trigger at an early stage to inform the relevant
protection agency in relation to child safety concerns, and a longer lead time
to enable the concerns to be investigated. This
would also facilitate
appropriate intervention in the proceedings by the state.
Part F of the
Application (Family Law)
should be amended to encourage parties to identify
whether there are or have been child protection concerns as early as possible in
proceedings. The Commissions are interested in hearing about the practical
changes that could be made to the
Initiating Application (Family Law)
make it clearer that parties are required to disclose current or prior child
protection proceedings and current child protection
orders. Further, the
Commissions seek suggestions as to other ways that child safety concerns may be
revealed at the commencement
of proceedings under the
Family Law Act
that they may be drawn to the attention of child protection agencies.
Proposal 14–1
To ensure appropriate disclosure of safety
concerns for children, the
Initiating Application (Family Law)
should be amended by adding an additional part headed ‘Concerns about
safety’ which should include a question along
the lines of ‘Do you
have any significant fears for the safety of you or your child(ren) that the
court should know about?’.
What other practical changes to the applications forms for
initiating proceedings in federal family courts and the Family Court of
Australia would make it clear to parties that they are required to disclose
current or prior child protection proceedings
and current child protection
Question 14–7
In what other ways can family law processes
be improved to ensure that any child safety concerns that may need to be drawn
attention of child protection agencies are highlighted appropriately upon
commencement of proceedings under the
Family Law Act 1975
Risk assessment
The Commissions understand that the Australian Government is currently
considering options for implementing a family violence screening
Screening frameworks are routinely used by family dispute resolution
practitioners and by other agencies in the family
law system. The
Commissions’ preliminary view is that state and territory child protection
agencies should contribute to any
screening framework for family violence and
child maltreatment. Early and active involvement by child protection agencies
an opportunity for participants in both systems to better understand
their respective roles and responsibilities.
This may best occur if a representative of the child protection agency is
actively involved in the screening process. A direct role
means that the child
protection system would have an immediate stake in dealing with the case. The
common family violence risk assessment
and risk management tool developed by the
Victorian Government may provide useful guidance for this
Proposal 14–2
Screening and risk assessment frameworks developed
for federal family courts should closely involve state and territory child
Information
Information from the family law system to
child protection system
Family Law Act
contains two provisions requiring family courts to
notify child protection agencies in certain circumstances. First, where a Form
requires the Registry Manager of the court to notify a
prescribed child welfare authority. Secondly, where an officer or professional
in a family court has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a child has been
abused, or is at risk of being abused,
requires them to notify a
prescribed child welfare authority.
Section 67ZA(3)
provides that a person may notify child protection agencies
where the person
has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a child:
(a) has been ill treated, or is at risk of being ill treated; or
(b) has been exposed, or subjected, or is at risk of being exposed or subjected,
to behaviour which psychologically harms the child.
Whether the relevant child protection agency takes action depends on the
threshold for taking action and the particular focus in the
whether, as a matter of fact, the child is in
current need of care, at risk, or
in need of protection. While evidence of a parent’s past abusive behaviour
may be relevant
in family law proceedings, that evidence does not necessarily
assist the child protection agency to determine whether the child is
at risk of harm.
Information from the child protection system
to the family law system
In child protection cases, the child protection agency initiates proceedings
by taking protective action in a court. The responsibility
for obtaining
evidence falls to the child protection agency. In family law proceedings, in the
absence of intervention from a child
protection agency the court may not have
relevant evidence relating to the alleged maltreatment of a child. The
includes mechanisms for seeking such information from child
protection authorities in the relevant jurisdiction—by subpoena
power to seek information and documents from child protection agencies.
Subpoenas may be issued under
Family Law Rules
power of a federal family court to compel production of documents from a child
protection agency under a subpoena was examined
by the High Court in
Northern Territory of Australia v
The specific issue was
whether under the former
Family Law Rules 1984
r 1 the court may compel production of documents which are the subject of a
‘public interest’ privilege under s 97(3)
Community Welfare Act
(NT). A majority of the court held
that the subpoena issued by the Family Court could not defeat state and
territory confidentiality
provisions.
Orders to produce documents or information
Section 69ZW
Family Law Act
provides that the court may make an
order in child-related proceedings requiring a prescribed state or territory
agency to provide
the court with the documents or information specified. The
order under
overrides any inconsistent state and territory law, but the
agency does not have to comply with the order in relation to:
(a) documents or information not in the possession or control of the agency;
(b) documents or information that include the identity of the person who made a
notification.
Once information is provided in response to the order, the court must admit
into evidence any such information on which it intends
There is qualified
protection for the identity of the person who made the notification—if the
person does not consent, the
court can only disclose their identity if satisfied
that it ‘is critically important to the proceedings and that failure to
make disclosure would prejudice the proper administration of
Each state and territory child protection law contains provisions for
protecting the confidentiality of information collected by child
agencies or for precluding such information from being admissible in another
proceeding.
The Commissions have heard that state and territory child protection agencies
provide very little information voluntarily to family
courts. They also
frequently challenge subpoenas issued by federal family courts. The Commissions
understand from preliminary consultations
that a number of child protection
agencies regard the decision in
Northern Territory of Australia v
as supporting a view that they cannot be compelled to answer subpoenas
from a federal family court. This view, which also apparently
affects the
attitude of some jurisdictions to the exercise of the court’s power under
Family Law Act
could constitute a serious systemic problem
because of the number of state and territory laws which may impact upon the
child protection information between jurisdictions.
In what ways can cooperation between child protection agencies
and family courts be improved with respect to compliance with subpoenas
Family Law Act 1975
Child protection interventions in family law
proceedings
A child protection agency may be involved in family law proceedings in three
principal ways: the relevant agency may intervene as
a party; parental
responsibility may be conferred on the child protection agency; and child
protection orders may be registered under
Family Law Act
In addition
a child protection agency may be involved through the Magellan project, which is
considered below.
Securing intervention
Family Law Act
, a prescribed welfare authority
is entitled to intervene in proceedings where it is alleged that a child has
been abused or is at
risk of being abused.
Section 91B
enables a family court to
request intervention by a child protection officer in a matter involving a
child’s welfare. An officer
who agrees to intervene is deemed to be a
party to the proceedings. An officer may also decline to intervene.
It appears that requests for intervention are regularly declined. The Wood
Inquiry identified four reasons why child protection agencies
may decide not to
intervene in family law proceedings:
the evidence may not justify intervention;
the evidence relates to past or future, rather than current
the threshold for notifications of abuse under care and protection
legislation are higher than the
Family Law Act
a party in proceedings for a parenting order under the
may be deemed by a child protection agency to have taken sufficient
protective action in relation to a
Clearly, the
best outcome for a child at significant risk of harm is for: the judge to be
made aware of concerns at an early stage;
the relevant state or territory child
protection agency to be informed of the concern and take timely investigative
action; and the
relevant state or territory child protection agency to seek care
orders if need be.
The worst outcome for the child is one in which protective action is not
taken when required. This may arise where, for example, a
judicial officer under
Family Law Act
determines on the evidence that there are safety
concerns in relation to the child, and neither parent is a viable carer. In that
instance, the judge may determine that it is not in the child’s best
interests to make a parenting order in favour of either
parent. That leaves the
problem of who should have parental responsibility for that child, especially
where a child protection agency,
having been previously notified of the safety
concern, decides not to intervene in the parenting proceedings. One option may
empower a family court to join parties to parenting proceedings where the
parents are found not to be viable carers for a child.
Child protection agencies may also be dissuaded from taking protective action
in a federal family court because, as parties, they
become liable to costs
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the Australian Government
should encourage the development of protocols and memorandums
of understanding
(MOUs) between federal family courts and child protection agencies that deal
with the following issues:
the election by a child protection agency to commence proceedings in
a federal family court or a state or territory court;
a process for dealing consistently with making and responding to
reports from child protection agencies;
subpoenas addressed to child protection agencies; and
a process which would permit a court to invite a child protection
agency to consent to an order being made which allocates parental
responsibility
in its favour, in circumstances where the court determines that no order should
be made in favour of either parent,
or grandparent, in the absence of being
required to become a party.
Conferring parental responsibility
on a child protection agency
What happens if the child protection agency declines to intervene? Can a
family court confer parental responsibility on the relevant
child welfare
authority, in the absence of intervention in the proceedings? These questions
in which it was
alleged that neither parent was being protective of the child and that both
parents’ households presented a
risk to the child. Benjamin J issued a
request for intervention under
, but this was declined. Benjamin J held
that parental responsibility should vest in the child welfare agency,
notwithstanding that
it had declined to intervene and be joined as a party. This
decision is currently being appealed.
Difficulties faced by federal family courts in obtaining sufficient
information from state and territory agencies to inform their
decision making is
a matter of concern. For example, a response from an agency indicating that the
matter was investigated and found
not to be substantiated does at least provide
some evaluation of the allegation, even if there is little detail. A response
states that no further action was required is filled with ambiguity, for
it may indicate nothing more than a conclusion that the
matter could be resolved
by orders made under the
Family Law Act
in favour of a viable carer.
To appropriately take into account child protection concerns in making decisions
of parental responsibility for children, family courts
require all relevant information. The family courts do not have an investigative
arm and must rely on the information provided by the parties and any information
obtained from child protection agencies.
The Commissions seek submissions about the role that child protection
agencies should play in family law proceedings and, in particular,
family courts should have additional powers to require their intervention. The
Commissions are also interested to hear about
any amendments necessary to the
Family Law Act
in consequence—for example, whether the Act should
be amended to provide that a family court may, upon finding that none of
parties to the proceedings is a viable carer, on its own motion join a child
protection agency or some other person (such as
a grandparent) as a party to
proceedings.
What role should child protection agencies play in family law
proceedings?
Question 14–10
Are amendments to the
(Cth) and state and territory child protection legislation required
to encourage prompt and effective intervention by child protection
agencies in
family law proceedings? For example, should the
Family Law Act
to provide that the court may, upon finding that none of the parties to the
proceedings is a viable carer, on its own
motion join a child protection agency
or some other person (for example, a grandparent) as a party to proceedings?
Should federal
family courts have additional powers to ensure that intervention
by the child protection system occurs when necessary in the interests
safety of children?
Enforcement of child protection orders in
family law courts
One mechanism for bridging the gap between the child protection and family
law systems is
Family Law Act
for the registration
of ‘state child orders’—orders dealing with matters concerning
residence and contact.
Section 70E
provides that once an order is registered in
a court, it has the same force and effect as if it were an order made by that
The effect of the registration is to invoke the enforcement mechanisms of
Family Law Act
The Chisholm Review suggested—in relation to s 67ZK of the
Family Law Act
—that, even where a child protection order is
registered, family courts may make orders in relation to children in the care
child protection authorities only if the state child welfare officer has given
written consent to the institution or continuation
of the proceedings. The
Review noted that there may be an absence of delegated power to provide the
necessary consent as part of
the registration
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether the registration of
relevant children’s court orders is a useful strategy
that enhances the
safety of children, and the circumstances in which child protection agencies
would consider its use.
As the giving of consent by a child welfare officer requires specific written
authority, if there is no delegated power then the consent
required by s 67ZK
may not effectively be given with the registration. The Commissions are
interested in hearing how the interaction
of these provisions operates in
What are the advantages of registration of state and territory
child protection orders under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth)? What are the interactions in practice of the registration provisions
and s 67ZK of the
The responsibility to investigate allegations of child
maltreatment—where its level of seriousness accords with the relevant
statutory intervention threshold—lies principally with child protection
agencies or the criminal justice system. It is easy
to lose sight of this
starting point because of differences between the way federal family courts and
child protection agencies receive
and assess allegations in the
‘protection’ area. Federal family courts need to play a more active
role in engaging and
assisting child protection agencies to understand how child
protection concerns arise in family law proceedings.
This section reveals some serious deficiencies in the system of protection
that are directly relevant to the Terms of Reference. The
Commissions have
formed the preliminary view that to protect children in both jurisdictions,
judicial officers exercising family
law jurisdiction should be empowered to
provide material filed and findings made to the relevant agency where there are
child protection
concerns, to assist the relevant agency to understand those
concerns, and to encourage them to take appropriate action.
The Commissions are interested in hearing how, in practice, information
exchange can best be facilitated between family courts and
child protection
How, in practice, can information exchange best be facilitated
between family courts and child protection agencies to ensure the safety
children? Are changes to the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) necessary to
achieve this?
[back to top]
Administrative
arrangements
A number of the problems identified in the area of child protection are
caused by a lack of communication and coordination between
the child protection
and family law systems. This section considers the administrative arrangements
in place to facilitate communication
and coordination between the systems.
and memorandums of understanding
Some state and territory child protection agencies have protocols or MOUs
with the Family Court and the FMC. These govern the handling
of child protection
matters and are designed to assist cooperation, clarify procedures and improve
decision-making. The purpose of
the majority of the MOUs is to meet the
protective needs of children. The Western Australian MOU takes a more expansive
and aims ‘to provide the best possible outcomes for
Stakeholders have told the Commissions that these arrangements work well
where they are in place. They shape the parties’ expectations
each will do, and in what circumstances. It appears to be appropriate and
desirable that there be nationally uniform or
consistent approaches to
information sharing between child protection agencies and federal family
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that all jurisdictions should have
MOUs and protocols—as appropriate—to govern
key elements of these
relationships. They establish the basic rules for dealing with cases where
family law proceedings require action
or intervention by a state or territory
child protection system. It is particularly important that where provisions in
Family Law Act
provide a power to request information or
assistance from a child protection agency, that the basis for the court’s
these powers be set out clearly and be readily available to judicial
officers, parties, legal advisers and other courts.
The Commissions are interested in hearing whether the variation in the
protocols across the jurisdictions causes any difficulties
in relation to
information flow and also as to how knowledge of the MOUs and protocols can be
Proposal 14–3
All states and territories should develop a
Memorandum of Understanding or Protocol to govern the relationship between
federal family
courts and child protection agencies.
Does the variation in the content of the protocols cause any
difficulties and, if so, what changes should be made to facilitate the
information between the family courts and child protection agencies? What
measures should be taken to ensure that the protocols
are effective in
Question 14–14
How could the Memorandums of
Understanding and Protocols for exchange of information between federal family
courts, child protection
agencies and legal aid commissions be better known
within courts, and beyond them?
Cooperative case
The Magellan project
The Magellan project is a case management approach to address the needs of
children and families where serious allegations of sexual
abuse or physical
abuse are raised during parenting disputes in the Family Court. The project
involves special management of cases
in which serious allegations of sexual or
physical abuse of children are made. Once a case is identified as suitable for
the Magellan
pathway, it is dealt with by a small designated team of judges,
registrars and family consultants. The Magellan project relies on
collaborative and highly coordinated set of processes and procedures, with
significant resources directed to each case in the early
A crucial aspect is
strong inter-agency coordination, in particular with state and territory child
protection agencies, which ensures
that problems are dealt with efficiently and
that information sharing is of high quality. An independent children’s
is appointed to every Magellan case. Formal protocols for information
sharing between child protection agencies and federal family
courts apply.
The FMC has no current involvement with the Magellan project as it is a
Family Court initiative. With the implementation of a common
registry for the
Family Court of Australia and the FMC, the transfer of matters between courts
appears to have become less of an
issue for complex child abuse cases which are
part of the Magellan project. Neither of the annual reports of the two courts
for 2008–09
raises this as an issue. The FMC has argued that, with the
introduction of the common registry, the Magellan project should be extended
include that court.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the Magellan project should
be extended to all qualifying cases, whether in the Family
Court, FMC or a other
federal court structure for family cases.
Collaborative relationships between all of the agencies involved in family
law and child protection must be strong, in order to ensure
that child abuse is
identified and responded to appropriately. Other options for ensuring an
effective response in child protection
cases in the family law system have been
proposed. The Family Law Council recommended the establishment of a national
child protection
service to investigate allegations of child maltreatment that
emerge from family law proceedings, because child protection agencies
insufficiently resourced to do that work.
A further option is for an early decision to be made about which court can
best handle a particular case. Family court parenting orders
can confer parental
responsibility on persons other than the parents. In child protection, the child
protection agency has a controlling
influence in according parental
responsibility or guardianship in relation to a child. In some cases a decision
could be made early
as to whether the matter should proceed under the
or under child protection law. This view was previously expressed by
the Family Law Council as the ‘one court
principle’,
endorsed by the Wood Inquiry.
The Commissions are interested in responses to these proposals and to hear
views as to what changes to law and practice are required
to prevent children
from ‘falling through the cracks’ between the child protection and
family law systems.
Proposal 14–4
The Australian Government should encourage all
and territory child protection agencies which include procedures:
(a) for electing the jurisdiction in which to commence proceedings;
(b) for dealing with requests for documents and information under
Family Law Act 1975
(c) for responding to subpoenas issued by federal family courts; and
(d) which permit a federal family court to invite a child protection agency
to consent to an order being made which allocates parental
responsibility in the
child protection agency’s favour, in circumstances where it determines
that no order should be made in
favour of either parent.
In what ways can the principles of the Magellan project be
applied in the Federal Magistrates Court?
Question 14–16
changes to law and practice are required to prevent children falling through the
gaps between the child protection and family
law systems?
Can the problems of the interactions in practice between family
law and child protection systems be resolved by collaborative arrangements
as the Magellan project? Are legal changes necessary to prevent systemic
problems and harm to children, and, if so, what are
Family Law Council,
Family Law and
Child Protection—Final Report
(2002), Rec
Family Law Council,
Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An Advice on the
Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
(2009), Rec
Family Law Council,
Family Law and
Child Protection—Final Report
(2002), 85–86. See Rec
Family Court of Australia,
Initiating Application (Family Law)
<www.familycourt.gov.au/> at
9 February 2010, 6.
Court of Australia,
Form 4—Notice of Child Abuse or Family Violence
<www.familylawcourts.
gov.au> at 9 February 2010.
Improving Responses to Family Violence in the Family Law System: An
Advice on the Intersection of Family Violence and Family Law Issues
R Chisholm,
Family Courts
Violence Review
(2009), Recs 2.3, 2.4.
Victorian Department of Human Services,
Family Violence Risk Assessment and
Risk Management Framework
Northern Territory of Australia v GPAO
(1999) 196 CLR
Family Law Act 1975
must be notified and given an opportunity to respond in such circumstances:
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
Ray v Males
[2009] FamCA 219.
R Chisholm,
Protecting Children—The Family Law Interface
Co-operation and
Coordination—An Evaluation of the Family Court of Australia’s
Magellan Case Management Model
Family Law Council,
and Child Protection—Final Report
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
15. Sexual Assault and Family
15. Sexual Assault and Family Violence
15. Sexual Assault and Family
of the Consultation Paper concerns the second Term of Reference of the
Inquiry. This requires the Commissions to focus on the impact
of inconsistent
interpretation or application of laws in cases of sexual assault occurring in a
family violence context, including
rules of evidence, on victims of such
Chapter 15 canvasses what is known about the prevalence of sexual assault in
the family violence context and situates the experience
of sexual assault as
part of family violence more generally. It highlights aspects of family violence
that are important in understanding
and responding to this category of sexual
violence—for example, the many types of sexual violence experienced by
children, its repetition within the family violence context, its
cumulative impact and coexistence with other forms of family violence.
The chapter then introduces the response of the criminal justice system to
the unique features of sexual assault, as well as the myths
children and sexual assault that continue to hold some sway in the community,
and in the legal system. Key myths and
misconceptions (frequently inter-related)
include that:
women and children are inherently unreliable and lie about sexual
the accusation of rape is easily made, but difficult to challenge;
sexual assault is most likely to be committed by a stranger;
women cannot be sexually assaulted by their spouse;
some sexual assaults are more serious and damaging than others;
non-consent is verbally articulated, evidenced by struggle and
results in physical injuries; and
a ‘true’ or ‘genuine’ victim of sexual
assault does not delay in reporting.
The unique features of sexual
offences include: the nature of the crime for the victim, the nature of the
crime in terms of the elements
that need to be proved and what this means for
the content of the evidence that has to be elicited from the victim, the focus
credibility, the focus on consent in adult sexual assault matters, the length
and nature of cross-examination, and the likelihood
that there is some close
relationship between the complainant and the victim (as current or former
intimate partners or family members).
The chapter introduces the substantial reform of law and procedure that has
been undertaken in this area over the last three decades
to provide more
appropriate criminal justice responses to sexual assault.
Other areas of the law that also respond to sexual assault, including
protection orders, family law, crimes compensation schemes and
the law of torts
are briefly discussed. This discussion recognises that the criminal justice
system is not the only legal response,
nor is it simply the law that is (or
should be) called on to respond to and reduce sexual violence.
Finally, the chapter discusses the ‘implementation gap’—the
gap between written law and its practice—that
remains despite extensive
changes to law and procedure related to sexual assault. It highlights the likely
continued disjunction
between the purpose and intention of legislation and its
application in practice without extensive cultural change.
Chapter 15 is intended to provide general background information critical to
a proper understanding of the criminal justice system’s
response to sexual
assault in the family violence context and does not contain any questions or
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
16. Sexual Offences
Introduction
Overview of sexual offences
Legislative framework
‘Rape’: the penetrative sexual offence
Sexual offences against children and young people
Statutory definition of consent
Circumstances that negate consent
The mental element
Jury directions about consent
Guiding principles and objects clauses
16. Sexual Offences
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 16 summarises the range of existing sexual offences and identifies
inconsistencies in relation to elements of these offences,
notably in relation
to the issue of consent. It also discusses the role that guiding principles and
objects clauses can play in explaining
the reality of sexual assault. The
summary of offences is not comprehensive, but focuses on those sexual offences
that are most likely
to be perpetrated by a current or former intimate partner
or family member.
[back to top]
Overview of sexual
Legislative
Each Australian jurisdiction has its own set of substantive and procedural
criminal laws. The main point of divergence between the
the criminal law is codified or remains guided by the common law. Within that
distinction, there is a further
differentiation as to whether the jurisdiction
has adopted the uniform Evidence Acts.
the penetrative sexual offence
Chapter 16 includes a brief overview of federal, state and territory law in
relation to penetrative sexual offences, aggravated sexual
assaults, indecent
assault, acts of indecency and assaults with intent to commit sexual acts. The
chapter notes the various statutory
extensions and modifications to the common
law crime of rape in each jurisdiction and the differences in the language and
the offences.
Do significant gaps or inconsistencies arise among Australian
(a) definition of sexual intercourse or penetration;
(b) recognition
of aggravating factors;
(c) penalties applicable if an offence is found
(d) offences relating to attempts; or
(e) definitions of indecency
Question 16–2
Do these gaps or inconsistencies have a
disproportionate impact on victims of sexual assault occurring in a family
violence context?
If so, how?
offences against children and young people
Each jurisdiction provides a range of offences concerning sexual conduct with
children. For example: sexual intercourse; attempts
to have sexual intercourse;
acts of indecency; procuring or grooming a child for ‘unlawful sexual
activity’; and abducting
a child with the intention of engaging in
unlawful sexual activity. Absence of consent is generally not an element of
these offences.
Offences against children are commonly articulated in terms of
the age of the victim. This gradation generally reflects the seriousness
offences against very young children. Accordingly, the sentences attached to
those offences are higher than for those against
older children.
There is inconsistency in the age of consent—the age at which young
people are considered able to consent to sexual activity—across
of sexual offending and to the availability of
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sexual Offences Against Children) Act
(Cth), concerning child sex tourism offences, sets the age of consent
at 16 years of age. According to the Explanatory Memorandum,
this ‘strikes
the appropriate balance between the need to protect vulnerable persons from
sexual exploitation, and the need
to allow for sexual autonomy’. The
Commissions agree with this approach.
Proposal 16–1
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide that the age of consent for all sexual offences is 16
How should ‘similarity in age’ of the complainant and
the accused be dealt with? Should it be a defence, or should lack
of consent be
included as an element of the offence in these circumstances?
At what age should a defendant be able to raise an honest and
reasonable belief that a person was over a certain
Persistent sexual abuse of a
All jurisdictions have introduced offences in relation to the
‘persistent sexual abuse of a child’, ‘maintaining
relationship with a young person’, or the ‘persistent sexual
exploitation of a child’. Generally these
offences capture a number of
unlawful sexual acts—not necessarily of the same kind—against a
child within the one indictment.
The provisions clearly stipulate that ‘it
is not necessary to specify or to prove the dates and exact circumstances of the
alleged occasions on which the conduct constituting the offence occurred’.
Instead, reasonable particularity for the period
during which the offence(s) are
alleged to have taken place is required and there must be a description of the
‘nature of the
separate offences alleged to have been committed by the
accused during that period’.
Has the offence of ‘persistent sexual abuse’ or
‘maintaining a relationship’ achieved its aims in assisting
prosecution of sexual offences against children in the family context, where
there are frequently multiple unlawful acts? If
not, what further changes are
[back to top]
Liability for sexual
offences against adults generally requires that the victim did not consent.
Where the complainant and the defendant
know each other, particularly in the
context of a previous or current intimate relationship, the issue of consent is
particularly
Time for Action
noted variations across Australia in terms of:
the definition of consent;
the conditions or circumstances that are seen as negating
the way in which an accused’s ‘honest belief’ in
consent is dealt with; and
the use of judicial directions as a way in which to inform and
educate the jury about what amounts (or does not amount) to
definition of consent
With the exception of the ACT, every Australian jurisdiction has a statutory
definition of consent based on one of the following three
approaches:
free agreement;
free and voluntary agreement; or
consent freely and voluntarily given.
The Commissions
support the adoption of a statutory definition of consent across all Australian
view is that the preferred statutory
definition of consent is ‘free and voluntary agreement’. This
definition is consistent
with the Model Criminal Code, and has been adopted by
the Commonwealth, NSW, South Australia and the Northern Territory. The
Commissions
agree that including the term ‘agreement’ reinforces
positive and communicative understandings of consent and suggests
Proposal 16–2
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide statutory definitions of consent based on ‘free
and voluntary agreement’.
Circumstances
that negate consent
Legislation in every Australian jurisdiction provides a non-exhaustive list
of circumstances that negate or vitiate consent. If the
prosecution proves a
negating factor or vitiating circumstance in a particular case, consent will not
be a fact in issue at trial.
Many of the negating factors are common to all
Australian jurisdictions. There is, however, considerable variation in scope and
Some of the negating factors prescribed by legislation merely codify
the position at common law; others go beyond the common law
position—rectifying anomalies, deficiencies or gaps.
The Commissions consider that it is desirable that such lists be
non-exhaustive, as is the case in all Australian jurisdictions. The
Commissions
are interested in comment about how the various vitiating provisions relate to
complainants who have experienced sexual
assault in a family violence context.
Issues may arise, for example, in relation to whether long standing and
pervasive family violence
creates a coercive, intimidating or threatening
environment (whether or not there are threats of physical force); and as a
whether such a family violence context may negate consent to sexual
activity. Do actual threats or coercive behaviours need to be
immediately
present to be considered to vitiate consent?
Proposal 16–3
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should prescribe a non-exhaustive list of circumstances where there
is no consent to sexual activity, or where consent is vitiated. These need not
automatically negate consent, but the circumstances
must in some way be
recognised as potentially vitiating consent. At a minimum, the non-exhaustive
list of vitiating factors should
(a) lack of capacity to consent, including because a person is asleep or
unconscious, or so affected by alcohol or other drugs as
to be unable to
(b) the actual use of force, threatened use of force against the complainant
or another person, which need not involve physical violence
or physical
(c) unlawful detention;
(d) mistaken identity and mistakes as to the nature of the act (including
mistakes generated by the fraud or deceit of the accused);
(e) any position of authority or power, intimidation or coercive
To what extent are the circumstances vitiating consent set out in
current legislation appropriate to sexual assaults committed in
violence context? Are any amendments required to draw attention to the coercive
environment created by family violence,
or are the current provisions
sufficient?
mental element
In all jurisdictions, the prosecution must prove that sexual penetration took
place without the consent of the complainant. These
are the physical elements of
the offence. In a number of jurisdictions a further element, the mental element,
must also be proved
in relation to consent. The mental element is the state of
mind of the accused which must be established beyond reasonable doubt
accused can be convicted.
In the common law jurisdictions, and the Northern Territory (a Code
complainant was not consenting, or was reckless as to that consent.
In the remaining jurisdictions, the mental state for rape is satisfied by a
mere intention to have intercourse. In these jurisdictions,
prosecution must prove that the complainant did not consent, they do not have to
prove that the defendant knew the complainant
was not consenting or was reckless
as to consent.
In all jurisdictions the defendant may raise a defence that he or she
honestly believed that the complainant was consenting. Again,
there is a clear
difference of approach between most of the common law jurisdictions and the Code
honest belief in consent need not be
reasonable.
However, in the Code
reasonable.
The law’s treatment of honest and mistaken belief remains an issue of
continuing controversy. The availability of the defence
is potentially an
important issue for complainants who have, or have had, an intimate relationship
with the accused and, therefore,
is of particular relevance to the family
violence context of this Inquiry. The intimate partner context may enable
accused persons
to raise a belief in consent based on past consensual activities
or ways of agreeing to sexual encounters.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that the issues are best addressed
by adopting the current NSW formulation of honest and
reasonable belief. The
insertion of an objective element, or the modification of the subjective element
by requiring reasonable steps
to ascertain consent, has also been adopted by
various overseas jurisdictions, for example in New Zealand, United Kingdom and
The Commissions are also concerned that ambiguity in relation to honest
belief may be more likely to arise in the context of sexual
assault occurring in
a long standing sexual relationship. This is likely to create difficulties at
trial for such cases. For example,
where the accused and complainant have an
ongoing relationship, the defence of honest and mistaken belief and its
subjective nature
may permit accused persons to concoct a mistaken belief,
making the prosecution’s task of disproving the belief very difficult.
Commissions are interested in comment on how the defence of honest belief
affects decisions made by the police and prosecutors
of a successful prosecution.
Proposal 16–4
Commonwealth, state and territory sexual offences
legislation should provide that a person who performs a sexual act with another
person, without the consent of the other person, knows that the other person
does not consent to the act if the person has no reasonable
grounds for
believing that the other person consents. For the purpose of making any such
finding, the trier of fact must have regard
to all the circumstances of the case
including any steps taken by the person to ascertain whether the other person
consents, but
not including any self-induced intoxication of the person.
Is an honest belief in consent more likely to be raised in cases
where the complainant has or has had an intimate relationship with
the accused?
If so, will the insertion of an objective element assist in these cases? Are
other measures required to clarify or restrict
the defence of honest belief in
these cases?
Jury directions about
Research indicates that jurors find consent a difficult concept to understand
and apply, and that jurors’ pre-existing attitudes
have been found to
influence their judgments
the facts of the case and the manner
in which the evidence was given.
For this reason, the Commissions provisionally support enacting positive
directions on consent: what it is, when it is absent, and
physical resistance and injury. Such directions may assist to reinforce the
communicative model of consent
and provide positive messages to the community
potentially
powerful tools of cultural change for those involved in the
prosecution of sexual offences.
Proposal 16–5
State and territory legislation should provide
that a direction must be made to the jury on consent in sexual offence
proceedings
where it is relevant to a fact in issue. Such directions must be
related to the facts in issue and the elements of the offence and
expressed in
such a way as to aid the comprehension of the jury. Such directions should
(a) the meaning of consent (as defined in the legislation);
(b) the circumstances that vitiate consent, and that if the jury finds beyond
reasonable doubt that one of these circumstances exists
then the complainant was
not consenting;
(c) the fact that the
person did not say or do anything to indicate free agreement to a sexual act
when the act took place is enough
to show that the act took place without that
person’s free agreement; and
(d) that the jury is not to regard a person as having freely agreed to a
sexual act just because she or he did not protest or physically
resist, did not
sustain physical injury, or freely agreed to engage in another sexual act
(whether or not of the same type) with
that person, or a sexual act with another
person, on an earlier occasion.
Where the defence asserts that the accused believed that the complainant was
consenting to the sexual act then the judge must direct
the jury to
(e) any evidence of that belief; and
(f) whether that belief was reasonable in all the relevant circumstances
having regard to (in a case where one of the circumstances
that vitiate consent
exists) whether the accused was aware that that circumstance existed in relation
to the complainant;
(g) whether the accused took any steps to ascertain whether the complainant
was consenting or might not be consenting, and if so,
the nature of those steps;
(h) any other relevant matters.
[back to top]
Guiding principles
and objects clauses
Time for Action
drew attention to the important role that guiding
principles can play in the interpretation of the law relating to sexual offences
and in the application of the rules of evidence in sexual offence proceedings.
Victoria is the only Australian jurisdiction which
provides an objects statement
and guiding principles in relation to sexual offences and related procedural and
evidential matters.
The Commissions agree that these statements can perform an important symbolic
and educative role in the application and interpretation
of the law, as well as
for the general community. While much more is required than simply a statement
of guiding principles to change
culture, it does provide an important
opportunity for governments and legal players to articulate their understanding
of sexual violence
and a benchmark against which to assess the implementation of
the law and procedure.
The objectives and principles articulated in the Victorian legislation are an
instructive starting point for similar provisions in
other jurisdictions. Other
matters mentioned in
Time for Action
could be incorporated to provide a
focus on particularly vulnerable groups of women and give sexual assault
visibility as a form of
family violence.
Time for Action
recommended that
Indigenous women and women with intellectual disabilities should be specifically
recognised as victims of sexual
violence, and that there should be specific
acknowledgement that sexual violence constitutes family violence—as it is
these cases that criminal justice systems deal with less
effectively.
Proposal 16–6
State and territory sexual offences legislation
should include a statement that the objectives of the legislation are to:
(a) uphold the fundamental right of every person to make decisions about his
or her sexual behaviour and to choose not to engage in
sexual activity;
(b) protect children and persons with a cognitive impairment from sexual
exploitation.
Proposal 16–7
State and territory sexual offences, criminal
procedure or evidence legislation, should provide for guiding principles, to
which courts
should have regard when interpreting provisions relating to sexual
offences. At a minimum, these guiding principles should refer
(a) there is a high incidence of sexual violence within society;
(b) sexual offences are significantly under-reported;
(c) a significant number of sexual offences are committed against women,
children and other vulnerable persons, including persons
with a cognitive
impairment;
(d) sexual offenders are commonly known to their victims; and
(e) sexual offences often occur in circumstances where there are unlikely to
be any physical signs of an offence having occurred.
Should such a statement of guiding principles make reference to
any other factors, such as recognising vulnerable groups of women,
specifically acknowledging that sexual violence constitutes a form of family
[1975] UKHL 3
[1976] AC 182.
Juror Attitudes and Biases in Sexual Assault Cases
(2007), 3–5.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
17. Reporting, Prosecution and
Pre-trial Processes
Introduction
Attrition in sexual assault cases
Reporting to the police
Police and integrated agency responses
The prosecution phase
Joint or separate trial
Consent and joint trial
Pre-recorded evidence
17. Reporting, Prosecution and
Pre-trial Processes
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 17 maps out the key ‘decision points’ in the
prosecution of sexual assault offences. These decision points extend
reporting to the police, through the handling of cases by various offices of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and to
procedures involved in the trial of
sexual offences. At each of these decision points, cases are filtered out,
including because
of the demands imposed on complainants. This
process—referred to as ‘attrition’—may lead to offences
being reported and cases being unnecessarily withdrawn or dismissed.
[back to top]
Attrition in sexual
assault cases
Improved data collection in relation to the reporting and prosecution of
sexual assault, including in a family violence context, is
clearly desirable.
Better statistics on attrition rates and outcomes in sexual assault cases are
critical to identifying problems,
and designing and monitoring solutions, in
relation to how the criminal justice system deals with sexual assault.
Bodies like the Australian
Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault (ACSSA) and the Australian Institute of
Criminology (AIC), along
with state and territory counterparts, have an
important role to play in this regard. One of the roles of ACSSA, in particular,
to ‘improve access to current information on sexual assault in order to
assist policymakers and others interested in this area
to develop evidence-based
strategies that respond to, and ultimately reduce, the incidence of sexual
Proposal 17–1
The Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual
Assault, the Australian Institute of Criminology and similar state and territory
should prioritise the collection of comprehensive data on attrition
rates and outcomes in sexual assault cases, including in relation
assault perpetrated in a family violence context.
[back to top]
Reporting to the
Since the late 1980s, policing practices have
changed to recognise the difficulties in investigating sex offences,
particularly those
committed by serial offenders. This has seen the
establishment of specialist squads around Australia to police serial sex
other types of serious sex offending and online sex offences. In
addition, specialist policing aims to minimise attrition rates by
evidence gathering and the response of police to victims of sexual assault.
Most specialist police squads appear to be more focused on, and dedicated to,
the offences of extra-familial offenders rather than
those that occur in a
family violence context. The extent to which specialist police squads alone can
increase the policing and apprehension
of sex offenders is difficult to assess.
Police have indicated that reform must be linked to providing additional
training and resources.
Have specialist police squads for sex crimes increased the
policing and apprehension of sexual assault offenders, including in a family
violence context?
Question 17–2
To what extent is the work of
specialist police hampered by lack of training and resources? In what ways can
improvements be made?
Police and integrated agency
Specialised police units also have roles in integrating police responses with
those of other government agencies involved in child
protection. For example,
Victoria Police has a Sexual Offences and Child Abuse (SOCA) Coordination Office
which collaborates with
government and non-government agencies in relation to
coordinated approaches to family violence, sexual assault and child abuse.
January 2007, Sexual Offences and Child Abuse Investigation Teams (SOCITs) and
Multidisciplinary Centres (MDCs) were established
to improve government and
police responses to sexual assault.
The SOCITs are staffed by specialist police investigators and specialist
sexual assault counsellors. The SOCIT is a victim-centred
service delivery and
investigative model, which aims to enhance the chances of prosecution and victim
satisfaction with the handling
of cases. It was developed by Victoria Police in
response to the VLRC’s 2004 report on sexual offences.
The Commissions have heard that specialised police responses to sexual
assault are important for complainants. However, not all sexual
assault offences
are dealt with by specialist police or units and considerable barriers may exist
for complainants of sexual assault,
particularly in rural, remote and Indigenous
communities, including problems with access to police and forensic examination
facilities.
Are specialised police and integrated agency responses effective
in reducing the attrition of sexual assault cases during the police
investigation phase? If not, what further measures should be taken?
Question 17–4
What impact are specialised police units having on
improving collection of admissible evidence and support for victims of sexual
in a family violence context?
Question 17–5
specialised sexual assault police units be established in jurisdictions that do
not have them?
[back to top]
The prosecution
The decision whether to commence or continue prosecution of sexual assault
offences is a significant aspect of the criminal justice
process. The DPPs in
each jurisdiction exercise considerable discretion in deciding both whether to
prosecute alleged offenders and
how any such prosecution should proceed. This
discretion is subject to prosecution policies or guidelines in each
The available data appear to indicate that substantial numbers of sexual
assault cases are discontinued by prosecutors—both
before and after
indictment. Many of these, perhaps up to half, are withdrawn because of the
attitude of the victim. While some of
these cases would also have encountered
evidentiary issues—and hence may have been subject to ‘subtle’
encouragement
to withdraw—others feared re-victimisation from the
defendant or the court process, and it is likely many victims withdraw
context of ongoing family violence.
This suggests that it may be possible, and desirable, to reduce attrition
rates at the prosecution stage by providing additional support
and information
to victims. The Commissions are interested in what steps should be taken to
reduce the attrition of sexual assault
cases during the prosecution phase,
including in relation to sexual assault perpetrated in a family violence
It may be possible to identify best practice in the policies and guidelines
of DPPs in dealing with sexual assault cases, including,
for example, in
relation to referral of victims and witnesses to relevant support services;
consultation with victims in relation
to prosecutorial decisions; and the
provision of information and assistance more generally. The Commissions are
especially interested
to learn whether any policies, practices or guidelines
should be introduced to deal with sexual assault perpetrated in a family
Proposal 17–2
Commonwealth, state and territory Directors of
Public Prosecution should ensure that prosecutorial guidelines and policies:
(a) facilitate the referral of victims and witnesses of sexual assault to
appropriate welfare, health, counselling and other support
(b) require consultation with victims of sexual assault about key
prosecutorial decisions including whether to prosecute, discontinue
prosecution or agree to a charge or fact bargain;
(c) require the ongoing provision of information to victims of sexual
assault about the status and progress of proceedings;
(d) facilitate the provision of assistance to victims and witnesses of
sexual assault in understanding the legal and court process;
(e) ensure that family violence protection orders or stalking intervention
orders are sought in all relevant circumstances; and
(f) require referral of victims and witnesses of sexual assault of victims
to providers of personal legal advice in related areas,
such as family law and
victims’ compensation.
What measures should be taken to reduce the attrition of sexual
assault cases during the prosecution phase, including in relation
assault committed in a family violence context?
Question 17–7
there any further prosecutorial guidelines and policies that could be introduced
to reduce the attrition of cases of sexual assault
committed in a family
violence context?
[back to top]
Before an adult charged with an indictable sexual offence can be sent for
trial, a committal hearing may be held. Committal hearings
or proceedings are a
preliminary examination of the evidence by a magistrate or other judicial
officer. Where the judicial officer
finds there is sufficient evidence to
support a conviction, the accused is committed to stand trial in a higher court.
In many cases
a committal hearing will be determined on the basis of documentary
evidence alone, which is referred to as a ‘paper’
‘hand-up’ committal.
The result of this is that victims may be required to give evidence twice and
be subject to cross-examination at both committal and
trial. The Commissions are
of the view that there is little or no benefit in requiring that complainants
give evidence twice. There
should be a complete prohibition in all states and
territories on complainants in sexual offence proceedings being required to
committal hearings in person.
Proposal 17–3
State and territory legislation should prohibit
any complainant in sexual assault proceedings from being required to attend to
evidence at committal proceedings. Alternatively, child complainants should
not be required to attend committal proceedings and,
for adult complainants, the
court should be satisfied that there are special reasons for the complainant to
[back to top]
Joint or separate
Sexual assault cases—especially those within a family violence
context— commonly involve multiple incidents and multiple
complainants,
for example, a number of siblings may allege that a parent has sexually abused
In such situations, the prosecution is likely to make a pre-trial application
to have the counts against the defendant heard in a
joint trial, rather than
separate trials. The defence, in contrast, is more likely to apply for separate
trials for each offence.
The power to order a joint trial is discretionary and
is exercised in order to prevent prejudice to the defendant. There is no limit
to the circumstances which will justify separate trials. However, two factors
which have received detailed consideration by the High
Court are: charges where
evidence in relation to one count is not admissible in relation to another, but
is prejudicial; and where
the charges are for sexual offences.
Decisions to hold separate trials or refuse to admit relevant tendency or
propensity evidence about a defendant’s sexual behaviour
are considerable
barriers to the successful prosecution of sex offences. Victoria has established
a presumption in favour of joint
trial in sexual offence cases.
The Commissions consider that, in order to reduce trauma for complainants in
sexual assault cases, there should be legislation creating
a presumption in
favour of joint trial of multiple allegations against the same defendant, based
on the Victorian provisions.
Proposal 17–4
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
(a) create a presumption that when two or more charges for sexual offences
are joined in the same indictment, it is presumed that
those charges are to be
tried together; and
(b) state that this presumption is not rebutted merely because evidence on
one charge is inadmissible on another charge.
Consent and joint
The High Court’s decision in
Phillips v The
considered to have application to all sexual assault trials where there are
multiple complaints of sexual assault against the
same defendant and where
consent is a fact in issue. The issue raised by
is whether the
evidence of the other complainants was relevant to whether or not the first
complainant consented to sexual relations
with the defendant.
involved a joint trial with six complainants. The High Court
held that the evidence of each complainant was not cross-admissible
in relation
to the counts involving the other complainants on the grounds of lack of
relevance. There is some case law
to show that
is being applied to prevent joint trials being held
in relation to multiple allegations of sexual assaults against the same
What impact has
Phillips v The Queen
prosecution of sexual assaults where there are multiple complaints against the
same defendant and consent is a fact in
Question 17–9
there a need to introduce reforms to overturn the decision in
Phillips v The
[back to top]
Pre-recorded
Pre-recorded evidence is recorded before the trial but used in court as part
of the trial process and is an aspect of vulnerable witness
protection.
Pre-recorded evidence used in criminal proceedings can be categorised into two
distinct forms:
the initial interview between police and the witness admitted as
evidence-in-chief;
the entirety of the witness’s evidence, including
cross-examination.
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
provides for the use of pre-recorded interviews with victims as
evidence-in-chief, however,
the provisions do not extend to complainants in
sexual offence proceedings generally. The Commonwealth provisions apply only to
witnesses, and the NSW and Victorian provisions to children and
cognitively impaired witnesses.
In the Commissions’ view, all Australian jurisdictions should adopt
comprehensive provisions dealing with pre-recorded evidence
in sexual offence
proceedings. These provisions should allow the tendering of audiovisual records
of interview between police and
complainants of sexual assault as the
complainant’s evidence-in-chief and apply to all victims of sexual assault
(adults and
In addition, child victims of sexual assault and victims of sexual assault
who are vulnerable as a result of mental or physical impairment
allowed to provide an audiovisual record of evidence at a pre-trial hearing
attended by the judge, the prosecutor, the
defence lawyer, the defendant and any
other person the court deems appropriate. Adult victims of sexual assault should
also be permitted
to provide evidence in this way, by order of the court.
Audiovisual evidence should be recorded and replayed at the trial as the
witness’s evidence in chief. Recorded evidence should be available for use
at any re-trial following an appeal or in other
proceedings in appropriate
circumstances.
Proposal 17–5
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should allow the tendering of pre-recorded audiovisual material of interview
investigators and a sexual assault complainant as the
complainant’s evidence-in-chief.
Proposal 17–6
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should permit child victims of sexual assault and victims of sexual assault who
vulnerable as a result of mental or physical impairment to provide an
audiovisual record of evidence at a pre-trial hearing attended
by the judge, the
prosecutor, the defence lawyer, the defendant and any other person the court
deems appropriate. Adult victims of
sexual assault should also be permitted to
provide evidence in this way, by order of the court. Audiovisual evidence should
be replayed
at the trial as the witness’s evidence. Recorded evidence
should be available for use at any re-trial following an appeal or
proceedings in appropriate circumstances.
Proposal 17–7
Commonwealth, state and territory governments
should ensure that participants in the criminal justice system receive
comprehensive
education about legislation authorising the use of pre-recorded
evidence in sexual assault proceedings, and training in relation
to interviewing
victims of sexual assault and creating pre-recorded evidence.
Phillips v The Queen
[2006] HCA 4
(2006) 225 CLR
[2006] ACTSC 47
[2006] QCA 220
[2006] VSC 265.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
18. Trial Processes
Introduction
Evidence issues
Sexual reputation and experience
Sexual assault communications privilege
Expert opinion evidence and children
Tendency and coincidence evidence
Relationship evidence
Evidence of recent and delayed complaint
Jury warnings
Warnings about unreliable evidence and corroboration
Warnings about delay in complaint
Cross-examination
Other aspects of giving evidence
Evidence on re-trial or appeal
18. Trial Processes
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 18 examines selected issues that arise in the trial of sexual offence
cases in relation to the application of the laws of
evidence, the giving of jury
warnings and the cross-examination of complainants and other witnesses. These
issues have been selected
because the application of law in these areas has a
direct and significant impact on the experiences in the criminal justice system
of women and children who have suffered a sexual assault. The way in which these
aspects of the law are applied may lead to cases
being withdrawn at a late stage
or tried without the full evidentiary picture being before the jury.
[back to top]
Issues often arise where the defence is seeking to adduce evidence to show
that sexual activity was consensual and, in doing so, to
undermine the
credibility of the complainant. This can sometimes result in unjustifiable
trauma to complainants. In other contexts,
the policy challenge is posed by
evidence of prior misconduct by the defendant, which is highly prejudicial and
may carry a risk
of wrongful conviction. At the same time, it can be highly
important and probative evidence.
reputation and experience
A number of commentators assert that the experience of testifying at trial
may cause complainants almost as much trauma as the actual
assault, and the
anticipated admission of sexual history evidence may contribute to the
reluctance of many women to report sexual
offences to the police. Australian
be admitted and
the procedure by which questions of admissibility are determined
by the court.
State and territory exclusionary rules generally limit the cross-examination
of complainants and the admission of evidence of a complainant’s
reputation and prior sexual history in proceedings in which a person stands
charged with a sexual offence. Commonwealth provisions
apply to child witnesses
in sexual offence proceedings.
The exclusionary rules do not, however, cover evidence about the sexual
reputation or prior sexual history of the following groups:
in the Commonwealth jurisdiction, adult sexual assault complainants
in sexual assault proceedings;
in all jurisdictions, adult sexual assault victims who are witnesses
but not the complainants in sexual assault proceedings; and
in the state and territory jurisdictions, child witnesses who are
not complainants in a sexual assault
proceeding.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory evidence law and
procedural rules limit cross-examination and the admission of evidence about
sexual reputation and prior sexual history of all witnesses in sexual assault
proceedings?
Terminology
Australian legislation regulates the admission and use of evidence in
relation to prior sexual history using terms such as sexual
reputation, sexual
history, disposition of the complainant in sexual matters, sexual experience and
sexual activities. Statutory
and judicial guidance about the meaning and
boundaries of each of these terms and the kinds of evidence covered is
In the Commissions’ view, legislative reform may be required to better
enable the judiciary and practitioners to distinguish
between kinds of prior
sexual history evidence. It is essential that prior sexual history evidence be
correctly identified as being
either of sexual reputation, sexual disposition or
sexual experience because different tests of admissibility apply in respect of
How best can judicial officers and legal practitioners be
assisted to develop a consistent approach to the classification of evidence
being either of ‘sexual reputation’, ‘sexual
disposition’ and ‘sexual experience’ (or ‘sexual
activities’)?
Evidence relating to the complainant’s sexual reputation is
inadmissible in all Australian states and the ACT. In the Northern
evidence relating to the complainant’s general reputation as to chastity
may be elicited or led with the leave of
the court. Leave is not granted unless
the evidence has substantial relevance to the facts in
In Commonwealth legislation,
evidence of a child witness or child complainant’s sexual reputation is
admissible in a proceeding
if the court is satisfied that the evidence is
substantially relevant to the facts in
The policy basis for excluding evidence of sexual reputation is widely
accepted. However, the Commonwealth and Northern Territory
admissibility do not give the policy full effect. The Commonwealth, and all
states and territories should, in the Commissions’
view, ensure
legislation provides that the court must not allow any questions as to, or admit
any evidence of, the sexual reputation
of the complainant.
Proposal 18–1
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that a court must not allow any questions as to, or admit any
of, the sexual reputation of the complainant.
Australian jurisdictions have adopted different approaches in relation to the
admission of evidence of the complainant’s sexual
activity or experience.
The most important distinction is between the mandatory model in NSW and the
discretionary models of the
other jurisdictions. In NSW, such evidence is
inadmissible unless it falls within specific statutory exceptions. In the
‘discretionary’
judicial officer’s discretion, the exercise of which is subject to
legislative
conditions.
In the Commissions’ view, a discretionary model ought to apply to
determine the admissibility of prior sexual activities evidence.
The Commissions
would like to know whether evidence of a complainant’s prior sexual
history is admitted more or less often
in proceedings where the charge arises
from a family violence context, as compared to other proceedings, and why this
might be so.
For example, defendants in family violence contexts may have more
knowledge about the previous sexual activities of the complainant.
This may mean
that the admission of evidence of previous sexual activity has a
disproportionate impact on those victims of sexual
Under discretionary models, is evidence of a complainant’s
prior sexual history admitted more or less often in proceedings concerning
offences perpetrated in a family violence context, as compared to other sexual
assault proceedings?
Scope of exclusionary rules
Rules relating to questioning and admitting evidence of the
complainant’s sexual activities vary and may apply to evidence of
complainant’s:
prior sexual activities with the accused and with other persons;
consensual and non-consensual sexual activities.
ACT, the restriction applies only to evidence about sexual activity with persons
other than the accused. In Victoria, Western
Australia and Tasmania the sexual
experience provisions apply (expressly or by implication) to prior sexual
experience between the
complainant and the accused. In the remaining
sexual activity between the complainant and the
In the Commissions’ view, an exclusionary rule of broad application to
evidence of a complainant’s sexual activities is
unlikely to cause
injustice to the accused. Under the discretionary models, any evidence covered
by the exclusionary rule may be
admitted, and the complainant may be
cross-examined as to such evidence, with the leave of the court.
For these reasons, the Commissions support the enactment of legislation
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Proposal 18–2
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that complainants of sexual assault must not be cross-examined,
court must not admit any evidence, as to the sexual activities (whether
consensual or non-consensual) of the complainant other than
those to which the
charge relates, without the leave of the court.
Test for admission
In all states and territories, other than NSW, sexual experience evidence is
inadmissible, subject to a judicial officer’s discretion
to grant leave.
Generally the court must be satisfied that the evidence is of ‘substantial
relevance to a fact in issue’
before leave may be granted to cross-examine
or admit evidence as to the complainant’s prior sexual history.
The primary focus of the Commissions is to identify a model governing the
admission of sexual history evidence which adequately safeguards
complainants
against irrelevant and harassing cross-examination, while still allowing
admission of evidence which is relevant to
the case of the defence. In the
Commissions’ view, such evidence should only be admissible where, as well
as satisfying a general
relevance test, the evidence has significant probative
value to a fact in issue. A significant probative value test is preferred
because it is more consistent with the approach in the uniform Evidence Acts in
relation to exclusionary rules, including in relation
to tendency and
coincidence evidence. The probative value of the evidence should be weighed
against the interests of justice to allow
the cross-examination or to admit the
evidence. Such an approach appropriately takes account of the needs and rights
of both complainants
and accused persons.
A non-exhaustive list of factors should be provided, which the court must
consider as part of the balancing exercise of weighing the
probative value of
the evidence against the danger of prejudice to the proper administration of
justice. The proposed factors reflect
Criminal Procedure
Proposal 18–3
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that the court shall not grant leave for complainants of sexual
to be cross-examined about their sexual activities unless it is
satisfied that:
(a) the evidence has significant probative value to a fact in issue; and
(b) the probative value of the evidence substantially outweighs the danger
of unfair prejudice to the proper administration of justice,
taking into account
the matters in Proposal 18–4 below.
Proposal 18–4
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that the court, in deciding whether the probative value of the
substantially outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice to the proper
administration of justice, must have regard to:
(a) the distress, humiliation, or embarrassment which the complainant may
suffer as a result of the cross-examination or the admission
of the evidence, in
view of the age of the complainant and the number and nature of the questions
that the complainant is likely
to be asked;
(b) the risk that the evidence may arouse in the jury discriminatory belief
or bias, prejudice, sympathy or hostility;
(c) the need to respect the complainant’s personal dignity and
(d) the right of the accused to make a full answer and defence; and
(e) any other factor which the court considers relevant.
Limitations on admissibility for specific
Proposals 18–3 and 18–4 do not address the admission of evidence
may raise an inference that the complainant is the type of person
who is more likely to have consented to the sexual activity to
which the charge
may raise an inference as to the complainant’s general
disposition; or
relates to the complainant’s credibility as a
Victorian legislation explicitly addresses these questions
of admissibility in respect of ‘sexual history evidence’. For
Sections 343
Criminal Procedure act 2009
the admission of sexual history evidence to support an inference that the
complainant is the type of person who is more
likely to have consented to the
sexual activity to which the charge relates. The Commissions are interested to
hear views about whether
the admission of sexual history evidence or sexual
experience evidence ought to be limited according to the Victorian model.
In the Commissions’ view, the admission of evidence about a
complainant’s sexual activity on the grounds that the evidence
significant probative value only in relation to the credibility of the
complainant should not be permitted. However, where sexual
history evidence is
genuinely relevant to credibility, and credibility is a fact in issue, sexual
history evidence may be a proper
matter for cross-examination as to credit.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory legislative provide that
‘sexual history evidence’ or sexual experience evidence
(a) admissible to support an inference that the complainant is the type
of person who is more likely to have consented to the sexual
activity to which
the charge relates; and/or
(b) to be regarded as having substantial probative
value by virtue of any inference it may raise as to general
disposition.
Proposal 18–5
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that ‘sexual history evidence’ or sexual experience
is not to be regarded as being proper matter for cross-examination as
to credit unless, because of special circumstances, it would
materially to impair confidence in the reliability of the evidence of the
complainant.
Procedural issues
Formalising the procedure by which an application to cross-examine and adduce
evidence of a complainant’s sexual history is
made will encourage judicial
officers and legal practitioners to turn their minds to the admissibility issues
at an early stage of
the proceedings. By requiring an application for leave in
writing, and that the application be given to the opposing party before
hearing of the application, the provision proposed below would require counsel
to address whether the evidence is probative of
the facts in issue. It also
gives the opposing party notice of the application and allows time to prepare
any counter-arguments.
In the Commissions’ view, the court should be required to give reasons
for its decision whether or not to grant leave and, if
leave is granted to
question the complainant, to state the nature of the evidence which may be
elicited by that questioning. The
requirement that the court ‘state the
nature of the evidence which may be elicited by that questioning’ is
to prevent questioning of the complainant beyond the scope of the
evidence which has been ruled admissible.
Proposal 18–6
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should require an application for leave to admit or adduce sexual history
evidence to
(a) made in writing; and
(b) filed with the relevant court and served on the informant or the
Director of Public Prosecutions within a prescribed minimum
number of days,
and prescribe:
(a) the required contents of such an application;
(b) the circumstances in which leave may be granted out of time;
(c) the circumstances in which the requirement that an application for leave
be made in writing may be waived; and
(d) that the application is to be determined in the absence of the jury, and
if the accused requests, in the absence of the complainant.
Proposal 18–7
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should require a court to give reasons for its decision whether or not to grant
and if leave is granted to question the complainant, to state the nature
of the evidence which may be elicited by that questioning.
Proposal 18–8
Commonwealth, state and territory Directors of
Public Prosecution should introduce and implement a policy of writing to the
in sexual assault matters and informing them of the procedural
application requirements imposed under the relevant legislation in
relation to
admitting and adducing sexual experience evidence.
Sexual assault
communications privilege
Sexual assault communications are communications
made in the course of a confidential relationship between the victim of a sexual
assault and a counsellor. The defence may seek access to this material to assist
during their cross-examination of the complainant
and other witnesses. From the
mid-1990s, ongoing reform of sexual assault law and procedure has included the
enactment of legislation
to limit the disclosure and use of these
communications. Every state and territory—except Queensland—now has
legislation protecting counselling communications.
Implementing some or all of the following measures may assist sexual assault
victims to invoke a sexual assault communications privilege:
requiring the party seeking production to provide notice in writing
to each other party and if the sexual assault complainant is
party—the sexual assault complainant;
requiring that any such written notice issued be accompanied by a
pro forma fact sheet on the privilege, providing contact details
for assistance;
educating defence counsel about their obligation to identify records
potentially giving rise to the privilege to encourage compliance
with any such
written notice provisions;
providing counsellors with education about the sexual assault
communications privilege and next steps if they are served with a subpoena;
requiring that subpoenas be issued with a pro forma fact sheet on
the privilege, providing contact details for legal assistance;
improving access to free legal assistance about the sexual assault
communications privilege;
requiring that the court issuing a subpoena provide a copy of all
subpoenas to the prosecution;
educating prosecutors: to identify possible claims of the sexual
assault communications privilege arising out of subpoenas; to inform
of any such possible claims of the sexual assault communications privilege
during the pre-trial processes; where subpoenas
are served at short notice
during a trial, to query short service applications; to inform the court where
documents containing protected
confidences are improperly adduced, admitted or
used in the course of proceedings;
educating defence counsel generally about the sexual assault
communications privilege with a view to limiting the use of improperly
protected confidences;
educating judicial officers about the impact of sexual assault on
complainants, the role of counselling in alleviating victims’
the desirability of encouraging people who have been sexually assaulted to seek
therapy; and
educating judicial officers about complainants’
difficulties—legal and personal—where an application for leave
produce or adduce a sexual assault communication is considered twice—by a
judicial officer at an interlocutory hearing and
again by the trial
The Commissions are interested in comments on whether any
such measures should be implemented to assist complainants in sexual assault
proceedings to invoke a sexual assault communications privilege.
In sexual assault proceedings, the sexual assault communications
privilege must generally be invoked by the complainant, who is legally
unrepresented. Assuming complainants continue to be unrepresented in such sexual
assault proceedings, what procedures and services
would best assist them to
invoke the privilege?
Expert opinion
evidence and children
Section 79(2)
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that for the
purposes of the expert opinion exception to the opinion rule, ‘specialised
knowledge’ includes ‘specialised knowledge of child development and
child behaviour (including specialised knowledge
of the impact of sexual abuse
on children and their development and behaviour during and following the
abuse)’. Section 108C
of the uniform Evidence Acts provides that the
credibility rule does not apply to evidence given by a person concerning the
credibility
of another witness if the person has specialised knowledge based on
the person’s training, study or experience (including specialised
knowledge of child development and child behaviour) and the evidence
‘could substantially affect the assessment of the credibility
There is recognition that, in at least some cases, expert evidence on the
development and behaviour of children generally (and those
who have been victims
of sexual offences in particular) and the implications for the credibility of
children as witnesses may be
On this basis, the approach
to the admissibility of such evidence taken under the uniform Evidence Acts is
an improvement on the position
in jurisdictions that have not joined the scheme.
For this reason, the Commissions propose below that state and territory evidence
legislation should provide that (a) the opinion rule does not apply to evidence
of an opinion of a person based on that person’s
specialised knowledge of
child development and child behaviour; and (b) the credibility rule does not
apply to such evidence given
concerning the credibility of children.
The Commissions are also interested in hearing views on the desirability or
otherwise of mandatory jury directions concerning children’s
abilities as
witnesses and children’s responses to sexual abuse.
Proposal 18–9
State and territory evidence legislation should
provide that
(a) the opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion of a person
based on that person’s specialised knowledge of child
development and
child behaviour; and
(b) the credibility rule does not apply to such evidence given concerning
the credibility of children.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory legislation provide for
mandatory jury directions, containing prescribed information about
children’s abilities as witnesses or children’s responses to sexual
Tendency and
coincidence evidence
The following section considers the admissibility of ‘tendency’
and ‘coincidence’ evidence, as defined under
the uniform Evidence
Acts, and ‘propensity’ or ‘similar fact’ evidence at
common law. These forms of evidence
may include, for example, evidence of prior
convictions for sexual offences or prior illegal sexual conduct—often
to as ‘uncharged acts’.
Three aspects of the law of evidence concerning the admissibility of tendency
and coincidence evidence are problematic in sexual assault
the ‘striking similarities’ test;
the ‘no rational view of the evidence’ test; and
excluding ‘a reasonable possibility of
concoction’.
‘striking similarities’ test
At common law, the cross-admissibility of the evidence of two or more
complainants is dependent on the evidence revealing ‘striking
similarities’.
threshold for determining probative value may be ‘appropriate in child
sexual assault cases where the identity of the
offender is not in issue, in
order to capture the range of sexual and grooming behaviours of serial
offenders’.
Since most cases
of sexual assault involve defendants known to the complainant, rather than
strangers, the identity of the accused
will not usually be a fact in issue.
Although the uniform Evidence Acts create a different regime for admitting
tendency and coincidence evidence, it can be argued that
the striking
similarities test is still used in assessing the probative value of the evidence
of two or more complainants about a
defendant’s sexual
The ‘no rational view of the
evidence’ test
At common law, even if the evidence of two or more witnesses has
‘striking similarities’, it can still be excluded because
prejudicial effect. In order to prevent the admission of prejudicial propensity
and similar fact evidence, the common law
developed the ‘no rational view
of the evidence’ test, confirmed by a majority of the High Court in
v The Queen
which held that the probative force of similar fact evidence will outweigh its
prejudicial effect only if there is no rational view
of the evidence that is
consistent with the innocence of the accused.
of the uniform Evidence Acts, the probative value of
tendency or coincidence evidence must substantially outweigh the prejudicial
A reasonable possibility of
Where two or more children give evidence about a defendant’s sexual
behaviour with them, the reliability of their evidence is
based on whether they
had the opportunity to concoct their allegations. While the targeting and
grooming strategies of serial sex
offenders are well documented, the rules
governing the admissibility of tendency and propensity evidence are based on the
that if two or more complainants know each other then the possibility of
concoction must be ruled out for one complainant’s
evidence to be
admissible in the case of another. The mere possibility of concoction can mean
that evidence is excluded in common
law jurisdictions.
Dr Anne Cossins has argued that, in sexual assault cases,
the uniform Evidence Acts is only likely to be satisfied ‘if a reasonable
possibility of concoction can be eliminated
if there are sufficient
similarities (striking or otherwise) between the evidence of two or more
witnesses to be able to conclude
that the probative value of the evidence
outweighs its prejudicial
Western Australian reforms
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
(WA), a court can
only order separate trials if satisfied that there would be a likelihood of
prejudice to the accused by the joinder
of two or more charges. When considering
the likelihood of prejudice to the accused from joinder of charges, the court
cannot take
into account that the evidence of two or more complainants or
witnesses may be the result of collusion or suggestion.
In addition,
Evidence Act 1906
specifically with admitting propensity evidence in a joint trial. It is
admissible if it would have significant probative
value and ‘the probative
value of the evidence compared to the degree of risk of an unfair trial, is such
that fair-minded
people would think that the public interest in adducing all
relevant evidence of guilt must have priority over the risk of an unfair
trial’. When determining whether the propensity evidence has significant
probative value the court cannot take into account
that the evidence may be the
result of collusion, concoction or suggestion.
Commissions’ views
The Commissions’ view is that, because the mere possibility of
concoction can affect the admissibility of propensity and similar
fact evidence
in common law jurisdictions, and because the uniform Evidence Acts do not
expressly deal with concoction and the admissibility
of tendency and coincidence
evidence, there is a need for reform in relation to this issue.
The Commissions propose that federal, state and territory legislation
provides that, in sexual offence proceedings, the court should
not have regard
to the possibility that the evidence of a witness or witnesses is the result of
concoction, collusion or suggestion
when determining the admissibility of
tendency or coincidence evidence.
Further consideration may also need to be given to the continued reliance on
the striking similarities test for the admission of tendency,
coincidence,
propensity and similar fact evidence (including in uniform Evidence Acts
Reform Committee considers
that without changes in the application of the test, reforms to increase the
number of joint trials may
undermined.
Although there have
been a number of reforms in different jurisdictions to increase the frequency of
joint trials in relation to
sex offences, only one common law jurisdiction
(Western Australia) has abandoned striking similarities as the test for
admissibility
of propensity evidence.
Proposal 18–10
Commonwealth, State and territory legislation
should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings, a court should not have
the possibility that the evidence of a witness or witnesses is the
result of concoction, collusion or suggestion when determining
the admissibility
of tendency or coincidence evidence.
To what extent does the ‘striking similarities’ test
impede the ordering of joint trials in relation to sex offences?
Should the Western Australian reforms in relation to the
cross-admissibility of evidence be adopted in other
Relationship
If there is only one complainant, the prosecution may want to lead evidence
from other witnesses about the defendant’s criminal
sexual behaviour with
them, or it may wish to adduce evidence to explain the nature of the
relationship between the complainant and
the defendant, as well as the context
in which the sexual assault occurred. Evidence of uncharged acts of sexual
misconduct is commonly
referred to as ‘relationship’,
‘context’, or ‘background’ evidence and is a type of
circumstantial
Where such evidence is admissible, it cannot be used by the jury to reason
that, if the accused committed the uncharged acts, he or
she is more likely to
have committed the charged acts. However, the distinction between relationship
evidence and tendency evidence
has been described as ‘somewhat
artificial’
since evidence
which shows the ‘existence of a sexual relationship must surely tend to
show that the accused [has a tendency]
to do the sort of things the subject of
the charge’.
Nonetheless,
many cases have held that evidence of uncharged sexual behaviour between a
complainant and an accused is admissible
as relationship
The High Court has accepted that there are important reasons why evidence of
uncharged acts of sexual misconduct by the defendant
ought to be admissible in
child sexual assault trials.
However, the relevance test was not considered to be a sufficient control on the
admissibility of relationship evidence by Gummow,
Kirby and Hayne JJ all of whom
agreed that, in addition to relevance, evidence of uncharged acts should not be
admissible unless
there was no rational view of the evidence consistent with the
innocence of the accused (the
However, Kiefel J expressed the view that only where relationship evidence is
being tendered for its tendency purpose should the
This is the same
approach that is taken in uniform Evidence Acts jurisdictions where the test
under s 101(2) does not apply to relationship
evidence which is tendered
for a non-tendency purpose.
Should the ‘no rational view of the evidence’
) test be applied to determine the admissibility of relationship
evidence at common law?
Evidence of recent
and delayed complaint
Complaint evidence is a type of prior consistent statement, which is given by
a witness or the complainant about when the complainant
made their first report
of sexual assault. The common law recent complaint rule allows this type of
evidence to be admissible if
the complaint was made at the first reasonable
opportunity after the alleged sexual assault. However, it is only admissible for
credibility
purposes, that is, to bolster the credit of the complainant.
The common law’s approach to recent complaint evidence meant that
evidence of delayed complaint was also considered to be relevant
credibility—to undermine the complainant’s credibility. Evidence of
delayed complaint is commonly used by defence
counsel to argue that a
complainant has falsely accused the defendant of sexual assault.
Evidence of a complainant’s complaint is caught by the exclusionary
hearsay rule in
of the uniform Evidence Acts. Evidence of the
complaint may nevertheless be admissible under the first-hand hearsay exception,
the complainant is available to give evidence, and the ‘fresh in the
memory’ test in
is satisfied.
Graham v The Queen
, the High Court was required to consider the
scope of the ‘fresh in the memory’ test under
case, a witness had given evidence about the complainant’s disclosures
made six years after the alleged sexual assault.
The High Court held that the
witness’ evidence was not admissible under
because the complainant
had not told her friend she was sexually abused by her father when the events
were fresh in her memory.
The Commissions consider that this is an area of evidence law in which
consistency should be pursued, based on provisions that recognise
that delay in
complaint is a common characteristic of sexual assault. Knowledge that children
typically delay disclosure of sexual
abuse is one reason that evidence of a
child’s delay in complaint has been held to satisfy the relevance test
under the uniform
Evidence Acts.
One option would be for legislation to provide that the hearsay rule does not
apply to evidence of a preliminary complaint, regardless
of when the preliminary
complaint was made.
Such a reform may be criticised, however, for attempting to amend an
exception to the hearsay rule to address concerns primarily about
attacks on the
credibility of complainants in sexual assault cases. Evidence of a long delayed
complaint is not inherently more reliable
than in-court evidence (the usual
justification for exceptions to hearsay rule). It can be seen as wrong in
principle to retain
generally, while creating a special exception for
complainants in sexual offence proceedings.
Another factor is that there has not been enough time to establish whether
recent amendments to the uniform Evidence Acts, intended
to address restrictive
interpretations of what is ‘fresh in the memory’ based on the
decision in
, have had any impact on the admission of evidence of
delayed complaint.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory legislation provide
that, where complainants in sexual assault proceedings are called to
evidence, the hearsay rule does not apply to evidence of a preliminary
complaint, regardless of when the preliminary complaint
[back to top]
In the sexual assault context the purpose of jury warnings has changed over
time. Historically, they served to protect the accused
against an unfair
conviction. More recently, ‘legislation has been enacted to counter myths
that complainants, as well as people charged
with sexual offences, are treated
Warnings about unreliable evidence and
corroboration
The common law required corroboration warnings to be given by trial judges to
juries in respect of the evidence of both sexual assault
complainants and child
witnesses. The common law corroboration warning has two components:
the corroboration component—the caution that, as it is
dangerous to convict on a child or sexual assault complainant’s
‘uncorroborated’ evidence, it was necessary to have corroborating
evidence; and
the reliability component—the caution that, as children and
sexual assault complainants each as a class of witness are unreliable,
evidence of a particular child or complainant had to be treated with
All Australian
warn the jury that it is dangerous to
act on uncorroborated evidence. These
provisions do not prohibit a warning that it would be dangerous to convict on
uncorroborated
evidence—only the requirement to give such a warning.
Further, in all Australian jurisdictions, except for Queensland, a judge
prohibited from warning or suggesting to the jury that children as a class are
unreliable witnesses.
In New South Wales, Victoria, the ACT and the Northern Territory a judge is
prohibited from warning or suggesting to the jury that
it is unsafe to convict
on the uncorroborated evidence of a complainant because the law regards
complainants as an unreliable class
of witness. These provisions were enacted to
mirror the prohibition on the warning that children as a class are unreliable
and prevent judges from stating or suggesting to the jury that
complainants in sexual assault proceedings are unreliable witnesses
These provisions do not prevent a judge from making any comment on evidence
given in a trial that it is appropriate to make in the
interests of justice. One
warning that may be given by trial judges pursuant to their common law powers is
warning cautions about the danger of
convicting on the uncorroborated evidence of a sexual assault
complainant—including a child
complainant—and is frequently given in
sexual assault trials, if requested by the defence. It is a direction to the
where there is only one witness asserting the commission of the crime, the
evidence of that witness must be scrutinised with great
care before a conclusion
is arrived at that a verdict of guilty should be brought
The legislation that now prohibits a judge from stating or suggesting to a
jury that complainants in sexual offence proceedings are
unreliable witnesses as
a class may have been enacted with the parliamentary intention of relieving a
trial judge from giving a
warning. However, because those
provisions are directed at warnings that refer to complainants of sexual
offences as an unreliable
class of witness and not whether the evidence of one
witness must be scrutinised with great care, it is unlikely that such provisions
prevent the trial judge from giving the
There is support for the legislative provisions which prohibit a judge from
warning or suggesting to the jury that children as a class
are unreliable
Commissions’ view is that similar prohibitions should also be extended to
complainants in sexual assault cases.
Proposal 18–11
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should prohibit a judge in any sexual assault proceeding from:
(a) warning a jury, or making any suggestion to a jury, that complainants as
a class are unreliable witnesses; and
(b) warning a jury of the danger of convicting on the uncorroborated
evidence of any complainant.
Warnings about
delay in complaint
Delay in complaint is now known to be a typical feature of reporting sexual
assault. In response to this, legislation was enacted
to ‘require the
trial judge to warn the jury that delay in complaint does not necessarily
indicate that the allegation is false
and that a person may have a good reason
for delaying in making a
complaint’.
Arguably, these legislative reforms have been subsequently undermined by the
High Court decisions of
Crofts v The
warning is required to be given to a jury in cases where there has been a
substantial delay between the time of the alleged offence
and the complaint. The
warning advises that because of delay the accused may be unable to adequately
test and meet the evidence of
the complainant.
Section 165B of the uniform Evidence Acts, developed in response to
provides that the judge must be satisfied that the accused has
suffered forensic disadvantage because of the delay before giving
warning. Section 165B is activated by a request from counsel for a warning. The
trial judge has a discretionary power
to refuse to give a warning which has been
requested when satisfied that ‘there are good reasons for not doing
The Commissions are of the view that s 165B of the uniform Evidence Acts
provides a satisfactory approach to the problems raised by
warnings. The Commission proposes that all states and territories that have
not already done so should adopt provisions consistent
with s 165B.
The Commissions are interested, however, in further comments on the operation
in practice of s 165B of the uniform Evidence Acts in
sexual offence
proceedings—particularly those involving offences perpetrated in a family
violence context.
Proposal 18–12
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that:
(a) if the court, on application by the defendant, is satisfied that the
defendant has suffered a significant forensic disadvantage
because of the
consequences of delay, the court must inform the jury of the nature of the
disadvantage and the need to take that
disadvantage into account when
considering the evidence;
(b) the judge need not comply with (a) if there are good reasons for not
doing so; and
(c) no particular form of words needs to be used in giving the warning
pursuant to (a), but in warning the jury, the judge should
not suggest that it
is ‘dangerous to convict’ because of any demonstrated forensic
disadvantage.
What issues arise in practice pursuant to s 165B of the uniform
Evidence Acts? Is the s 165B(5) abrogation of the trial judge’s
obligation and power to give a
warning sufficiently
Kilby v The Queen
the High Court endorsed a court direction to juries that delay or absence of
complaint could be used as a factor in determining a
complainant’s
credibility. Legislation, including
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), was subsequently passed in a number of Australian jurisdictions to
require the judge to warn the jury that a delay in making
a complaint of sexual
assault does not necessarily mean that the allegation is false. Although such
provisions were designed to remove
stereotypes as to the unreliability of
evidence given by sexual assault complainants, their protective effects have
arguably been
negated by the High Court decision in
Crofts v The
Crofts v The Queen
, the complainant reported that she had been
sexually assaulted by a family friend over a period of six years, and made a
six months after the last assault. The trial judge directed the jury,
as required by
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), that delay in
complaint did not necessarily indicate that the allegation of sexual assault was
false and that there were good
reasons why a complainant might delay making a
complaint. The High Court held that
does not preclude the court from
direction or from commenting that delay in complaint of
sexual assault may affect the credibility of the complainant.
The Commissions propose two options for reform. The first option would be for
Commonwealth, state and territory governments to enact
legislation modelled on
the VLRC’s recommendation pursuant to their 2004 report
Legislation would provide that, in any trial for a sexual offence, the issue
of the effect of any delay in complaint, or absence of
complaint, on the
credibility of the complainant should be a matter for argument by counsel and
for determination by the jury and
that ‘the trial judge must not give a
direction regarding the effect of delay in complaint, or absence of complaint,
credibility of the complainant, unless satisfied it is necessary to do so
in order to ensure a fair trial’. If evidence is
given, or comments made,
that tend ‘to suggest that the person against whom the offence is alleged
to have been committed either
delayed making, or failed to make, a complaint in
respect of the offence, the judge must tell the jury that there may be good
why a victim of a sexual offence of that kind may delay making or fail
to make a complaint in respect of the
Legislation modelled on the
second option would contain elements of
Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences) Act 1978
Crimes Act 1958
Paragraph (a) of the second proposed option—that is, the direction in
relation to ‘good reason for delay’—has
been criticised
because it may encourage the jury to speculate on the delay. Such directions
were originally introduced to eliminate
unwarranted misconceptions about the
unreliability of the evidence of sexual assault complainants and to assist the
jury to gain
an understanding of the complainant’s position. As long
periods of delay are not uncommon in cases of child sexual assault
in a family
context (for a range of reasons), the retention of the ‘good reason for
delay’ direction may be particularly
justified in those cases.
Paragraph (b) of the second option clearly prevents the
from being given. Paragraphs (c) and (d) of the second proposed option act as
‘let out’ clauses in response to
the strict prohibition on the
giving of a
warning by paragraph (b). These provisions permit
trial judges to redress statements by defence counsel where the fact of delay is
used to undermine the credibility of the complainant’s account in
cross-examination or in addressing the jury; and preserve
the common law powers
of a trial judge to give the jury a warning and to comment on the evidence
‘in the interests of justice’.
Are warnings about the effect of delay on the credibility of
complainants necessary in sexual assault
proceedings?
Proposal 18–13
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
should provide that, in sexual assault proceedings:
(a) (i) the issue of any delay in complaint, or absence of complaint, on the
credibility of the complainant should be a matter for
argument by counsel and
for determination by the jury;
(ii) subject to paragraph (iii), save for identifying the issue for the
jury and the competing contentions of counsel, the trial
judge must not give a
direction regarding the effect of delay in complaint, or absence of complaint,
on the credibility of the complainant,
unless satisfied it is necessary to do so
in order to ensure a fair trial; and
(iii) if evidence is given, or a question is asked, or a comment is made
that tends to suggest that the person against whom the
offence is alleged to
have been committed either delayed making or failed to make a complaint in
respect of the offence, the judge
must tell the jury that there may be good
reasons why a victim of a sexual offence may delay making or fail to make a
complaint in
respect of the offence.
(b) the judge:
(i) must inform the jury that there may be good reasons why a victim of a
sexual assault may delay or hesitate in complaining about
(ii) must not warn or suggest in any way to the jury that the law regards
the complainant’s evidence to be more reliable or
less reliable only
because of the length of time before the complainant made a preliminary or other
(iii) maintains a discretion to give appropriate directions to correct
statements by counsel that conflict with the evidence or are
stereotypical assumptions about reporting of sexual offences; and
(iv) maintains a discretion to comment on the reliability of the
complainant’s evidence in the particular case if the judge
considers it is
appropriate to do so in the interests of justice.
[back to top]
Cross-examination
Cross-examination
is a feature of the adversarial process and designed, among other things, to
allow the defence to confront and undermine
the prosecution’s case by
exposing deficiencies in a witness’ testimony, including the
complainant’s testimony.
Under the common law, the uniform Evidence Acts
and other legislation, limitations have been placed on inappropriate and
questioning under cross-examination., It has been argued, however,
that the effect of these provisions in practice has not provided
a sufficient
degree of protection for complainants in sexual offence proceedings.
Every Australian jurisdiction, with the exception of Tasmania, has enacted
legislation to place restrictions on the cross-examination
of complainants in
sexual offence proceedings by unrepresented defendants. In some jurisdictions
this protection is only afforded
to child complainants and child witnesses. In
other jurisdictions it has application beyond sexual offences, and applies to a
range of legal proceedings and/or a wider class of witnesses. In Western
Australia the court’s power to prohibit personal cross-examination
defendant is discretionary (albeit for a wider class of witness across a range
of criminal proceedings). Where these limits
operate, various mechanisms have
been put in place to allow cross-examination on behalf of the defendant.
Two issues arise in relation to these provisions:
whether the protection applies to witnesses other than sexual
assault complainants or alleged victims and whether it applies in other
proceedings; and
who asks the questions on behalf of the unrepresented defendant and
whether that person has any role or responsibility in providing
advice to the
The Commissions propose that Commonwealth, state and
territory governments legislate to prohibit an unrepresented defendant from
cross-examining any complainant or other witness in any sexual
offence proceeding.
In the Commissions’ view, it is inappropriate to allow judicial
officers to ask questions on behalf of defendants—as is
currently the case
in the Northern Territory and Western Australia. This places judicial officers
in a difficult position in relation
to determining the admissibility of the
questions, and may raise perceptions of bias.
The Commissions prefer the approach adopted in Victoria and Queensland, where
the person who asks the questions must be a legal practitioner
representing the
interests of the defendant. The Commissions note that the advantages of legal
practitioner involvement include benefits
associated with the professional duty
the lawyer owes to the court and the client; the skills that lawyers bring to
this work in
terms of understanding the rules of evidence; the public interest
in testing the evidence presented by the witness; and in addressing
imbalance between the prosecution and an unrepresented
Proposal 18–14
Commonwealth, state and territory legislation
(a) prohibit an unrepresented defendant from personally cross-examining any
complainant or other witness in sexual assault proceedings;
(b) provide that any person conducting such cross-examination is a legal
practitioner representing the interests of the defendant.
[back to top]
Other aspects of
giving evidence
Some jurisdictions provide ‘alternative’ or ‘special’
arrangements for the giving of evidence by complainants
or other witnesses in
sexual offence proceedings including: the giving of contemporaneous evidence by
closed circuit television (CCTV)
or video-link; the use of screening to restrict
the court. All jurisdictions also permit a complainant in sexual offence
proceedings to have a support person present with them while
In most jurisdictions, the giving of evidence by way of alternative or
special arrangements ‘may’ be ordered by the court.
In other cases,
the arrangements are something to which, subject to exceptions, the complainant
is entitled, or are mandatory (especially
in the case of evidence given by
Some methods for giving evidence by complainants, such as the use of CCTV,
are broadly used. However, not all jurisdictions expressly
permit, for example,
the use of screens or planned seating arrangements; or require evidence of the
complainant in sexual offence
proceedings to be given in closed court.
Are there significant gaps or inconsistencies among Australian
arrangements for the giving of evidence by complainants or other witnesses in
sexual offence proceedings?
[back to top]
Evidence on re-trial
Some jurisdictions provide that pre-recorded audio-visual evidence of
complainants in sexual offence proceedings may be admissible
in evidence in a
re-trial or appeal. Such provisions may also apply to a recording of a
complainant’s evidence at trial.
NSW has introduced provisions relating to evidence in re-trials of sexual
offence proceedings. The
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) provides that
if a person is convicted of a prescribed sexual offence and where, on appeal
against the conviction, a new trial
is ordered, the prosecutor may tender as
evidence in the new trial ‘a record of the original evidence of the
complainant’,
despite the rule against hearsay evidence. While the
original evidence might include any pre-recorded evidence used in the trial,
covers ‘all evidence given by the complainant in the proceedings from
which the conviction arose’, including court
transcripts of evidence.
Section 306C of the Act provides that if a record of the original evidence of
the complainant is admitted in proceedings, the complainant
is not compellable
to give any further evidence in the proceedings, including for the purpose of
any examination in chief, cross-examination
or re-examination.
The problem addressed by the provision was described by the NSW
Attorney-General as being that:
Not surprisingly, some complainants who have given evidence that resulted in a
conviction decide they simply cannot return to give
evidence again if a new
trial is ordered on appeal. Significant time will have passed and the
complainant will have tried as best
as possible to put the matter out of their
The Commissions are interested in comment on whether Commonwealth, state and
territory governments should develop legislation, modelled
on that in NSW, to
permit prosecutors to tender a record of the original evidence of the
complainant in any re-trial ordered on appeal.
Should Commonwealth, state and territory legislation permit
prosecutors to tender a record of the original evidence of the complainant
any re-trial ordered on appeal?
Sexual Offences (Evidence and
Procedure) Act 1983
Crimes Act 1914
Phillips v The Queen
[2006] HCA 4
(2006) 225 CLR 303.
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Striking Similarities
between the Common Law and the Uniform Evidence Acts: Protecting Serial
Offenders and Putting Children at Risk
, unpublished (2010),
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
Striking Similarities between the Common Law and the Uniform Evidence Acts:
Protecting Serial Offenders and Putting Children at Risk
, unpublished
(2010), 19–20.
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
(Unreported, QCA,
J Lee, 23 June 1998), [22].
Harriman v The Queen
[1989] HCA 50
(1989) 167 CLR 590
[1992] HCA 68
(1992) 175 CLR 599
R v Beserick
(1993) 30 NSWLR 510
(Unreported, SASC, 24 April 1996);
Cook v The Queen
[2000] WASCA 78
R v Nieterink
(1999) 76 SASR 56
[1999] 3 VR 618.
HML v The Queen
[2008] HCA 16
(2008) 235 CLR 334.
Ibid, [503],
Graham v The Queen
[1998] HCA 61
195 CLR 606
National Child Sexual
Assault Reform Committee,
Alternative Models for Prosecuting Child Sex
Offences in Australia
, unpublished (2009),
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), [7.7] (footnotes
This analysis was put forward
by the QLRC in Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by
Queensland Courts: The Evidence of Children
, Report No 55 (Part 2) (2000),
(1987) 11 NSWLR
Criminal Justice Sexual
Offences Taskforce (NSW Attorney General’s Department),
Responding to
Sexual Assault: The Way Forward
Australian Law Reform Commission,
New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102, NSWLRC Report 112, VLRC FR (2005),
[18.73]. See, eg,
Crimes Act 1958
s 61(1)(b).
Longman v The
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79.
v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR
Kilby v The Queen
[1973] HCA 30
129 CLR 460.
Crofts v The Queen
[1996] HCA 22
(1996) 186 CLR 427.
See Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
Sexual Offences: Final Report
(2004), Rec
See New South Wales Law Reform
Commission,
Questioning of Complainants by Unrepresented Accused in Sexual
Offence Trials
, Report No 101 (2003),
[5.7]–[5.10].
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, L Assembly, 3 March 2005, 14649 (B
Attorney General and Minister for the Environment).
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
19. Integrated Responses and Best
Introduction
Integrated responses in Australia
Key features
Maintaining momentum
Victim support
Victims’ compensation
Training and education
19. Integrated Responses and Best
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 19 provides an overview of integrated responses and some best
practice models in relation to family violence in Australia.
‘Integrated
responses’ to family violence have flourished since a pioneering model,
the Domestic Abuse Intervention Project,
was established in Duluth, Minnesota in
1981 (the Duluth Model). This model is based on four key principles: the need
for coordination
and co-operation between agencies; the need for collaboration
between partners; a focus on victim safety; and the need for offenders
held accountable for their actions. The Duluth model features offender programs,
community awareness-raising and training,
and case management. It works in
tandem with, and monitors, criminal justice services.
[back to top]
Integrated responses
in Australia
Integrated responses seem to offer clear benefits for service delivery to
victims, including—importantly for this Inquiry—benefits
improving experiences for victims involved in multiple proceedings across
different legal frameworks. For example, liaison arrangements
between police and
victim support services and co-location of services facilitate victims’
access to a range of legal options
and referrals. Another benefit is that such
responses enable networks to be formed across services and government
departments at
a local level, fostering collaboration and communication between
key players in different legal frameworks, and providing ongoing
improvements to
practice and understanding. The precise costs and benefits depend, of course,
upon the models adopted.
A number of Australian jurisdictions have implemented or are in the process
of implementing integrated responses. In other Australian
however, the ‘integrated responses’ that exist are mostly
small-scale operations, focused on liaison between
the police and victim support
services. It is clearly desirable for integrated responses to be developed in
close consultation with
local networks and leaders, in order to reflect the
diversity of needs and strengths in different geographical areas. The
Commissions
consider, however, that Australian state and territory governments
should have, or continue to have, responsibility for fostering
such integrated
The Commissions note that there are many ways in which governments may foster
the development of integrated responses. These include:
the development of strategic plans;
the creation of statewide steering committees;
the creation of model information sharing protocols and/or amending
information sharing legislation;
the provision of training and education; and
the funding of locally developed
initiatives.
At this stage, the Commissions also consider that there is strong evidence
that integrated responses should, at a minimum, have a
number of key features.
These are: common policies and objectives; mechanisms for inter-agency
collaboration, including those to
ensure information sharing; provision for
victim support, and a key role for victim support organisations; training and
programs; and provision for data collection and evaluation.
There is also a role for the federal government in promoting integrated
responses, as part of a national agenda for action on family
violence. The
Commissions note that this may take a number of forms. For example, much could
be learnt from other Australian jurisdictions
in the development of integrated
responses, and the federal government could facilitate the transfer of this
knowledge between jurisdictions.
This could be done through existing mechanisms
such as the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General and the Ministerial Council
Police and Emergency Management, or through more informal mechanisms. A
national resource manual for integrated responses could be
one way of promoting
integrated responses.
The Commissions note that the Australian Domestic and Family Violence
Clearinghouse has a very useful Good Practice Database (and
Coordinator) that
provides helpful information about such responses. This may be a logical
starting point for training and the transfer
of knowledge between jurisdictions.
Alternatively, this may be a function for the National Centre of Excellence
recommended in
Time for Action
or the expert panel and reference group
recommended by the Family Law Council.
Proposal 19–1
State and territory governments should establish
and further develop integrated responses to family violence in their respective
building on best practice. The Australian Government should also
foster the development of integrated responses at a national level.
integrated responses should include the following elements:
(a) common policies and objectives;
(b) mechanisms for inter-agency collaboration, including those to ensure
information sharing;
(c) provision for legal and non-legal victim support, and a key role for
victim support organisations;
(d) training and education programs; and
(e) provision for data collection and evaluation.
Maintaining
Integrated responses often
depend on the energy, enthusiasm and expertise of the people originally
involved, and sustaining them when
those people move on is a key challenge.
One key aspect for retaining momentum is leadership. The Commissions have
heard from stakeholders that committed leadership is necessary
integrated (and other) responses forward. One model, used in the ACT, is for a
statutory position of coordinator. The ACT
Victims of Crime Coordinator chairs
the FVIP in the role of Domestic Violence Project Coordinator under the
Domestic Violence Agencies Act 1986
(ACT). This model has the benefit of
ensuring that one person has a statutory responsibility and resources for
driving the integrated
response forward, and ensuring a degree of continuity and
victim-focused leadership.
A separate issue is whether integrated responses themselves should have a
legislative basis. The FVIP itself, like other integrated
responses in
Australia, does not have a legislative basis. On the one hand, a legislative
basis may provide greater security, especially
in terms of funding, and may help
sustain commitment to the response as key players enter and exit. A legislative
basis could also
have the benefit of setting out statutory positions for
steering committees, special provisions on information sharing, and underlining
the importance of the integrated response as part of the core responsibilities
of key players.
On the other hand, legislation may restrict the flexibility of integrated
responses, and increase costs. Integrated responses need
to be sensitive to the
needs, strengths and existing institutions and frameworks in a particular area,
and these contextual factors
may change over time. Legislation may also restrict
the capacity of integrated responses to evolve as part of an ongoing process
The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders whether
legislative support for integrated responses is desirable and,
if so, what such
legislation should address.
Should state and territory legislation support integrated
responses to family violence within their jurisdictions and, if so, what
this legislation address? For example, should responsibility for coordinating
integrated responses within a jurisdiction be
placed on a statutory
office-holder or agency?
[back to top]
There is strong evidence that victim support provided at the time of an
incident to which the police are called, at court, and at
other key times during
the legal process is an important measure that can improve the ability of
victims to navigate through the
system. Victim support workers also can, and do,
routinely navigate through the legal, social and health systems on behalf of
In the Commissions’ view, one of the most practical methods of
improving the interaction in practice of legal frameworks is
strengthening and supporting existing victim support services. This would be
immediately beneficial and is proven to have
significant impact on
victims’ experiences. Although extra resourcing would be required, it is
likely that this would ultimately
be one of the most cost-effective measures for
improving victim satisfaction and safety.
There is much to be said for the delivery of victim support at the time the
police are called out to an incident. It is notable that
a number of
‘fax-back protocols’ have been initiated in some areas. This may be
a practice that should be encouraged
by Australian state and territory
governments.
Victim support is also crucial at court. The Commissions note that, while
victim support workers are a feature of specialised courts,
they need not be
tied to such courts. Indeed, this is one element which the Commissions believe
can be productively mainstreamed
across courts. The NSW Domestic Violence Court
Assistance Schemes are useful precedents, and the Family Law court support
in NSW, Victoria and South Australia should be extended nationally
across the family court system.
Proposal 19–2
State and territory governments should, to the
extent feasible, make victim support workers and lawyers available at family
violence-related
court proceedings, and ensure access to victim support workers
at the time the police are called out to family violence incidents.
Proposal 19–3
The Australian Government should ensure that court
support services for victims of family violence are available nationally in
family courts.
[back to top]
compensation
Another, often overlooked, aspect of support for victims is access to
financial assistance. Family violence, among other harms, often
significant impact on the financial security of victims. Victims of family
violence are likely to incur medical, counselling,
legal and housing expenses,
as well as education and child care expenses, and may have been subject to
economic abuse as an element
of family violence. In practice, these costs may
constitute a significant barrier for victims in accessing the legal system.
An important method of addressing these financial concerns is through
victims’ compensation. For most victims the only practical
financial redress is through statutory victims’ compensation schemes,
funded by state and territory governments.
All Australian state and territory
governments currently provide such schemes. Although these are available to
victims of family
violence, there are problems with the ways such schemes
operate in this context, limiting the capacity of the schemes to provide
effective support to such victims. The Commissions’ preliminary view is
that Australian state and territory governments should
amend their
victims’ compensation legislation to ensure the legislative provisions do
not unfairly discriminate against victims
of family violence. In particular, the
Commissions make a number of specific proposals towards these ends.
First, the Commissions consider that the definition of the act and injuries
that trigger compensation needs to be revisited to ensure
that the pattern of
violence that is characteristic of family violence can be considered in
assessing victims’ compensation
claims, rather than focusing exclusively
on specific incidents. This objective may be achieved in a number of ways, and
methods may be more appropriate to different legislative schemes. One
approach would be to specify that evidence of a pattern of
family violence can
be considered when assessing the probability that an act of violence or injury
has occurred. Another method is
to adopt the approach of NSW, and deem
‘domestic violence’ to be an act of violence and a specific form of
injury, which
would be defined as involving a pattern of violence. Another
approach is to extend the definition of injury to enable consideration
adverse impacts, as is done with sexual offences in Victoria and Queensland.
Secondly, state and territory
legislation should be amended so that the mere fact that the same offender
committed the crime does
not mean the crimes are ‘related’. This
does not mean that states or territories cannot reduce the amounts payable for
multiple claims, as is already done in some jurisdictions. This may be necessary
because of the resource implications of such claims.
In the Commissions’
view, however, to treat all criminal incidents of family violence as if they
constituted a ‘single’
incident discriminates unfairly against
victims of family violence. Further, state and territory legislation should
allow a victim
to object if claims are to be treated as
Thirdly, victims’ compensation legislation should be amended so that a
failure to report the criminal incident to the police,
or to provide reasonable
cooperation with law enforcement, does not automatically disqualify a victim of
family violence from claiming
compensation. A pre-requisite that a victim report
to the police or cooperate with law enforcement impacts particularly upon
of family violence (including victims of sexual abuse) who choose not to
report or cooperate for fear of the offender. This proposal
affects the Western
Australian, Tasmanian and ACT legislation. This should be a discretionary
factor, as it is in other jurisdictions.
In all jurisdictions, the legislation should provide that decision-makers
consider the nature of the relationship between the offender
and the victim when
assessing these discretionary factors (as is done in NSW, Victoria, and
Queensland), in light of the nature and
dynamics of family violence. Similarly,
the legislation should be amended to provide that the nature of the
relationship, in light
of the nature and dynamics of family violence, should
also be considered when assessing whether a victim contributed to the injury
(where the legislation so provides) whether a victim failed to take reasonable
steps to mitigate the injury. As well, decision-makers
should be required to
consider, when deciding whether to extend the time for making an application,
the fact that a claim is made
on the basis of family violence, sexual assault,
or child abuse (as is done in NSW and the Northern Territory), or the fact that
the offender was in a position of power, influence, or trust (as in Victoria and
Queensland).
In the view of the Commissions, the legislation in Victoria, South Australia
and the ACT should also be amended to ensure that victims
of family violence are
not required to attend hearings in the presence of offenders. Clearly, there is
the potential for the victim
to suffer trauma as a result, and the risk that
victims will be unfairly deterred from claiming compensation. Instead, the
legislation
should require that alternative arrangements, such as remote witness
facilities, should be employed in cases of family violence.
The Commissions also propose the repeal of provisions in the Victorian,
Western Australian, and Northern Territory legislation excluding
compensation on
the basis that it would advantage or benefit the offender, as has been done in
other jurisdictions. These provisions
discriminate against victims of family
violence who remain in relationships with the offender. The Commissions are
interested, however,
in hearing from stakeholders whether any mechanisms can and
should be adopted to ensure that offenders cannot access victims’
compensation awards, and whether there are any issues as to the availability of
interim compensation awards.
The Commissions consider that there is a clear need for better data
collection in relation to claims and awards of victims’
compensation. The
reports of the Compensation Tribunal of NSW provide a useful model, as they
identify victims of family violence,
including those who claim for other types
of injuries. These reports also usefully separately identify claims made by
victims from
Indigenous communities. The
Time for Action
highlighted the disproportionate representation of Indigenous women and child
victims of family violence.
Finally, the Commissions consider that Australian governments should ensure
that information about victims’ compensation is
readily available in all
courts dealing with family violence matters.
Proposal 19–4
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should:
(a) provide that evidence of a pattern of family violence may be considered
in assessing whether an act of violence or injury occurred;
(b) define family violence as a specific act of violence or injury, as in
s 5 and the Dictionary in the
Victims Support and Rehabilitation Act
(NSW) and cl 5 of the
Victims of Crime Assistance Regulation
(c) extend the definition of injury to include other significant adverse
impacts, as is done in respect of some offences in
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–5
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should provide that:
(a) acts are not ‘related’ merely because they are committed by
the same offender; and
(b) applicants should be given the opportunity to object if multiple claims
are treated as ‘related’, as in
Crime Assistance Act 1996
Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–6
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should not require that a victim report a crime to the police, or
reasonable cooperation with law enforcement authorities, as a condition
of such compensation for family violence-related claims.
Proposal 19–7
State and territory legislation should provide
that, when deciding whether it was reasonable for the victim not to report a
or cooperate with law enforcement authorities, decision makers must
consider factors such as the nature of the relationship between
the victim and
the offender in light of the nature and dynamics of family violence.
Proposal 19–8
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should require decision makers, when considering whether victims
contributed
to their injuries, to consider the relationship between the victim
and the offender in light of the nature and dynamics of family
violence. This
requirement should also apply to assessments of the reasonableness of
victims’ failures to take steps to mitigate
their injuries, where the
legislation includes that as a factor to be considered. Section 30(2A) of the
Victim Support and Rehabilitation Act 1996
(NSW), which makes such
provision in relation to a failure to mitigate injury, should be referred to as
Proposal 19–9
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should not enable claims to be excluded on the basis that the
might benefit from the claim.
Proposal 19–10
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should ensure that time limitation clauses do not apply unfairly to
of family violence. These provisions may take the form of providing
(a) decision makers must consider the fact that the application involves
family violence, sexual assault, or child abuse in deciding
to extend time, as
set out in s 31 of the
Victims of Crime
(b) decision makers must consider whether the offender was in a position of
power, influence or trust in deciding to extend time,
as set out in
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 2009
Proposal 19–11
State and territory victims’ compensation
legislation should ensure that victims of family violence are not required to be
at a hearing with an offender in victims’ compensation
Proposal 19–12
State and territory governments should ensure
that data is collected concerning the claims and awards of compensation made to
of family violence under statutory victims’ compensation schemes.
The practice of the Victims’ Compensation Tribunal
in NSW provides an
instructive model.
Proposal 19–13
State and territory governments should provide
information about victims’ compensation in all courts dealing with family
matters. The Australian Government should ensure that similar
information is available in federal family courts.
In practice, are the current provisions for making interim
compensation awards working effectively for victims of family
Question 19–3
Should measures be adopted to ensure that
offenders do not have access to victims’ compensation awards in cases of
family violence?
If so, what measures should be
introduced?
[back to top]
Training and
This section briefly addresses different issues relating to education and
training in the context of family violence. Specific training
discussed elsewhere in the Consultation Paper. The need for effective training
and education is discussed in the context
of family violence in Chapter 4 and in
relation to federal offences relevant to family violence in Chapter 5. The
training of police
and prosecutors is discussed in Chapters 5, 6 and 7;
proposals for judicial training are made in the context of family law and family
violence in Chapter 7 and 8; and training in the context of family dispute
resolution is discussed in Chapter 11.
Training is discussed in the context of sexual offences in Chapter 15; in
relation to specialist police and prosecutors, inter-sectoral
training, and
training in interviewing in Chapter 17; and in relation to judicial training on
issues relating to sexual offences
in Chapter 18.
The Commissions endorse the recommendations made by the National Council, the
Chisholm Review and the Family Law Council that there
be further training of
those in the family law system in relation to family violence, including
judicial officers, lawyers and family
dispute resolution practitioners.
An issue that has been raised with the Commissions is the need for better
training of lawyers at both an undergraduate level and in
professional development training. In the Commissions’ view, the
curriculum of degree courses in law and continuing
professional development
frameworks need to be reviewed in order to ensure that issues of family violence
are being addressed appropriately.
Proposal 19–14
Australian universities offering law degrees
should review their curriculums to ensure that legal issues concerning family
are appropriately addressed.
Proposal 19–15
Australian law societies and institutes should
review continuing professional development requirements to ensure that legal
concerning family violence are appropriately addressed.
In 2009, the Education Centre Against Violence conducted an audit of domestic
and family violence training conducted by government
and non-governmental
organisations in NSW, as part of the Intersectoral Domestic & Family
Violence Education and Training project,
established under the NSW
government’s new whole of government approach to domestic and family
violence in NSW. This audit
involved a survey of key agencies of training
conducted in those agencies in 2008. The survey was followed by a number of
cross-sector focus groups on training needs. This audit has not yet
been published.
The Commissions are not aware of any similar audits being conducted in other
states or territories. The Commissions consider that
it is desirable, before
implementing any recommendations regarding training, that a national audit of
existing family violence training
should be conducted, in order to ensure that
existing resources are best used, to evaluate whether existing training meets
best practice
principles, and to promote the development of best practice in
Proposal 19–16
The Australian Government and state and territory
governments should collaborate in conducting a national audit of family violence
training conducted by government and non-governmental agencies, in order to:
(a) ensure that existing resources are best used;
(b) evaluate whether such training meets best practice principles; and
(c) promote the development of best practice in training.
Ensuring that training is effective, and measuring the effectiveness of
training, is a challenge. It is essential to ensure that training
and education
is sensitive, specific, and relevant to the needs of particular stakeholders and
that training programs are designed
with the ultimate aim of improving service
responses to victims of domestic and family violence. In particular, it must
the time constraints of those being trained and the aversion to
training that can result if training is not appropriately designed.
It needs to
be ongoing and substantive, rather than superficial. It also needs to be based
on solid evidence, and open to diverse
viewpoints. The Commissions recognise
that calls for further education and training are easy to make, but that
ensuring that training
is relevant, useful, and has a meaningful impact on
behaviour is much more difficult.
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that it is important to propose
ways to ensure the quality of training and education. A
number of strategies
appear necessary to achieve this aim. First, there need to be minimum standards
for assessing the quality of
family violence training, and training needs to be
evaluated according to those standards. In addition, best practice guidelines
for quality family violence training—including key issues such as the
content, length, and format of such training—should
be developed.
Secondly, agencies should conduct an assessment of the training needs of
staff, to ensure that training is sensitive and specific
to the needs of those
being trained. Agencies should also foster training in conjunction with other
agencies, to improve the cooperation
and collaboration between key players in
the legal system.
Thirdly, the Commissions support the strategy of developing a comprehensive
professional development framework for professionals working
in family violence,
as recommended in
Time for Action
. It also supports proposals for a
coordinating body to have a primary role in training and education, either in
the form of a National
Centre of Excellence (as proposed in
) or an expert panel and reference group (as recommended by the Family
Law Council).
Proposal 19–17
The Australian Government and state and territory
governments should ensure the quality of family violence training by:
(a) developing minimum standards for assessing the quality of family violence
training, and regularly evaluating the quality of such
training in relevant
government agencies using those standards;
(b) developing best practice guidelines in relation to family violence
training, including the content, length, and format of such
(c) developing training based on evidence of the needs of those being
trained, with the ultimate aim of improving outcomes for victims;
(d) fostering cross-agency and collaborative training, including cross-agency
placements.
S Stewart (Education Centre Against
Consultation
, By telephone, 18 February 2010.
ALRC CPS1 Family Violence � Improving Legal Frameworks (Summary)
20. Specialisation
Introduction
Specialised police
Specialised prosecutors
Specialised courts
Features of specialised family violence courts
Best practice in courts generally
Intake services
The role of the federal government
20. Specialisation
[back to top]
Introduction
Chapter 20 considers specialisation as a method to improve the interaction in
practice of the legal frameworks governing family violence,
and improving the
consistency of the interpretation and application of laws for victims of sexual
assault in the context of family
violence, with an overall objective of
improving the safety of women and children.
[back to top]
Specialised
In a number of jurisdictions, police officers specialise in family violence
and sexual assault.
substantial merit in the use of specialised police units. Liaison officers
provide an important early point of contact,
and continuity in contact, for
victims and assist them in navigating the legal system. Specialised police at
all levels provide contact
points for inter-agency collaboration, and may form a
key element of integrated responses. Further, monitoring and supervision by
specialised police is likely to improve consistency in the application of laws
in the context of family violence. In particular,
the comprehensive models in
Victoria and Western Australia, which designate specialised units at different
levels of command and
across a wide range of functions appear most promising.
The use of specialised police, however, is a complement to, rather than a
substitute for, important general measures such as a Code of Practice and
training of operational police.
In expressing these views, the Commissions are aware that there is relatively
little information on the roles of specialised police,
and relatively little
empirical evidence of their value. Further, the Commissions recognise that
police services have different needs,
strengths, policy frameworks and
organisational structures, and operate in different policy and operational
In light of this, the Commissions invite stakeholders to provide further
information about the operation of specialised police units,
and any other
issues that arise in relation to them.
Proposal 20–1
Each state and territory police force should
ensure that:
(a) victims have access to a primary contact person within the police, who
specialises and is trained in family violence issues;
(b) a police officer is designated as a primary point of contact for
government and non-government agencies involved in responding
(c) specially trained police have responsibility for supervising, monitoring
or assuring the quality of police responses to family
violence incidents, and
providing advice and guidance to operational police and police prosecutors in
this regard; and
(d) there is a central forum or unit responsible for policy and strategy
concerning family violence within the police.
What issues arise in practice concerning the role and operations
of police who specialise in family violence
[back to top]
Specialised
prosecutors
In some jurisdictions, there are prosecutors who specialise in dealing with
family violence or sexual assault. The ACT Office of the
Director of Public
Prosecutions (ODPP), for example, has for several years had specialised family
violence prosecutors as part of
the Family Violence Intervention Program (FVIP).
They are assisted by three witness assistants. The ODPP states that:
Having specialist prosecutors allows for a consistency of approach and for
continuity for victims. Specialisation also enhances the
relationships with
other essential agencies—the police, the Office of Children and Youth and
Family Support, the Domestic Violence
Crisis Service and Victims Support
There may be significant value in specialised prosecutors dealing with family
violence issues, including cases of sexual assault.
This appears to have been of
significant benefit in the ACT, and the weight of evidence in the US suggests
that, provided such units
are adequately funded, they are effective. There are
also potential benefits when specialised prosecutors work in conjunction with
specialised courts, as noted below, as their greater understanding of the nature
and dynamics of family violence and sexual assault
improves outcomes and levels
of victim satisfaction.
The Commissions consider, however, that further exploration of this issue is
required to justify making a proposal. It may be that
other options, such as
specialised training for all prosecutors or prosecution guidelines specific to
family violence (as, for example,
already exist in some Australian
provide further information
on whether there is value in creating positions for
specialised prosecutors for family violence matters.
What are the benefits of specialised family violence prosecutors,
and the disadvantages or challenges associated with them, if any?
benefits of specialised prosecutors be achieved in other ways, such as by
training or guidelines on family
[back to top]
Specialised
In Australia, family violence courts now operate in NSW, Victoria,
Queensland, Western Australia (WA) and the ACT. Such a court has
recommended recently for Tasmania. Specialised sexual assault courts are much
less common than family violence courts.
A specialised child sexual assault
offences lists.
The first issue that arises for this Inquiry is whether specialised courts
should be established more widely in Australia. One key
benefit in terms of
improving the interaction between legal frameworks is the greater integration
and coordination of the management
of cases in these courts. The Commissions
consider that family violence courts offer many potential benefits, and this is
by evaluations. In the Commissions’ preliminary view, state and
territory governments should establish and foster specialised
family violence
courts in their jurisdictions.
Most specialised courts in Australia focus on criminal cases
Only Victoria employs a
‘one stop shop’ model, which deals with all related matters within
the jurisdiction of the Magistrates’
Court. There appear to be
considerable benefits, from the perspectives of victims and families, in
enabling specialised courts to
address issues across different legal frameworks.
Most judicial officers dealing regularly with family violence issues already
experience both in criminal proceedings and in protection order
proceedings. The Commissions consider that, when establishing family
courts, state and territory governments should establish courts which deal with
both criminal proceedings and protection
orders in relation to family
The Commissions’ preliminary view is that there is much advantage in
the multi-jurisdictional model used in Victoria, which
includes civil and
statutory claims for compensation, as well as child support and family law
matters (to the extent to which such
territory courts). The Commissions are interested in hearing from stakeholders
on the feasibility
of multi-jurisdictional courts. The Commissions propose, at
this stage, that state and territory governments should review whether
specialised family violence courts should exercise other jurisdiction relevant
to family violence.
The Commissions also consider that, in order to maximise the potential of
specialised family violence courts and improve access to
such courts, a
mechanism for referral from general to specialised family violence courts should
be established. Referral should be
based on principled criteria, such as
concurrent or multiple claims or actions in relation to the same family. A more
general discretion
could be conferred, such as where a judicial officer
considers it necessary for exceptional reasons. There may be other criteria
demonstrating a particular need for the use of specialised family violence
courts. The Commissions are interested in hearing stakeholder
views on this
Proposal 20–2
State and territory governments should ensure that
specialised family violence courts determine matters relating to protection
and criminal proceedings related to family violence. State and territory
governments should review whether specialised family violence
courts should also
be responsible for handling related claims:
(a) for civil and statutory compensation; and
(b) in child support and family law matters, to the extent such jurisdiction
is conferred in the state or territory.
Proposal 20–3
State and territory governments should establish
mechanisms for referral of cases involving family violence to specialised family
violence courts. There should be principled criteria for determining which cases
could be referred to such courts. For example, these
criteria could include:
(a) where there are concurrent family-related claims or actions in relation
to the same family issues;
(b) where there have been multiple family-related legal actions in relation
to the same family in the past;
(c) where, for exceptional reasons, a judicial officer considers it
of specialised family violence courts
The features of specialised family violence courts vary markedly from
view is that,
at a minimum, specialised family violence courts should have a number of
First, all judicial officers in a family violence court should be especially
selected for their roles. The attitude, knowledge and
skills of a judicial
officer are critical to the success of such a court and it is important that
selection be based on these criteria.
The mechanisms for selection, however,
should be determined by those establishing the court, in close consultation with
stakeholders.
Secondly, specialised and ongoing training on family violence issues is key
to ensuring a shared understanding of family violence
within the court. Ideally,
this training should be provided to all staff, as was done with the Victorian
FVCD. At a minimum, training
should be provided to the following key
participants: judicial officers, prosecutors, registrars, and the police who
appear in those
courts. If there are specialised lawyers in the court, they
should also participate in this training.
Thirdly, as stakeholders have emphasised, victim support workers play a key
role in ensuring the success of such courts. Such workers
may be employed
directly by the court or a community organisation may be funded to provide such
workers. The Commissions are also
of the view that there would be significant
benefit in providing support for defendants but, given the impact on resources,
do not propose that this be required for all specialised family violence
Family violence courts should also have special arrangements for victim
safety at court, such as a separate waiting room for victims,
separate entrances
and exits, remote witness facilities, and appropriately trained security staff.
Finally, the Commissions propose
that family violence courts should have
mechanisms for collaboration with other agencies and non-government
organisations. Those
establishing such courts should determine precisely what
kinds of mechanisms are desirable for each court, in close consultation
stakeholders.
Proposal 20–4
State and territory governments should establish
or further develop specialised family violence courts in their jurisdictions, in
close consultation with relevant stakeholders. These courts should have, as a
(a) especially selected judicial officers;
(b) specialised and ongoing training on family violence issues for judicial
officers, prosecutors, registrars, and police;
(c) victim support workers;
(d) arrangements for victim safety; and
(e) mechanisms for collaboration with other courts, agencies and
non-government organisations.
[back to top]
practice in courts generally
Several elements of specialised family violence courts appear capable of
being adopted in other courts as ‘best practice’.
First, it would
appear efficient for proceedings relating to protection orders and, potentially,
criminal proceedings related to
family violence to be listed on the same day,
where the caseload permits . The Commissions understand that this is already the
in many courts. It may also be worth reviewing whether related claims
(in, for example, child support and family law) can also be
listed at the same
time. As part of this review, it is also desirable for courts to review their
capacity to identify and deal with
family violence-related matters in their
general lists, such as in bail applications.
If such listing practices are adopted, it would also be possible for the
courts to facilitate the presence of victim support workers
on those days,
including legal aid lawyers. In addition, defendant support workers could also
be employed. In Chapter 19, the Commissions
propose that state and
territory governments should, to the extent feasible, make victim support
workers available at court proceedings
related to family violence, and at the
time the police are called out to family violence incidents. Of course, this
requires additional
funding. However, where there are victim support
organisations in the region which already offer court support services, general
courts could immediately facilitate the provision of court support by providing,
for example, an office and other institutional support.
Assigning selected judicial officers to work on cases related to family
violence may also be cost-effective, depending on the caseload
of the court.
This would likely provide an immediate benefit in terms of improving consistency
and, provided the selection was done
carefully, is likely also to improve the
treatment of victims. If the caseload justifies it, specialised police and
prosecutors could
also be assigned. This would potentially result in long-term
efficiencies. For example, it would be efficient to target training
those dedicated to this work, rather than training all judicial officers.
Another practice that may be worth adopting is the use of practice directions
for family violence cases. The ACT Magistrates Court
uses a Practice Direction
that sets out timelines for stages in the process and, in particular, specifies
the information that is
required at particular stages in the process. The Local
Court in NSW has also adopted a shorter practice direction, which also sets
a timeframe for certain stages in the process. Similarly, a practice note in the
New Zealand family violence courts sets a timetable
for family violence
prosecutions to minimise delay. The adoption of similar practice directions
elsewhere may be one way of ensuring
more timely dispositions of family violence
cases. Such practice directions should enable courts to provide victims with
some guidance
as to the usual duration of court proceedings related to family
Courts generally could also review existing court facilities and practices
with a view to improving victim safety at court. For example,
separate exits and entrances, the use of a separate waiting room for victims,
and the use of escorts to and from the courtroom
may be ways of increasing
victim safety.
Finally, another practice used in specialised courts that could be developed
in courts generally is the establishment of a forum for
discussion with, other agencies and non-government organisations. Many courts
already have court users groups
for this purpose.
In the view of the Commissions, there is likely to be considerable benefit in
state and territory governments reviewing whether, and
to what extent, these
features have been adopted in the courts in their jurisdiction dealing with
family violence, with a view to
adopting them.
Proposal 20–5
State and territory governments should review
whether, and to what extent, the following features have been adopted in the
in their jurisdiction dealing with family violence, with a view to
adopting them:
(a) identifying, and listing on the same day, protection order matters and
criminal proceedings related to family violence, as well
as related family law
act and child protection matters;
(b) providing victim and defendant support, including legal advice, on family
violence list days;
(c) assigning selected and trained judicial officers to work on cases
related to family violence;
(d) adopting practice directions for family violence cases;
(e) ensuring that facilities and practices secure victim safety at court;
(f) establishing a forum for feedback from, and discussion with, other
agencies and non-government organisations.
[back to top]
The Superior Court of the District of Columbia has established an integrated
Domestic Violence Unit, which includes within it a Domestic
Violence Court, a
Domestic Violence Coordination Unit, and a Domestic Violence Intake Center.
There are two Intake Centers within
the District of Columbia, which serve as a
‘one stop shop’ for victims of family violence. The Intake Centers
are staffed
by government employees, as well as employees of non-governmental
support agencies.
There are some similarities between the Intake Centers and the Domestic
Violence Advocacy Support Central in Perth. This also provides
a ‘one stop
shop’ of family violence services, through the co-location of refuge,
legal, family support, police and counselling
services. A key point of
difference, however, is that the Intake Center acts as a service centre for the
Domestic Violence Court
Providing a ‘one stop shop’ centre for a range of related
services is one method of delivering the benefits of victim
support, and would
complement the existence of victim support workers at court or at the time the
police were called. Such a centre
would minimise the burden on victims, and
facilitate access to the full range of government and victim services.
The intake services so provided could perform a range of functions. If staff
are appropriately trained, they could assist in (for
example) recording victim
statements and complaints, and filing claims across a range of jurisdictions,
including in the family law
central point of contact for victims for basic information about pending court
proceedings.
For example, an intake centre could inform victims when court
proceedings have been listed. It could also facilitate access to legal
and other victim services. As in the Neighbourhood Justice Centre in Victoria, a
family law courts officer could be available
at certain times to provide
information on family law courts. The Commissions consider that intake units
could be a practical and
affordable measure to ensure access to the benefits of
specialised family violence courts across the court system generally. In its
preliminary view, state and territory governments should establish such units,
where feasible.
Proposal 20–6
State and territory governments should establish
centres providing a range of family violence services for victims, which would
the following functions:
(a) recording victim statements and complaints;
(b) facilitating access to victim support workers for referrals to other
(c) filing all claims relating to family violence from victims on behalf of
the victim in relevant courts; and
(d) acting as a central point of contact for victims for basic information
[back to top]
role of the federal government
There are several ways for the federal government to support specialised
family violence courts. The Australian Government could assist
by facilitating
the transfer of knowledge and expertise across state and territory
provided by existing specialised
courts or judicial officers; and research and evaluations of existing
specialised courts could be
funded for the benefit of other jurisdictions.
Appropriate funding could be provided to the National Judicial College of
for the purpose of providing ongoing judicial education in relation to
family violence, including in relation to family violence
The Australian Government could also coordinate state and territory
government action in relation to specialised courts. For example,
party could be set up by the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General which could
exchange information and collaborate on
projects for such courts. Another way of
fostering national cooperation and collaboration is by establishing a network of
specialised family violence courts and judicial officers specialising
in family violence or family law.
There is also a key role for
the Australian Government in ensuring coordination between federal and
state/territory courts. In New
Zealand, as noted above, there is a position of
Family Law Coordinator. These coordinators liaise with people external to the
including specialist report writers and counsellors. Importantly, for the
purposes of this Inquiry, the coordinator also liaises
with child protection
services, as well as family violence courts.
A similar liaison position could be created within the Family Court and
Federal Magistrates Court to facilitate communication between
federal courts and
state and territory courts. This liaison officer could act as a central point of
courts where there are concurrent family law
proceedings, and thus facilitate information exchange between federal family law
and state and territory courts. Further, a liaison officer could act also
to develop and promote best practice in relation to greater
coordination and
integration between the federal, state and territory courts. For example, a
liaison officer could be responsible
for the negotiation of protocols between
courts, and for addressing problems with interaction raised by the judicial
officers and
staff of the courts. The liaison officer could also represent the
federal family law courts in relevant forums for collaboration
with agencies,
courts and non-government organisations.
Proposal 20–7
The Australian Government should assist state and
territory governments in the establishment, development and maintenance of
family violence courts by, for example, facilitating the transfer of
specialised knowledge and expertise in dealing with family violence
assault across federal and state and territory jurisdictions; and establishing
and maintaining national networks of judicial
officers and staff specialising in
family violence or family law.
Proposal 20–8
The Australian Government should create positions
for Family Law Courts liaison officers. These officers should have the following
(a) facilitating information sharing between federal family law courts and
state and territory courts;
(b) developing and promoting best practice in relation to information
sharing between the federal family law courts and state and
territory courts;
(c) representing the federal family law courts in relevant forums for
collaboration with agencies, courts and non-government organisations.
The role of specialised police in the
context of sexual assault is discussed in
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (ACT),
Annual Report 2008–2009
In South Australia, protection orders
are dealt with alongside criminal cases.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (2.58 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter