URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/1994/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:35:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issues - Discussion Paper [1994] NSWLRCDP 35
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the
Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
1. INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND TO THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
Over-representation and unfair treatment in the criminal justice system
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
THE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE TO DATE
The Issues Paper
The Research Reports
The first Discussion Paper: Policing Issues
The Commission’s approach
Consultation
OUTLINE OF THIS PAPER
FUTURE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE
2. DEFINITIONS OF INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
INTRODUCTION
WHAT IS INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY?
CLINICAL DEFINITIONS OF INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
STATUTORY DEFINITIONS OF INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
New South Wales statutory definitions
Crimes Act 1900
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1990 (NSW)
Victorian statutory definitions
Is a statutory definition desirable?
Should the same definition apply in criminal and social welfare contexts?
What should a statutory definition contain?
Reference to IQ scores and categories of disability
Distinction between intellectual disability and brain injury
CONCLUSIONS
3. LAWYERS AND LEGAL PERSONNEL
INTRODUCTION
ATTITUDES OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM PERSONNEL TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
LEGAL EDUCATION
Lawyers, the judiciary, and court personnel
Solicitors/Barristers
The judiciary/magistracy
Court personnel
Legal education for people with an intellectual disability and carers
People with an intellectual disability
LEGAL REPRESENTATION
Identification
Further assessment
Appropriate communication in interviews
Continuity of personnel
Difficulties in obtaining instructions
Lawyer/client relationship
Guardianship
Support person
SPECIALIST LEGAL SERVICES
Existing legal specialist units
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Legal Aid Commission of NSW
“Other related bodies”
Advantages and disadvantages of specialist units
Disadvantages
Alternatives to special units
Intellectual disability liaison officers
Independent unit
4. FITNESS TO BE TRIED - SUPREME AND DISTRICT COURTS
OVERVIEW - APPEARING IN COURT
FITNESS: AN INTRODUCTION
What makes a person fit to be tried?
PROCEEDINGS IN THE SUPREME AND DISTRICT COURTS
Overview of the procedure
Who can raise fitness and when?
If found fit/unfit to be tried by the court?
The Mental Health Review Tribunal
Determination by the Tribunal that the person
become fit to be tried within 12
Determination by the Tribunal that the person
become fit to be tried within 12 months
Continuing review by the Tribunal of forensic patients
Difficulties with the legislation
The distinction between intellectual disability and mental illness
Standard of proof
Trial by judge alone - the use of standard forms
Length of detention, delay and complexity
Power to dismiss charge - the s 10(4) procedure
If fit to be tried?
Directions to the jury
Special hearings and limiting terms
Acquired brain damage and fitness
Release - the discretion of the executive
5. FITNESS TO BE TRIED AND DIVERSION - LOCAL COURTS
FITNESS TO BE TRIED
DIVERSION BY THE LOCAL COURTS
The s 32/33 procedure
Intention of the sections
Use of s 32/33 by the courts
Table 1: Number of charges dismissed in 1992 under sections 32 and 33 by offence type
DIFFICULTIES WITH THE CURRENT LEGISLATION
Definitions: to whom does the procedure apply?
Proving that a person is “developmentally disabled”: supporting evidence
Release with conditions
Dismissal under s 32: possible options
THE DEFENCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 32 AND RELATED PROVISIONS
Diversion (P25A)
Fitness (P25B, P25C)
Defence of mental impairment (P25D)
6. COMPETENCE TO GIVE EVIDENCE
INTRODUCTION
THE REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPETENCY
Special provisions for children
Difficulties faced by the witness with an intellectual disability
THE EVIDENCE BILL
Unsworn evidence
7. GIVING EVIDENCE IN COURT
UNDERSTANDING THE COURT PROCESS
Witness support - before court
CASE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS
Closed courts and adjournments
Expedition of cases involving people with an intellectual disability
THE LANGUAGE USED IN THE COURT ROOM: QUESTIONING AND “INTERPRETERS”
“Interpreters” for people with an intellectual disability
The Evidence Bill
Appropriate questioning
The Evidence Bill
Limited cross-examination
SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR “VULNERABLE” WITNESSES’ EVIDENCE
Existing procedures
New South Wales
Other jurisdictions
Witness support - in court
Screens and other “alternative arrangements”
Advantages and disadvantages
Closed-circuit television (“CCTV”)
Use of CCTV in New South Wales
Advantages and disadvantages of CCTV
Extension of CCTV
Extending and evaluating special procedures: issues for consideration
The Commission’s proposal
Videorecording before the hearing
Videorecorded police interviews with the witness
Videorecorded witness testimony
Provisional views: videorecording
Unsworn (“Dock”) statements
Provisional views and further issues for consideration
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR VULNERABLE WITNESSES
8. RELIABILITY OF EVIDENCE
EXPERT EVIDENCE ABOUT RELIABILITY
The Evidence Bill
The Commission’s proposal
CORROBORATION AND OTHER JUDICIAL WARNINGS
Warnings about confessions
Warnings for all witnesses
The Evidence Bill
9. VICTIMS: SEXUAL OFFENCES AND VICTIM COMPENSATION
SEXUAL OFFENCES AGAINST PEOPLE WITH AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
General issues
Aggravated sexual offences
Specific sexual offences
Desirability of specific offences
New South Wales: s 66F
Sexual offences
Aggravated sexual offences
General sexual assault provisions
Specific sexual offences: s 66F
COMPENSATION FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME
10. CRIMINAL DEFENCES
INTRODUCTION
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY AND CRIMINAL DEFENCES OR EXCUSES
THE DEFENCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS
Can a person with an intellectual disability be found not guilty on the ground of “mental illness”?
The consequences of the defence of mental illness
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE DEFENCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS
Mandatory requirement for strict custody
“Strict custody”
A judicial power to release?
The recommendations of the Monitoring Committee
Conclusions: mandatory strict custody
Indeterminate detention
Conditions of release
The duty to give reasons and appeals
11. SENTENCING DECISIONS AND OPTIONS
INTRODUCTION
Intellectual disability as a sentencing factor
Rehabilitation
Legislative recognition for intellectual disability as a sentencing factor
Intellectual disability as a “special circumstance”
The decision to give a custodial sentence
Vulnerability in gaol
PRE-SENTENCE REPORTS
Pre-sentence Review Panel
CUSTODIAL OPTIONS
New South Wales
Special units
Special services
Custodial options in other States
SECURE UNITS IN THE COMMUNITY
OTHER CUSTODIAL ISSUES
Over-representation in prisons
Why does this over-representation of people with an intellectual disability occur?
Implications for prisoner management
Screening and assessment
Transfer of information from the courts
Short term prisoners
Training for correctional officers
NON-CUSTODIAL (OR SEMI-CUSTODIAL) OPTIONS
Options available in New South Wales
Community Service Orders and Attendance Centres
Dismissal without conviction
Periodic detention
Program probation orders
Disadvantages of non-custodial options for People with an intellectual disability
Justice Plans
12. RELEASE FROM CUSTODY
“DANGEROUSNESS”
Predicting “dangerousness”
“Dangerousness” and intellectual disability
“Dangerousness” and preventive detention
General sentencing principles: proportionality
Preventive detention statutes - Australia
Objections to preventive detention
Alternatives to additional periods of punishment
PAROLE AND POST RELEASE SERVICES
Parole and people with an intellectual disability
Post release services
A multi-disciplinary approach: the Lancaster Program
Negotiated agreements
13. SERVICES AND CO-ORDINATION
INTRODUCTION
SOME GENERAL PROBLEMS
People with a “double disadvantage”
Mental illness
Identification and assessment
Continuity and support
Policy and co-ordination
Lack of services
Services needed
The role of the Department of Community Services
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS
Information
Case management
Guardianship
Provision of assessment, accommodation and other services
Policy development and specialist units
Inter-department initiatives and the transfer of information
Criminal justice worker
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
Appendix A: STATUTORY DEFINITIONS OF INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY AND RELATED TERMS
Appendix B: TABLES FROM THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT 1900 (NSW)
Appendix C: EXCERPTS FROM LEGISLATION
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW), the then Attorney General, the Hon Peter Collins QC MP, referred by letter received on 30 September 1991, the following matter
to the Law Reform Commission for report:
To inquire into and review the law and practice relating to the treatment of the intellectually disabled in the criminal justice system
and matters incidental thereto; and in particular, without affecting the generality of the foregoing, to consider -
(a) whether there should be a new uniform statutory definition of "intellectual disability";
(b) whether, and to what extent, the intellectually disabled should be diverted from the criminal justice system, including consideration
of the custodial and non-custodial alternatives to the sentencing and detention of the intellectually disabled;
(c) the treatment of intellectually disabled persons in police custody and in prison;
(d) the release from custody into the community of intellectually disabled persons considered dangerous;
(e) whether specialist units should be established within the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Legal Aid Commission,
the Corrective Services Commission, the Police Service and other related bodies, to deal with the intellectually disabled; and
(f) in so far as the law and practice relating to the treatment of the intellectually disabled is relevant to the treatment of mentally
ill in the criminal justice system, whether any recommendations should also be made in relation to the mentally ill.
PARTICIPANTS
The Law Reform Commission is constituted by the
Law Reform Commission Act
. For the purpose of this reference, the Chairman, in accordance with the Act, created a Division comprising the following members
of the Commission:
The Hon R M Hope AC CMG QC (until 2 April 1993)
The Hon G J Samuels AC QC (from 3 April 1993)
Professor David Weisbrot
Professor Brent Fisse
Ms Clare Petre (until 23 October 1992)
Ms Jane Stackpool (until 31 December 1993)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Research and Writing
Ms Leonie Armstrong
Mr Bruce Fischer
Mr Jarrod White
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop Publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Administrative Assistance
Ms Zoya Howes
Ms Suzanna Mishhawi
Honorary Consultants
Associate Professor Susan Hayes
Mr Mark Ierace
SUBMISSIONS
The Commission invites submissions on the issues raised in this Discussion Paper.
How to make a submission
Anyone may make a submission or comment, including people with an intellectual disability, relatives or service providers, participants
in the criminal justice system, such as police or lawyers, or members of the public. You can do so in any of the following ways:
Make a written submission by writing to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 SYDNEY]
Fax: (02) 247 1054
Telephone the Commission on (02) 252 3855 and ask to speak to a Legal Officer to make your comments by telephone.
Telephone or write to the Commission to arrange to make a submission in person.
If you need an interpreter or have some other difficulty of communication or transport, please arrange for someone to telephone the
Commission and we will attempt to make some suitable arrangements.
What should a submission contain?
There is no special form for a submission or restriction on what can be said: we are interested to hear any comments, from any source,
victims or witnesses. The Commission invites submissions on issues relevant to the review, including but not limited to the issues
raised in this Discussion Paper.
Closing dates for submissions
The closing dates for submissions is
28 February 1994
. No final decisions will be made by the Commission until after the deadline for submissions has passed. If your require an extension
of time, please telephone the Commission by that date.
Confidentiality
Submissions made to the Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission's process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally be
made available on request to any person or organisation. However, if you would like all, or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked "confidential"
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act
In preparing the final Report, the Commission may also find it useful to refer to and make mention of comments submitted in response
Discussion Paper
. However, if a request for confidentiality is made, it will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of such
submissions in a Report.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
Executive Summary
History of this Reference (Digest)
The Commission has been asked to review the treatment of people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system, whether
as suspects, victims or witnesses. This Paper is the fifth paper released as part of this review. The Commission has already published
an Issues Paper, two Research Reports and a Discussion Paper. The earlier Discussion Paper focussed on policing and dealt with issues
which arise in the initial contact between a person with an intellectual disability and the criminal justice system. This Discussion
Paper considers the next stage of the criminal justice process: the courts and sentencing.
This Discussion Paper is the last paper which will be released by the Commission before its final Report to the Attorney General.
This is therefore the
final opportunity to submit comments
to the Commission about this project. The Commission appreciates that the paper is very long and, in places, technical. However
not every chapter will be of concern to every individual or interest group. The Commission would welcome comments on all or any
part of the Paper.
This Discussion Paper covers the following areas:
statutory definitions
of intellectual disability;
lawyers and other legal personnel
and their dealings with people with an intellectual disability, including issues of legal education and problems associated with
obtaining instructions;
Chapters 4-10:
issues arising from the appearance in court of people with an intellectual disability, including fitness to be tried, competence,
giving evidence and criminal defences;
Chapters 11-12:
the sentence:
sentencing, custody and release, including consideration of the custodial and non-custodial alternatives available for the offender
with an intellectual disability and their release from custody; and
Chapter 13:
issues relevant to the whole criminal justice system
such as the particular needs of juveniles with an intellectual disability, and the necessity for co-ordination and provision of services.
The Paper contains 48 provisional proposals for reform. The proposals do not represent the final views of the Commission. The Commission
seeks further submissions and comments about the strengths or weaknesses of these proposals and invites suggestions for alternative
or additional proposals. Also throughout the Paper are a number of questions for discussion and requests for further information
and submissions. These areas are just as important as the proposals, but often point to areas where the Commission requires more
input before making more definite proposals.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary |
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an
Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and
Sentencing Issue
Provisional Proposals for Reform
of this Reference (Digest)
PROVISIONAL
PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
Discussion Paper contains 13 chapters and 48 proposals for reform. The
proposals, summarised below, do not represent the final
views of the
Commission. The Commission seeks comments and responses in order to
better formulate recommendations for reform to the
Attorney General.
2 - Definitions
1. That a new statutory
definition of intellectual disability be introduced as set out below.
(a) That the
Mental Health Act
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) and the
1993 (NSW) (the “listed Acts”) be
amended to include the following definition:
“Intellectual disability” in relation to
a person means a significantly below average general intellectual
functioning
existing concurrently with two or more deficits in adaptive
behaviour, and which has manifested before the age of 18 years.
It is important that this definition remain uniform
in criminal legislation.
(b) That the listed Acts replace
“developmental disability of mind”, or variations
of this term such as “developmentally
wherever they occur in the listed Acts, with “intellectual
disability”.
(c) That an umbrella term,
“impaired intellectual functioning”, be introduced
into the listed Acts to cover all conditions
which impair a
person’s intellectual functioning (but not including mental
illness) and that such a term be used wherever a
policy decision is
made that a provision in one of the listed Acts should apply to all
people with such an impairment, however
that condition arises, including intellectual
disability, brain injury or dementia:
“impaired intellectual functioning”
includes impaired intellectual functioning because of intellectual
disability, brain
injury or dementia.
Chapter 2 - Lawyers and legal personnel
2. That the Law Society of New South Wales and the NSW Bar Association:
(a) develop and distribute to all
solicitors/barristers in New South Wales a short summary of
intellectual disability issues with
appropriate contact numbers; and
(b) ensure that their respective
practice notes, manuals, and Codes/Rules refer to intellectual
disability issues, and provide guidelines
for lawyers with a client
with an intellectual disability. The issues covered should include:
(i) identifying intellectual
disability, acquiring further psychological or psychiatric assessments,
interviewing the client with
an intellectual disability, and the
importance of continuity of personnel in legal representation;
(ii) ascertaining and pursuing the interests of the
client with an intellectual disability in a way which maximises client
Guidelines should provide lawyers with a set of options
(graded according to the circumstances of the individual case) and
information
on obtaining assistance; and
(iii) information about guardianship and people
with an intellectual disability, with emphasis on what matters should
be considered,
and measures taken, before the making of an application
for guardianship is appropriate.
3. That intellectual disability issues be considered
in: law school curricula; the educational requirements for admission to
(especially the College of Law, and reading for the Bar);
courses satisfying the requirements of Mandatory Continuing Legal
and in-house training for law firms and relevant government
agencies (such as the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
New South Wales and the Legal Aid Commission of NSW).
4. That the Judicial Commission
of New South Wales:
(a) commission research into
intellectual disability issues including the incidence of intellectual
disability, the judiciary’s
knowledge of and attitudes
towards intellectual disability, trends in the sentencing and diversion
of offenders with an intellectual
disability, and the effect upon case
dispositions of the availability of intellectual disability services;
(b) develop, with appropriate
expert assistance, manuals, written/video/computerised educative
materials dealing with intellectual
disability issues (both generally
and in the context of the criminal justice system in particular), and
seminars/programs involving
first hand contact by judges and
magistrates with people with an intellectual disability.
5. That the New South Wales
Department of Courts Administration develop courses/information on
intellectual disability issues for
court personnel, and that such
issues be included in training courses and on-going employee education.
6. That the New South Wales
Department of Community Services, with the co-operation of police,
lawyers, criminal justice system agencies,
the New South Wales
Department of Education, and any other interested organisation (such as
the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual
Disability Rights Service), fund
and develop programs of legal education for people with an intellectual
disability and their carers.
7. That a support person be able
to attend the lawyer/client interview, but only at the request, or with
the consent, of the client
with an intellectual disability. The
person’s role is to be supportive of the person with an
intellectual disability, to interpret
if necessary, and to ensure that
the client’s wishes are being recognised and implemented by
the lawyer. A support person should
be familiar with, and trusted by,
the person with an intellectual disability, for example a family
member, advocate or carer. Care
should be taken that the person is not
favourably or unfavourably biased in relation to the interests of the
client. Where such a
person is unavailable or unwilling to participate,
the support person should be a crisis advocate provided by either the
Wales Department of Community Services or a non-governmental
organisation. If possible, the support person should not otherwise be
connected with the trial, for example, a potential witness. The support
person should be precluded by law from giving evidence in
any matter relating to the content of the lawyer/client interview,
unless the client otherwise consents. As it is not
clear whether such
protection would be offered by legal professional privilege, a
statutory privilege may be appropriate.
8. That government legal services develop and implement a policy that,
to the extent practicable, the same lawyer have the carriage
matter involving a person with an intellectual disability as a suspect,
witness or victim. As continuity will not always be
possible, a case
manager from the New South Wales Department of Community Services
should be appointed and be available if required
to assist the client
in the criminal process.
9. That the Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions, New South Wales and the Legal Aid Commission of
NSW establish intellectual
disability liaison officers. In addition to
their general duties, such officers should have responsibility for and
or input into:
(a) developing and implementing
policy, guidelines, and education for all personnel within the
particular institution;
(b) interacting with other specialist bodies and
institutions to ensure that people with an intellectual disability are
advised about,
and exposed to, available services;
(c) maintaining expertise in legal and policy
developments involving intellectual disability, so as to provide expert
assistance and
information on intellectual disability issues to persons
within and outside the particular organisation, for example, to private
solicitors; and
(d) acting as a contact and referral point for their
organisation, the legal profession, government bodies and the public.
Chapter 4 - Fitness to be tried: Supreme and District Courts
10. That certain sections of the
Mental Health (Criminal
Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) should be amended to include
reference to the person with an intellectual disability. (See para 4.22
for the full text
of this proposal.)
11. That references to “forensic
patient” in the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure)
1990 (NSW) or the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) be replaced by “forensic person”.
12. That the provisions of the
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be relocated in
13. That, wherever practicable,
the membership of the Mental Health Review Tribunal include, as one
member of its three person panel,
a member with appropriate expertise
in the area of intellectual disability in circumstances where the
Tribunal knows or suspects
that the person appearing before it has an
intellectual disability.
14. That the right to election
for a hearing by judge alone in fitness and special hearings be removed
(a) fitness hearings be always
heard by judge alone; and
(b) special hearings be always heard by judge and
15. That s 27 of the
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be amended to the
effect that orders are made by the Tribunal, not the Court.
16. That s 10(4) of the
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be amended as
10(4) If, in respect of a person charged with an offence, the
Court is of the opinion that it is inappropriate to inflict any
punishment,
or to inflict any punishment other than a nominal
punishment,
having regard to the trivial nature of the charge
or the offence, the nature of the person’s disability or any
other matter
including time already spent in custody
which the Court thinks proper to consider, the Court may determine not
to conduct an inquiry and may dismiss the charge and order
person be released.
17. Any expert report prepared for the purpose of assessing
the fitness of the accused to stand trial should not be able to be used
in evidence at the subsequent trial.
18. That the Judicial Commission of New
South Wales review the adequacy of the material in the Bench Books in
relation to intellectual
disability.
19. That s 14 of the
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be amended to
provide that, in the period between a finding of unfitness and the
special hearing, the Court may, on an
application by either side, have
the matter brought back before it to consider any possible variation in
the orders made under s
20. Where a person appearing
before any court in a fitness or special hearing does not have a
guardian and it appears to the Court
that a guardian may be necessary,
the Court should be empowered to adjourn the proceedings and direct
that an appropriate person
(presumably the Public Guardian) be notified
of the person’s position, and consider bringing an
application to the Guardianship
21. For the purpose of setting
the limiting term, the judge should be required to give the person the
benefit of assuming that the
person would have pleaded guilty. The
legislation should also be amended so that the limiting term is divided
into minimum and additional
22. A limited finding of guilt at
a special hearing should be a bar to further prosecution in respect of
the same circumstances, and
should no longer be subject to s 28 of the
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW).
23. That the executive discretion
be removed from all decisions regarding forensic patients (except as
limited by Proposal 24) so
that all decisions as to their placement,
security conditions and release are made by the Mental Health Review
Tribunal. (This proposal
would require consequential amendments to the
(NSW) and the
Mental Health
(Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) to enable the Tribunal to
make orders rather than recommendations.)
Mental Health Act
(NSW) be limited to apply only to forensic patients who have been
transferred to hospital while serving a sentence of imprisonment
life sentence.
5 - Fitness to be tried and diversion: Local Courts
and related
sections of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
(NSW) be re-drafted (in the terms set out at the end of Chapter 5) to
overcome the concerns highlighted in the chapter.
6 - Competence
26. The Commission does not make
a new proposal in relation to competence but rather supports cl 11 and
cl 12 of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW).
7 - Giving evidence in court
27. The Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions, New South Wales should develop guidelines for
preparing witnesses with an intellectual
disability for court. A video
explaining court procedures to adults with an intellectual disability
should be produced.
28. Matters involving an accused
or a victim with an intellectual disability should be expedited
wherever practicable.
29. That the following provisions
in relation to vulnerable witnesses (where
“witness” is defined to include the accused)
inserted into the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW):
(a) If by reason of intellectual disability, age or any other
factor the court is satisfied that a witness may be unfairly subjected
to embarrassment or distress in giving evidence in the ordinary way or
may be so intimidated by the atmosphere of the court room
nature of the proceedings as to be severely disadvantaged as a witness,
it may order that special arrangements be made for
the taking of
evidence of that witness.
(b) Special arrangements include, but are
not limited to:
(i) the use of closed circuit-television;
(ii) screens; or
(iii) the presence of a support person.
(c) Without limiting the
judge’s right to give any other warning, in any criminal
proceedings in which the evidence of a witness
is given by special
arrangements, the judge must warn the jury not to draw any inference
adverse to the accused person or give the
evidence any greater or
lesser weight because of the use of special arrangements.
30. Where the court is satisfied, on expert evidence, that the accused
has an intellectual disability, the accused shall have the
make a statement not subject to cross examination.
Chapter 8 - Reliability of evidence
31. A party in a criminal trial should be able, with the leave of the
court, to call expert evidence in chief about a witness’s
intellectual disability, where there is a risk that in the absence of
that evidence the trier of fact (judge or jury) will be unable
proper consideration to the reliability of the witness’
evidence. This evidence should be admitted to inform the trier
of the manner in which the intellectual disability may affect the
cognitive, communication, and memory skills of the witness
in relation
to the giving of evidence, and to explain the behaviour of the person.
32. That cl 164 of the
1993 (NSW) be amended to provide that the evidence of
people with an intellectual disability is a category of evidence which
be unreliable, and which may attract a judicial warning upon the
judge being requested by a party to give the warning to the jury.
9 - Victims: Sexual offences and victim compensation
In this area, the Commission has decided to ask a number of questions
at this stage, rather than to make specific proposals for reform.
questions and requests for further information are set out in paras
9.24 and 9.29.
10 - Criminal defences
33. That New South Wales adopt the proposed Commonwealth statutory
version of the defence of mental impairment. Accordingly, all
references in the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
(NSW) to the defence/verdict of “not guilty by reason of
mental illness” or “not guilty on the ground of
illness” should be amended to “the verdict
of not guilty because of mental impairment”. (Proposals
below, however,
will continue to refer to the defence of
“mental illness” to avoid confusion.)
34. That s 39 of the
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be amended so
that, following a verdict of not guilty by reason of mental illness,
the judge has the power either to order
the detention of the accused,
or in appropriate cases to allow for the person’s conditional
release until the Mental Health
Review Tribunal has made its
recommendations and the prescribed authority has responded to them.
(Consequential amendments to this
proposal will need to be made if the
role of the prescribed authority is changed, see Proposal 36 below.)
35. That the provisions in the
Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) and the
(NSW) that a person found not guilty by
reason of mental illness shall be detained (or released conditionally
by the judge, as proposed
in Proposal 34) on an indeterminate basis,
until the Mental Health Review Tribunal is satisfied that the person is
not dangerous,
be retained.
36. The Commission repeats Proposal 23 in relation to the abolition of
the executive discretion in this area:
That the executive discretion be removed from all decisions
regarding forensic patients (except as limited by Proposal 24) so that
all decisions as to their placement, security conditions and release
are made by the Mental Health Review Tribunal. (This proposal
require consequential amendments to the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) to enable the Tribunal to make orders rather than
recommendations.)
37. That the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and/or
Mental Health Regulation
1990 (NSW) be amended
to include a non-exhaustive list of release conditions which may be
imposed by the Mental Health Review Tribunal.
Chapter 11 - Sentencing
38. Where an offender is unrepresented and has an intellectual
disability, or one is suspected, and a custodial sentence is a
possibility, a Pre-sentence Report is mandatory.
39. A pilot study should be undertaken of a court
liaison position, for example in the Downing Centre. The liaison
officer(s) should
provide immediate assessments or advice for the
court, the police prosecutors, other prosecution lawyers, or defence
counsel, and
should have appropriate psychiatric and psychological
40. On the information obtained to date, the
Commission supports the retention of special units in the prison
system. The units, however,
should be regularly reviewed. The
Commission also supports the provision of funding for services for
mainstream prisoners with an
intellectual disability.
41. The Victorian model of a
secure unit (not within the grounds of a prison) for people with an
intellectual disability who are either
unfit to be tried or not guilty
on the grounds of mental illness, or other offenders with an
intellectual disability for whom prison
is considered inappropriate,
should be adapted for use in New South Wales. Appropriate safeguards
and services should be provided
and the conditions for the transfer of
such people from prison set out in legislation. The appropriate
government department to run
the unit should be a matter for further
discussion. The unit should be able to have more flexible leave and
rehabilitation programs
than are available in prison, and there should
be provision for decreasing levels of security to enable re-integration
into the community,
as currently exists in the prison system.
42. That the assessment and screening procedures in prisons be
appropriately resourced and reviewed on a regular basis.
43. That procedures be instituted to ensure
that relevant information about an offender’s intellectual
disability is transferred
from the courts to the New South Wales
Department of Corrective Services and the NSW Probation Service.
44. An audit of current New South
Wales Department of Corrective Services and NSW Probation Service
training in relation to intellectual
disability should be undertaken.
Training about the special needs and vulnerability of people with an
intellectual disability should
not be directed merely to the level of
the new recruit, but should be included on a continuing basis for all
staff who are likely
to come into contact with people with an
intellectual disability.
45. With the assistance of the
New South Wales Department of Community Services, the NSW Probation
Service should develop appropriate
non-custodial programs for the
offender with an intellectual disability, within the existing
non-custodial (or semi-custodial) options,
such as Community Service
Orders. The court should also have the power, as in Victoria, to
request information from both agencies
programs and order that the person attend such a program as a condition
of the sentence.
12 - Release from custody
46. That a pilot service co-ordination scheme, based upon the Special
Offenders Service, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, USA, be
established
jointly by the New South Wales Department of Community Services and the
NSW Probation Service, with staff drawn from
both organisations, and
that appropriate community-based accommodation be established to
provide for those participants in the program
who do not have adequate
accommodation or community ties to facilitate their participation in
the program.
47. That the proposed pilot service
co-ordination scheme include, in appropriate circumstances, a
negotiated agreements option, so
that offenders with an intellectual
disability may have some input into the structure and sanctions of
their individual programs.
This option should provide safeguards to
ensure that the person’s disability and unequal bargaining
position are not exploited.
13 - Services and co-ordination
48. The position of Intellectual Disability Commissioner should be
established, independent of any Department, to perform the following
roles, in consultation with the disability community, government
agencies and appropriate experts:
(a) identify the service needs of people
with an intellectual disability involved (or at risk of being involved)
in the criminal justice
system, and review these services on a regular
(b) decide which government departments could best
provide such services and be involved in their allocation, considering
the necessity
of appropriate resources to meet those needs;
(c) once the departmental responsibilities are
clearly outlined, assist in the establishment, at both the operational
and the policy
levels, of formal channels of communication between the
relevant criminal justice and service agencies;
(d) provide an information and referral contact
point for personnel in the criminal justice system (police, lawyers,
probation officers
etc), and preparing appropriate information for
dissemination to the public;
(e) encourage research into this area, through the
commissioning of projects and the supervision of, for example,
inter-departmental
initiatives;
(f) assist (perhaps on a contract basis) in the
training of criminal justice system personnel about intellectual
disability; and
(g) develop and provide a list of support persons
available for police interviews on a 24 hour basis.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
| Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
1.1 This Discussion Paper is concerned with people who have an intellectual disability in their contact with the criminal courts.
This Paper deals with the position of an accused person, a victim or a witness in the courts. It is the fifth paper released as
part of the Commission’s inquiry into the treatment of people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system.
1.2 In brief, people with an intellectual disability have a permanent condition of
significantly
lower than average intellectual ability. This disability does not simply mean that a person will perform poorly in academic pursuits;
it also results in what are known as “adaptive deficits”, that is, the disability usually affects such areas as the person’s
level of communication, social skills, and ability to live independently. Though the severity and consequences of an intellectual
disability will vary, a person with an intellectual disability may have difficulty in grasping complicated questions or abstract
concepts and in absorbing and assessing information at a “normal” rate.
These difficulties lead to obvious disadvantages in the criminal justice system, whether the person is a victim, a witness or an
accused person. The characteristics of an intellectual disability are discussed further in Chapter 2.
1.3 The implications of an intellectual disability provide the context for the proposed reforms outlined in this Discussion Paper.
This chapter provides an introduction to the background and conduct to date of the reference. It also sets out the areas to be covered
within this Paper and outlines the proposed future conduct of the reference.
BACKGROUND TO THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
Over-representation and unfair treatment in the criminal justice system
1.4 This reference arose from concern that people with an intellectual disability were over-represented as offenders and victims in,
and/or were being treated inappropriately by, the criminal justice system. It has been estimated that approximately 2-3% of the population
have an intellectual disability. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability, for example, estimated in 1992 that in
New South Wales (with a population of 5.6 million) there were about 27,500 persons with a substantial disability and 140,000 persons
with a mild to moderate intellectual disability. Until recently, many people with an intellectual disability lived in institutions
or were otherwise separated from society. Now, with changing community attitudes and a policy of “independent living”
programs, people with an intellectual disability are more likely to live in the community and use mainstream community services.
Similarly, there is greater community contact with, and input into, institutions and other forms of supported accommodation. It has
been stated that: “[i]t is likely that as more people with an intellectual disability come from an institutional setting to
live in the broader community, the numbers having contact with the criminal justice system, either as suspects or as victims of crime,
will increase.”
1.5 In relation to offenders, most research has occurred in prisons. A study of inmates in New South Wales prisons estimated that
people with an intellectual disability comprise 12-13% of the New South Wales prison population. This study used a definition of
intellectual disability which included both the results of intelligence tests and social and adaptive skills.
It has also been suggested that offenders with an intellectual disability are over-represented in other parts of the criminal justice
system. The Commission’s own research in this area,
undertaken by Associate Professor Susan Hayes, suggested that nearly one in four of the persons appearing before Local Courts on
criminal charges may have a significant intellectual deficit (see para 1.10 below). Other studies, both in Australia and overseas,
consistently point to the over-representation of people with an intellectual disability as offenders.
1.6 The over-representation and particular vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability as victims of crime, particularly
sexual assault, has also been commented upon. Recent studies in New South Wales,
and South Australia,
for example, have found a higher than average incidence of sexual assault of such persons and, in the South Australian study, of
other crimes. The actual level of victimisation may be even higher, as a Victorian study suggested that victims with an intellectual
disability did not report crimes for a variety of reasons, including their lack of understanding that a crime had been committed,
and ignorance of where to go to seek help. The study also commented on the small number of cases which actually reach the courts,
and the difficulty that these victims have in understanding court formalities and processes.
1.7 The significance of this level of over-representation is that the treatment of people with an intellectual disability is
a marginal issue in the criminal justice system - the numbers are high enough to suggest that every police officer, every criminal
lawyer, every prison officer, and every magistrate or judge dealing with criminal matters is likely to encounter people with an intellectual
disability in his or her daily work.
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
1.8 It was within the context of concerns about over-representation and unfair treatment that the then Attorney General, the Hon John
Dowd QC MP, convened a Committee to conduct a preliminary review of the operation of the criminal justice system as it affects people
with an intellectual disability. The Committee contained representatives from a number of agencies, including the Department of Corrective
Services, the Criminal Law Review Division of the Attorney General’s Department, the Mental Health Review Tribunal, the Guardianship
Board, the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Magistracy, the Public Defenders and (what is now known as) the Department
of Community Services. (The New South Wales Law Reform Commission did not participate in this stage of the review.) The Committee’s
two meetings produced a brief Issues Paper which revealed the need for a more comprehensive review of the area.
Accordingly, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission received a reference
to inquire into and review the law and practice relating to the treatment of people with an intellectual disability in the criminal
justice system. The full terms of the Commission’s reference are set out on page xi of this Paper.
THE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE TO DATE
The Issues Paper
1.9 Considering the breadth of the terms of reference and the variety of interest groups to be consulted, the Commission decided that
it should seek a preliminary response to the terms of reference and release an Issues Paper before formulating specific proposals
for reform. The terms of reference were widely distributed and the Commission incorporated the comments made in preliminary meetings,
interviews, written submissions and telephone calls in an Issues Paper
released in June 1992. The Issues Paper traced the criminal justice process, beginning with the commission of a crime and covering
of people with an intellectual disability at each stage. It was designed to promote discussion and to seek information and comment
The Research Reports
1.10 During the preliminary research for this reference, the Commission noted that, except for the prison statistics referred to above,
there was a lack of recent statistics about the number of people with an intellectual disability in the New South Wales criminal
justice system. It therefore sought funding to carry out some empirical research. The Commission also decided in the early stages
of the reference that it should place a priority on seeking input from people with disabilities. This was not a simple matter, however.
The Commission’s usual methods of seeking written or telephone submissions, based on written documents, are inappropriate for
people with low literacy levels and expression difficulties. With the assistance of the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability
Rights Service, discussion groups were organised using a specially prepared session outline and appropriate discussion leaders. The
Commission received funding assistance from the Law Foundation of New South Wales for these projects, resulting in two Research Reports,
released in March 1993:
Research Report 3,
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Consultations.
This Research Report contains the comments and recommendations for reform made by people with an intellectual disability, who spoke
to the Commission about their experiences in the criminal justice system and their ideas for change; and
Research Report 4,
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances Before Local Courts.
This study surveyed people appearing before four selected New South Wales Local Courts on criminal charges. Local Courts were selected
because of the high numbers of court appearances, and the range and diversity of offences. Social and adaptive skills were not able
to be assessed due to privacy considerations, therefore an operational definition of intellectual disability, based on a test of
cognitive reasoning ability, was used. With this test, the study found that 14.2% of the sample of 120 people had an intellectual
disability and a further 8.8% were in the borderline category. The Research Report suggests some solutions to the problem of over-representation
of people with an intellectual disability in Local Courts and indicates where further research may be useful.
The findings of, and difficulties for people with an intellectual disability highlighted by, these Research Reports will be the subject
of recommendations in the Commission’s final Report.
1.11 After the release of such preliminary papers, it is the Commission’s usual practice to prepare a Discussion Paper. A Discussion
Paper considers the issues raised in the Issues Paper in greater detail together with comments received in response and sets out
specific, but provisional, proposals for reform. Such proposals do not represent the Commission’s final recommendations, but
allow further detailed comment and consultation. In the course of preparation, it was decided to produce two Discussion Papers, the
first dealing with issues relevant to the police, and the second with courts and sentencing options.
The first Discussion Paper: Policing Issues
1.12 People with an intellectual disability come into contact with the police as suspects, as victims and as witnesses to crimes.
In each case, identification by the police of a person’s intellectual disability
and the consequent use of appropriate questioning techniques is essential. In the Policing Issues Discussion Paper,
released in October 1993, the Commission considered such issues as:
the adequacy of the existing police guidelines (the Police Commissioner’s Instructions);
identification of a person’s disability by the police;
police questioning of suspects, victims or witnesses with intellectual disabilities;
the effectiveness of the police caution for people with an intellectual disability;
the treatment of confessions made by people with an intellectual disability;
standard police procedures such as bail; and
education and training programs for police officers in all of these areas.
1.13 The Commission sought comments and submissions about the role of the police when dealing with people who have an intellectual
disability and about the efficacy of the safeguards proposed in that Paper to ensure that people with an intellectual disability
were treated appropriately. In particular, the Commission sought comments from the police about the practicality, within their normal
work constraints, of such safeguards.
The Commission’s approach
1.14 As discussed in previous papers for this reference, the Commission recognises that each person with an intellectual disability
has the same rights and responsibilities as all other members of the community. Because of the disadvantages and vulnerability to
exploitation experienced by people with an intellectual disability, however, the community (and principles of justice) may require
that extra procedures are followed in the criminal justice system to ensure that legal principles in practice apply to them equally
and uniformly, and to allow them to exercise fully their rights. Similarly, lawyers, police and other personnel involved in the criminal
justice system may need special training and techniques in order to better fulfil their legal, official and ethical responsibilities
and to ensure that people with an intellectual disability are treated fairly.
1.15 It must be borne in mind, by contrast, that
criminal responsibility,
in our system of justice, is usually constructed around the concept of subjective intention or awareness. In relation to criminal
responsibility, some people with an intellectual disability may not have the same level of responsibility as other members of the
community. This may occur because they fall within the defences of mental illness or diminished responsibility or because they may
not have the requisite
(or mental state) to be convicted of an offence. For example, in relation to the offence of larceny (theft) the accused must have
to deprive (permanently) the owner of the relevant object. A person with an intellectual disability may not have had such an intention.
Alternatively, some people with an intellectual disability, because of their low level of understanding, may not be found fit to
stand trial for an offence. These issues will be discussed further in this Paper.
Consultation
1.16 Over 1000 copies of each of the four papers to date for this reference have been distributed, both in New South Wales and in
other, including overseas, jurisdictions. To date the Commission has received over 140 written or oral submissions and attended at
least 65 consultation meetings with groups and individuals in the criminal justice and disability services areas. As part of this
consultation process, in March 1994 the Commission conducted a series of consultations designed primarily to allow interest groups
to supplement information already provided to the Commission and to indicate issues which they believed should be considered by the
Commission in this Paper. The Commission consulted individuals and representatives of New South Wales criminal justice and disability
organisations including the: Legal Aid Commission of NSW, Magistracy, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, Crown Prosecutors,
Police Prosecutors, Aboriginal Legal Service, NSW Bar Association, Department of Courts Administration, Judicial Commission, Department
of Corrective Services, NSW Probation Service, Juvenile Justice Advisory Council, Department of Juvenile Justice, Redfern Legal Centre
Intellectual Disability Rights Service, New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability, Disability Council of New South Wales,
New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee, Brain Injury Association, Mental Health Review Tribunal, Mental Health Advocacy Service,
Department of Community Services, Public Guardian, Guardianship Board, Victims Compensation Tribunal and the Victims’ Advisory
Council. The Commission is grateful to all the individuals and organisations who assisted us in this way.
1.17 The Commission was further assisted in the consultations and preparation of this Paper by the five week secondment to the Commission
of Mr Mark Ierace. Mr Ierace is a Public Defender and the author of a textbook in the area. He has been a honorary consultant to
the Commission since the start of the reference. The Commission also conducted a free public Seminar in Law Week in May 1994, which
allowed for public feedback and questions about the reference.
OUTLINE OF THIS PAPER
1.18 This Discussion Paper covers the following areas:
statutory definitions
of intellectual disability;
lawyers and other legal personnel
and their dealings with people with an intellectual disability, including issues of legal education and problems associated with
obtaining instructions;
Chapters 4-10:
: issues arising from the appearance in court of people with an intellectual disability, including fitness to be tried, competence,
giving evidence and criminal defences;
Chapters 11-12:
the sentence
: sentencing, custody and release, including consideration of the custodial and non-custodial alternatives available for the offender
with an intellectual disability and their release from custody; and
Chapter 13:
issues relevant to the whole criminal justice system
such as the particular needs of juveniles with an intellectual disability, and the necessity for co-ordination and provision of services.
The Commission invites submissions from the public on all these areas. For details about making a submission see the introductory
pages of this Paper.
FUTURE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE
1.19 After the release of this Discussion Paper there will be several months of final consultations and submissions. The Commission
will then prepare its Report to the Attorney General, annexing, if appropriate, draft legislation. This Report will then be tabled
in Parliament and made public.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 1.
. Ierace at 2.
. S C Hayes and D McIlwain
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the New South Wales Prison Population: An Empirical Study
(November 1988) at 47. This study assessed the prevalence of intellectual disability in five New South Wales prisons: Mulawa Training
and Detention Centre for Women, Central Industrial Prison, Parramatta Gaol, Metropolitan Remand Centre and Broken Hill Gaol. The
five gaols held a total population of 1,318 prisoners of whom 675 were screened: at 22.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances Before Local Courts
(Research Report 4, 1993).
. This issue will be considered in more detail in the final Report. A summary of research in relation to offenders is found in S
C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992), ch 2.
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Final Report, 1990). This Report found, at 11, that people with an intellectual disability report a higher than average proportion
of sexual assault cases. In this study the Department of Health noted disability as a specific data collection item. In the first
six months of collection, 55 out of 855 (6.4%) adults referred to the Sexual Assault Service had an intellectual disability. The
Report also refers, at 11, to overseas research which revealed a high prevalence of sexual assault against people with an intellectual
disability.
The Incidence of Crime Victimization among Intellectually Disabled Adults
(Final Report, National Police Research Unit, 1990). This South Australian study found that people with an intellectual disability
were twice as likely as people without this disability to be the victim of a personal crime (eg assault). They were also one and
a half times more likely to be the victim of a property offence (eg theft).
. K Johnson, R Andrew and V Topp
Silent Victims: A Study of People with Intellectual Disabilities as Victims of Crime
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988). In Victoria, 19 agencies agreed to monitor (during the last quarter of 1987) their
cases of alleged crime against people with an intellectual disability. The agencies included government and non-government organisations.
Though the study stated that the data should be treated as tentative for a number of reasons, the survey revealed that the overwhelming
majority of alleged crimes reported to agencies during the study period involved sexual offences: see Appendix 4.
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Criminal Law Review Division, Issues Paper, 1991).
. The reference was received on 30 September 1991 from the then Attorney General, the Hon P E J Collins QC MP, pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW). By a separate letter, dated 19 November 1991, the Attorney General also asked the Commission to examine the recent amendments
(NSW) in relation to alternate arrangements for the taking of assault victim’s evidence, which currently only apply to children
under the age of 16 years.
. Many submissions have commented on the language used in the terms of reference, and expressed a preference for “people with
an intellectual disability” rather than “the intellectually disabled”. The Commission acknowledges this comment
and has used the phrase “people with an intellectual disability” wherever possible throughout this reference.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper 8, 1992).
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
(Discussion Paper 29, 1993).
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
2. Definitions of Intellectual Disability
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
2.1 This chapter considers definitions of intellectual disability, in particular those definitions found in legislation (“statutory
definitions”). Consistency and clarity in the terminology and definitions relating to intellectual disability are vital to
avoid injustices, particularly if special procedures flow from a person’s diagnosis. At present there is considerable confusion
in this area, often as a result of the variety of terms used to refer to intellectual disability. People with an intellectual disability
are sometimes referred to as “mentally retarded”, “mentally handicapped”, “sub-normal” or “defective”,
terms which are often now rejected as carrying pejorative connotations. In the Issues Paper the Commission noted that terms which
use the word “mental” have been described as having “an inaccurate association with mental illness. These terms
emphasise abnormality, pathology or disease, and tend to promote ideas of disability as being a sub-human condition”.
Submissions to the Commission have constantly stressed the need for a clear distinction between mental illness and intellectual disability.
The continuing confusion between the two is exacerbated by the terms used in criminal law. For example the defence of “not
guilty on the grounds of mental illness” (also known as the insanity defence) can apply to people with an intellectual disability
(see Chapter 10).
2.2 The Commission believes “intellectual disability” to be the appropriate term for the purposes of this reference, and
for legislation in New South Wales. It has already been adopted in Commonwealth and Victorian Crimes Acts and most submissions to
the Commission have accepted the use of this term.
Though “developmental disability” is sometimes also used (see para 2.5), the Commission believes one term should be used
consistently to avoid confusion. The Commission prefers the more precise “intellectual disability”, particularly in the
criminal law context.
2.3 Apart from the confusion caused by different names, there are also differences of opinion about who should be considered to have
an “intellectual disability”, leading to calls for a clear and recognised definition. By its terms of reference the Commission
was asked to consider whether there should be a new and uniform statutory definition of “intellectual disability”. “Intellectual
disability” and related terms have been defined in a variety of ways, in criminal, health and social service contexts. Appendix
A sets out, by way of comparison, some of the definitions used in Australia and the United Kingdom. Many statutes contain outdated
or inaccurate terminology and definitions, or use terms without definitions. Some submissions to the Commission
have called for the removal of existing archaic, derogatory, ambiguous or inaccurate definitions from the statute book, a process
which is already occurring. The Commission agrees with this approach. The more difficult decisions are what definition (if any) of
intellectual disability should be used in legislation, and whether the disadvantages of having a definition outweigh its advantages.
Before attempting to assess the merits or otherwise of a statutory definition of “intellectual disability”, the existing
definitions must first be considered.
WHAT IS INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY?
2.4 People with an intellectual disability have significantly lower than average intellectual ability and deficits in social and adaptive
functioning, that is, limitations in such areas as communication, social, daily living or movement skills. The implications of an
intellectual disability for daily living have been described as follows:
People with intellectual disabilities have the same sorts of needs, goals, dreams, hopes and aspirations as the rest of the population,
as well as the same range of emotions. Because of their disability they may display limitations in learning, speech, self care, movement,
independent living, employment and relationships. Many people need to use the same environment and consistent instructions when learning
new skills such as shopping or cooking. Support may be needed to reduce the restrictions that disability might otherwise impose on
life. For example, a person with an intellectual disability may have trouble reading the paper in order to find out what jobs are
advertised; longer time may be needed to complete a task, such as filling out a form; frequent reminders may be necessary to ensure
medication is taken regularly.
2.5 The cause of a person’s intellectual disability is not known in most cases. Some identifiable causes include: hereditary
factors; chromosome abnormalities, such as in Down Syndrome; brain damage before or at birth; brain damage after birth due to illness
or accident; malnutrition or other deprivation in early childhood.
The term “developmental disability” is sometimes used as a synonym for “intellectual disability”, but it
is generally considered to be a broader term than intellectual disability,
in that it can include a number of other disabilities (such as cerebral palsy) which arise during the “developmental”
period (usually defined as the period up to 18 years of age) but which may be of a physical, rather than an intellectual, nature.
Furthermore, some developmental disabilities may be overcome with or without treatment or management and may not be permanent. It
is important to recognise that an intellectual disability is
a mental illness or a physical sickness which can be “cured”,
though people with an intellectual disability can benefit from appropriate educational programs.
Nor is an intellectual disability necessarily accompanied by a physical disability or obvious from a person’s appearance.
2.6 The severity and consequences of an intellectual disability will vary from person to person and “generalisations about the
needs of people with an intellectual disability .. must be treated with caution.”
Any definition needs to take this diversity into account. A person’s intellectual disability can be classified as “mild”,
“moderate”, “severe” or “profound”, based upon certain IQ (intelligence quotient) ranges.
A further category, “borderline”, is also used to indicate people just above the mild range in terms of intellectual
functioning.
A person with a “severe” or “profound” disability may be unable to learn basic social skills such as speech,
walking and personal care, and is likely to require supported accommodation. The majority of people with an intellectual disability
have a “mild” level of intellectual disability and “can learn skills of reading, writing, numeracy, and daily living
sufficient to enable them to live independently in the community.”
These classifications have limited utility and can sometimes be misleading. For example, such terms may suggest to criminal justice
personnel, who do not have a full understanding of the disability involved, that a “mild” intellectual disability is
inconsequential.
Whether these categories should be included in statutory definitions is discussed at paras 2.29-2.30.
CLINICAL DEFINITIONS OF INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
2.7 Three commonly-used clinical definitions of intellectual disability are proposed by the World Health Organisation (“WHO”),
the American Psychiatric Association (“DSM III-R”),
and the American Association on Mental Retardation (“AAMR”).
Intellectual disability, or mental retardation as it is often known, as defined by these organisations, refers to:
a condition of arrested or incomplete development of the mind, which is especially characterised by impairment of skills manifested
during the developmental period, which contribute to the overall level of intelligence, ie cognitive, language, motor and social
[WHO, 1992]
significantly subaverage general intellectual functioning, accompanied by significant deficits or impairments in adaptive functioning,
with onset before the age of 18.
[DSM III-R, 1987]
substantial limitations in present functioning. It is characterised by significantly subaverage intellectual functioning, existing
concurrently with related limitations in two or more of the following applicable adaptive skill areas: communication, self-care,
manifests before age 18.
[AAMR, 1992]
2.8 These definitions were not designed for the criminal justice system. For example, the main focus of the AAMR definition is the
provision of appropriate services, which is a different issue from concerns about criminal responsibility and vulnerability which
affect the criminal justice system. The National Council on Intellectual Disability has commented that the WHO system, often used
by non-disability agencies such as the Department of Social Security and the Australian Bureau of Statistics, “tends to be
rather confusing and over-complicates the issue for most useful purposes”. It prefers the AAMR definition, though recognising
it limits people with an intellectual disability to occurrence during the developmental stage (0-18 yrs). If this feature is ignored
it most likely provides the most useful definition for criminal justice purposes because it highlights the combination of “IQ”
and actual functioning
The Commission accepts that a legal definition of intellectual disability will not be identical to a clinical definition, but it believes
that the legal definition should not contradict clinical understanding, as this will not only cause problems for the expert witness
but will add to the existing confusion in the criminal justice system about intellectual disability.
STATUTORY DEFINITIONS OF INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
2.9 A person’s intellectual disability may be referred to in criminal legislation in a number of areas including:
provisions affecting an accused’s fitness to be tried or criminal responsibility (see Chapters 4, 5 and 10);
specific sexual offences involving people with an intellectual disability (see Chapter 9);
procedures for giving evidence (see Chapter 7); and
sentencing provisions (see Chapter 11).
New South Wales statutory definitions
2.10 Although
(NSW) does contain a definition of intellectual disability, the definition is applicable to that section only. There is no general
definition which can be applied consistently across all New South Wales criminal legislation.
Crimes Act 1900
Section 66F
(NSW) creates a number of sexual offences against people with an intellectual disability. Intellectual disability is defined for
the purpose of that section only as:
an appreciably below average general intellectual function that results in the person requiring supervision or social habilitation
in connection with daily life activities. [s 66F(1)]
This definition does not apply to the other (aggravated) sexual offences discussed below. It has been criticised for being inconsistent
with the term “intellectual disability” as understood by psychologists, and as inappropriate having regard to the policy
objectives of legislation affecting people with an intellectual disability.
The requirement of supervision or “social habilitation” (that is, the gaining of social capacity or skills) appears
to indicate a higher level of disability than that experienced by the majority of people with an intellectual disability.
2.12 Since its introduction in 1987, the section has been rarely used.
As there are so few cases in this area, it is difficult to know how such a definition will be interpreted by the courts, for example,
whether people with a mild intellectual disability will be included. Some guidance on this issue may be found in the comments of
the then Premier, the Hon Barry Unsworth MP, when introducing the amendments into Parliament:
[i]ntellectual disability is carefully defined to attract the protections afforded by the legislation to those people whose level
of disability requires such protection ... The intent of these reforms is to provide protection from sexual exploitation and assault
to people with a
significant
intellectual disability.
[emphasis added]
Other difficulties with the section and the aggravated sexual offences, apart from definitional ones, are discussed in Chapter 9.
2.13 As well as the sexual offences created by
(NSW) contains provisions for harsher sentences for other sexual offences where there are “circumstances of aggravation”.
One of these circumstances is stated to be a “serious intellectual disability” of the victim. “Serious intellectual
disability” is not defined. According to the Second Reading Speech of the then Attorney General, Mr John Dowd QC MP, the term
was not defined, as “[t]his is a matter for the courts.”
It is unclear, however, what level of intellectual disability is considered to be “serious”, when the usual terms employed
to differentiate levels of disability are “borderline”, “mild”, “moderate”, “severe”
and “profound”. The Attorney General’s Committee stated that either amending the sections to replace “serious”
with a more meaningful term or defining the word “serious” in this context should be considered.
The New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee called for the removal of the reference to “serious” intellectual disability
as this term was not used professionally.
The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability (“CID”) suggested that the phrase “serious intellectual
disability”:
should not be replaced with “moderate” or even “severe or profound” but rather the provision [should be] rephrased
to state the objects of the provision, and detail more precisely the particular matters which may exist for the victim with a disability
which make an assault against such a person more grievous.
, also provides for a defence to murder known as “diminished responsibility”. The defence states that a person shall not
be convicted of murder if he or she was suffering from:
such abnormality of mind (whether arising from a condition of
arrested or retarded development of mind
or any inherent causes or induced by disease or injury) as substantially impaired his [or her] mental responsibility for the acts
or omissions ... [emphasis added]
The Commission believes that “arrested or retarded development of mind” clearly encompasses an intellectual disability.
Whether people with an intellectual disability will satisfy the test for diminished responsibility, however, will depend upon the
nature or severity of their disability. The operation of the defence has caused some controversy, resulting in a separate New South
Wales Law Reform Commission inquiry into this defence.
(NSW) also refers to “appreciably below average general intellectual function” in
, which deals with Apprehended Violence Orders (“AVOs”). In that Part, if the court is of the opinion that the person
seeking an AVO “is suffering from an appreciably below average general intellectual function” the court does not need
to be satisfied that the person “in fact fears that [a personal violence] offence will be committed, or that such conduct will
be engaged in”. The Commission seeks submissions whether this phrase should be left undefined, or whether the term “intellectual
disability” should be substituted.
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1990 (NSW)
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) refers, in s 32, to defendants who are “developmentally disabled”. This section gives a Magistrate the discretion
to dismiss (often on conditions) the charges against such defendants brought before the Local Courts. “Developmentally disabled”
is not defined, although, as discussed above, it is usually taken to refer to a wider group than “intellectually disabled”.
The absence of definition is surprising, considering the scope of this section. Submissions to the Commission have referred to the
absence of a definition of “developmental disability”
and the resulting variation in the use of the section. Other concerns relating to s 32, apart from the definitional question, are
discussed in Chapter 5.
Victorian statutory definitions
2.17 In Victoria the statutory definition of “intellectual disability” is “significant sub-average general intellectual
functioning existing concurrently with deficits in adaptive behaviour and manifested during the developmental period”.
It may be illuminating to consider how that definition has been interpreted. According to the Victorian Intellectual Disability
Review Panel (the “Review Panel”), in relation to “intellectual functioning”:
only a standardised test using standardised procedures may be admitted as evidence of IQ and that a single cut-off point of the full
scale IQ (eg IQ=70) may not be used to determine eligibility,
“significant sub-average general intellectual functioning” as defined by the Act, is interpreted by the Review Panel to
mean “two standard deviations below the mean plus or minus the standard error of measurement” of the particular test,
at the 95% level of confidence. Rather than the single cut-off point, an upper limit for inclusion should be expressed in the form
around the standard error of measurement: in the case of WAIS-R this means a range of the full scale IQ 65 to 75. Persons whose
IQ is within this range and below are considered to have satisfied this criteria,
in practice IQ 75 becomes a maximum level of the range for inclusion as eligible for services consistent with the definition of the
Act and internationally accepted standards,
that the psychometric test used for measuring intellectual functioning must measure ‘general’ intellectual functioning
and not just the person’s deficits or strengths.
2.18 In relation to “deficits in adaptive behaviour” the Review Panel commented:
subjective judgements of adaptive behaviour are inadequate,
methods of assessment of adaptive behaviour which do not have total scores and normative data, are also not relevant,
the Review Panel would only accept at this stage assessments of adaptive behaviour which used the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale,
that deficits in adaptive behaviour should be given greater weight at the borderline levels of intellectual functioning in determining
eligibility.
2.19 The Review Panel has also expressed some concerns for the people who are excluded from this definition, for example: former Community
Services clients who no longer fit within the current definition, some people with autism, people with “dual disability”
or behavioural disturbances and people with a “borderline” IQ level. In relation to people with a borderline intellectual
disability the Review Panel commented that:
[t]his group of people may also have significant deficits in adaptive behaviour, severe behavioural problems and appear to be at great
risk. They are more likely to be involved in the criminal justice system or at risk as victims because of their inability to adequately
deal with their circumstances, their family, social and sexual relationships, employment etc.
The inclusion of people with a “borderline” IQ level in definitions of intellectual disability remains controversial.
Is a statutory definition desirable?
2.20 It has been argued that a new and uniform statutory definition of “intellectual disability” would remove the present
confusion caused by existing imprecise or conflicting statutory definitions. Some submissions have supported a statutory definition
of intellectual disability, though this support is often qualified and contains suggested limitations on the scope of the definition.
Others have stated that they do not think that there should be a statutory definition as it would be clinically inaccurate.
It could also be stigmatising, increasing the “labelling” of people with an intellectual disability. Many people do not
wish to be identified as having an intellectual disability and fear that, with such a label, they may receive worse, not better,
treatment within the criminal justice system. The Law Society of New South Wales, however, stated that it:
does not believe that the disadvantages of having a definition outweigh the advantages. While the definition may exclude certain people
whose intellectual disability might be the subject of heated debate between psychologists, psychiatrists and social workers, the
advantage of certainty may well make it easier to reach a greater consensus of opinion as to a person’s intellectual disability
and save a person from much unnecessary stress and trauma with professionals arguing in a clinical way about a person’s mental
capabilities.
2.21 A further advantage was suggested by the Legal Aid Commission of NSW:
it would assist the courts, legal practitioners, police and others involved in the criminal justice system by making them aware of
the nature of those disabilities. This in turn could assist the person with the intellectual disability by giving some proper recognition
to those disabilities, which might otherwise be overlooked or glossed over.
Similar comments were made by Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service (“IDRS”)
and CID, which thought that such a definition was important to ensure that all personnel within the criminal justice system share
a common understanding, and would have “considerable educative value”.
Reservations expressed have included the problems caused by applying definitions too strictly and the difficulty of developing a
definition which could cover the varied levels of intellectual disability.
The Legal Aid Commission of NSW also was concerned that a uniform definition “may include persons to whom the legislation
was never meant to apply, or conversely exclude them.”
It therefore advised the Commission that although, on balance, it supported the development of a consistent definition, the best
approach may be to create an “operational” definition and then specify clearly when it should be applied.
2.22 The Commission recognises that statutory definitions of intellectual disability already exist and believes they can serve a useful
purpose, if accurate and appropriate, in providing greater certainty in the operation of the law. The Commission believes that, as
far as possible, within the criminal law context the same definition should be used to avoid confusion.
Should the same definition apply in criminal and social welfare contexts?
2.23 It has been suggested to the Commission that, to avoid confusion, a new definition should apply not only to the
(NSW) and the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
but also to the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and relevant community or welfare legislation.
In Victoria, for example, the definition of intellectual disability in the
(Vic) adopts the definition in the
Intellectually Disabled Persons’ Services Act
(Vic). In the Issues Paper the Commission noted that non-criminal statutes affecting people with an intellectual disability fall
outside the terms of the Commission’s reference. As well, despite the obvious advantages of uniformity in both criminal and
“welfare” legislation, and the danger of criminal lawyers and service providers using different definitions of “intellectual
disability”, the Commission believes the two systems are inherently different in aims and context. For example, the welfare
model usually favours a broad definition so as not to deny people services, whereas definitions in a criminal law context need to
be as unambiguous as possible, bearing in mind the consequences involved. It must also be acknowledged that many of the definitions
set out in legislation (see Appendix A) were drafted to fulfil specific purposes of the Acts in which they appear. They are thus
not always easily extended beyond the parameters of a particular piece of legislation.
What should a statutory definition contain?
2.24 Once it has been accepted that there should be a standard statutory definition of intellectual disability in criminal legislation,
the more difficult question is the content of that definition. Submissions have varied on the issue of how broad or narrow a definition
should be. A narrow definition may exclude some groups of people; for example, the definition which limits intellectual disability
to a condition arising in the “developmental period” will not apply to those who are brain damaged as a result of an
accident or injury in adulthood. An overly technical definition may also be incomprehensible to lawyers and the general community.
The Law Society of New South Wales favoured the development of a definition of intellectual disability “in as wide and broad
terms as possible without losing the sense and meaning after suitable consultation with specialists in the field.”
2.25 Other submissions have also suggested a definition in broad terms, such as “handicapped/impaired to function in society
as the result of a disability”. These definitions focus on how the intellectual disability affects social functioning.
Such a vague definition is probably unworkable in the context of a criminal trial. An alternative is a definition that includes
a “checklist” or series of categories, including whether the person can read, whether they can undertake basic tasks
of daily self maintenance etc.
Developing an acceptable checklist would be both difficult and costly, and may be either over-inclusive or under-inclusive. No checklist
could be comprehensive and allow for different cultures or family backgrounds. Any definition based on what are effectively adaptive
skills would not necessarily indicate the presence of intellectual disability as people may have poor adaptive skills for a variety
of reasons, for instance mental illness.
Reference to IQ scores and categories of disability
2.26 The question remains: which aspects of the definitions referred to above should be included in legislation. For example, is it
appropriate to include references to IQ-based categories of intellectual disability? Definitions based
on IQ levels have been criticised, but definitions without an independent standard may prove unworkable. According to Hayes and Craddock:
[r]eliance upon IQ scores
in classification of intellectually disabled people is condemned on many grounds, principally - that IQ scores do not reflect social
or adaptive skills, that the tests are not fair to persons from differing cultural backgrounds, that the categories are arbitrary
and an individual’s IQ may change, for example, decrease as a result of environmental deprivation, or increase owing to special
education programmes, and that the categorisation is of little value in predicting an individual’s long-term adjustment or
[emphasis added]
Similarly, according to Noble and Conley:
Reliance on rigid IQ criteria to determine whether an offender is entitled to special consideration may lead not only to inequities
among people who differ only slightly in mental competency but also to inappropriate sentencing and rehabilitation decisions. This
is because the ability to distinguish right from wrong, to be competent to stand trial, to plead guilty, to be a witness, or to participate
meaningfully in rehabilitation programs depends on many factors, among which level of intelligence is only one.
2.27 By contrast, one submission from a clinical psychologist has argued that a clinical definition based on IQ is the most valid
and reliable available.
IDRS has stated that a definition should “include some concept of a lower capacity for intellectual functioning, as well as
reference to social or habilitation skills”, and that “[t]he disability community would reject any definition which only
considered an ‘IQ’, or similar score or ranking.”
CID stated that definitions should include both “significantly below average intellectual functioning and marked impairment
in social and habilitation skills relative to both biological age and to the social culture.”
2.28 The establishment of an arbitrary cut off point (such as IQ of 70) for intellectual disability is also controversial. Associate
Professor Susan Hayes has stated that it is inappropriate to set an IQ cut-off for intellectual disability because accepted definitions
include both IQ and adaptive skills.
Clearly there are likely to be injustices caused by a rigid IQ cut off.
The Commission does not believe that its proposed definition should include references to IQ scores. To do so would require a reference
to specified tests and confidence levels, as there can be considerable variation in IQ scores, even at a 99% confidence level. The
Commission believes that what comprises “significant deficits in intellectual functioning” can be left to the professional
judgment of expert witnesses such as psychologists, and that no IQ “cap” should be set in a statutory definition.
2.29 As discussed at para 2.6, the usefulness of the categories of intellectual disability (“mild”, “moderate”,
“severe” or “profound”) has also been questioned. Some organisations are opposed to the use of a definition
which draws a distinction between different levels of disability, as “[t]hese classifications would once more place emphasis
on detailing the disability, rather than on its relevance to the legal issue in point.”
The Illawarra Area Consultative Committee expressed concern at the categorisation of people with an intellectual disability into
levels of disability rather than individual assessment “if different strategies/protocols are utilised when dealing with different
levels”, because of the variety of abilities found within each level.
For example, over three-quarters of people with an intellectual disability are classified as having a “mild” level of
intellectual disability, and therefore an enormous range of abilities will be found in this category.
2.30 A legislative formulation must overcome, however, the problems created by these categories, which at least have the advantage
of being generally accepted by experts. The Commission is not persuaded that any alternatives for these categories would be suitable
for inclusion in a statutory definition, for example the AAMR’s use of references to “pervasive” or “intermittent”
needs for “habilitation” and support
are unlikely to be helpful in a criminal court. These categories or comparisons may, however, be useful for other purposes. By way
of illustration, comparisons based upon percentile ranking of the population (for instance, “the accused has been assessed
as having an IQ of 70, which means that approximately 97% of the population are functioning intellectually at a higher level”)
may assist a judge or jury to understand the severity of the disability compared to the general population. Comparisons based upon
“mental age”, such as references to a person having a “functional age of 6 years” should be treated with
caution, however, as they are based on:
an assumption that such a person may also have the maturity, experience and emotional development of a person of the so-called “mental
age”, which may or may not be so.
One possibility is that, for the purposes of the criminal justice system, expert witnesses develop a duplicate set of categories (for
instance, borderline = Level 1, mild = Level 2, moderate = Level 3 etc). Though such categories should not be a substitute for individual-based
assessment, and the wide variety of abilities within each of these categories should not be overlooked, at least it could overcome
the confusion which appears clearly to exist in the criminal justice system about the significance of a “mild” intellectual
disability. Such a proposal would be more appropriately considered by the relevant psychological and psychiatric associations, rather
than a matter for legislation, and the Commission seeks submissions from these bodies.
Distinction between intellectual disability and brain injury
2.31 As outlined above, most clinical definitions of intellectual disability only include people who have a disability which arises
before the age of 18 years, and thus do not encompass adults who receive an injury to the brain. Such brain injuries may arise from
industrial or motor vehicle accidents,
near drowning, drug and alcohol abuse, abuse of other chemicals (for example, glue sniffing) or serious illness. The brain damage
lead to intellectual and adaptive deficits such that the person would be classified by a psychologist as having an intellectual disability.
According to Associate Professor Susan Hayes the usual terminology is “acquired brain damage resulting in intellectual disability/cognitive
deficits and social and adaptive skills deficits” or “intellectual disability subsequent to a brain injury”.
2.32 Organisations who represent the interests of people with the conditions variously known as “brain damage”, “head
injury” “traumatic brain injury” or “acquired brain injury”,
however, are keen to stress the difference between a “developmental” intellectual disability and an “acquired”
disability and state that the latter group generally do not wish to be considered as “intellectually disabled”:
[a]dults with an acquired brain injury have usually had what could be termed a normal social and intellectual development. ... Their
self identity and expectations of life after an injury are still strongly shaped by their social and intellectual development before
the brain injury. ... The person who has a brain injury will have aspects of their self identity, behaviours and expectations based
on pre-injury experience interspersed with their acquired disability(ies).
Different services and support may therefore be necessary. The question remains whether the difference between the two conditions
material for criminal justice purposes
, as people suffering a brain injury may, as with intellectual disability, experience permanent restrictions to their physical and
cognitive abilities, with behavioural or personality implications. They may then encounter problems in remembering details, concentrating,
comprehending complex ideas, planning or organising, and processing information quickly. The personality changes may affect their
sense of drive or motivation, self control, emotional state, degree of personal insight and perceptions of relationships with others.
These possible consequences of brain injury may have implications for the person’s fitness to be tried, available criminal
defences, appropriate sentencing options and custodial or non-custodial “rehabilitation” programs. Submissions to the
Commission have reported similar difficulties for people with a brain injury in the criminal justice system as those experienced
by people with an intellectual disability, for example, the lack of identification or understanding of the person’s disability
at the police station,
and suggestibility and unreliability in providing information.
2.33 It may be impossible to determine the cause of a person’s disability, or when it arose, even with a detailed medical history.
For some people involved in the criminal justice system there is no evidence to indicate whether the disability arose in the developmental
period or not, as they were not assessed psychometrically during the developmental period, nor were they known to any disability
agencies. Apart from the difficulty of determining the cause of a person’s disability, the disadvantage of drawing a distinction
between an intellectual disability acquired in the developmental period and one acquired after the age of 18 is that people in the
latter group may be disadvantaged in their contact with the criminal justice system, if protections and procedures available to people
with an intellectual disability are not extended to them in appropriate cases. It has been commented that:
[r]egardless of whether the event (eg, accident, substance abuse) causing mental limitations happened before or after age 18, criminal
justice system officials must confront the same problems of social adaptation and offer the same kinds of services to assist the
affected individuals to respond appropriately to the due process requirements of the criminal justice system and, if found guilty
and sentenced to prison, to help them adjust to prison life and prepare for subsequent release.
It has therefore been suggested that because accused people with brain injuries (which have affected their cognitive capacities) report
similar difficulties in the criminal justice system to those who have a “developmental” intellectual disability, the
manner in which they are properly regarded in the system may in many instances be considered together. For instance, perhaps the
same legislative diversion provisions should have equal application to either group.
2.34 The distinction between brain injury and intellectual disability is a very difficult and controversial area. The Commission does
not consider it appropriate to exclude from consideration people who have an intellectual disability merely because their disability
arose after the age of 18 years or because it is not known when or how their disability arose. The person’s disability is relevant
at the time of the alleged crime and at all subsequent times in their progress through the criminal justice system. In most cases,
when and how that disability arose is irrelevant. It seems that a person who receives brain damage from a car accident at the age
of 17 could, on most current definitions, be classified as having an intellectual disability, whereas if the same accident occurred
when the person was 18, that person would be considered to have an acquired brain injury. Nevertheless, the Commission does not wish
to recommend a definition of intellectual disability which is confusing, inappropriate or not accepted by professionals giving expert
evidence in this area. There may also be ways in which the distinction between a “developmental” intellectual disability
and an “acquired” intellectual disability does have consequences for the criminal justice system, and the Commission
seeks submissions in this regard.
2.35 As discussed, most clinical definitions describe intellectual disability as significantly below average general intellectual
functioning existing concurrently with deficits in adaptive behaviour, manifested before the age of 18 years. The Commission has
considered a number of possible options for incorporating the difficulties discussed above in definitions of intellectual disability
contained in criminal legislation.
Option 1: Retain the distinction between a developmental and an acquired intellectual disability.
Intellectual disability would be defined in similar terms to the clinical definitions. Criminal legislation in other jurisdictions
(for example Victoria) uses such a “developmental” definition for intellectual disability. A reference to “two
or more adaptive deficits” rather than “adaptive deficits” would avoid any arguments about exactly how many adaptive
deficits are required. A limited definition will, however, exclude people whose intellectual abilities are clearly relevant for the
criminal justice system in a similar way to intellectual disability, for example, brain injuries and dementia, including Alzheimers
disease. It seems logical that other disabilities which affect cognitive functioning should receive the same protections or consideration
as intellectual disability, as in the criminal justice system the cause of the disability is largely irrelevant; it is the impact
of the disability which matters.
Option 2: Remove the requirement that the intellectual disability arose during the developmental period.
Without that limitation, people with a relevant brain injury (those with significant intellectual and behaviour deficits as a result
of the injury), or those for whom it is unclear when the disability arose, would fall within the definition of intellectual disability.
This was suggested by the National Council for Intellectual Disability, see para 2.8. Such a definition could, however, include conditions
such as dementia, which may be inappropriate and confusing, particularly if this definition is to serve an educative function and
to be used wherever possible in future legislation.
Option 3: Intellectual disability is deemed to include brain injury.
A possible compromise approach would be to retain a developmental definition of intellectual disability but state that, for the purposes
of the relevant Act, any definition of intellectual disability shall be deemed to include a reference to a brain injury or damage
which affects intellectual functioning. This effectively turns intellectual disability into an umbrella term, and there could be
arguments about what conditions should or should not be deemed to be included, for example, it seems illogical to include brain injury
but not dementia.
Option 4: An umbrella term.
Another way of retaining the distinction between different disabilities, while ensuring that all relevant people receive the safeguards
deemed appropriate for people with some form of impaired intellectual functioning, however caused, is to develop an “umbrella
term” to cover the various forms of cognitive disability, including intellectual disability, brain injury, or dementia, but
not mental illness. The umbrella term (for instance “mental impairment”, “cognitive disability”, “impaired
intellectual functioning” or “mental condition”) could then be conveniently used for legislative provisions designed
to cover a variety of conditions. This approach was adopted by the Victorian Law Reform Commission, while acknowledging its limitations.
It is difficult to find, however, both an appropriate umbrella term and acceptable definitions for each of the conditions covered
by that term. “Mental impairment” has been used as an umbrella term in a number of contexts (for example in the Model
Criminal Code prepared by the Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General
and by the Victorian Law Reform Commission) but usually includes mental illness as well as cognitive disabilities. “Mental
condition” has been defined in s 3 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) to refer to “a condition of disability of mind not including either mental illness or developmental disability of
mind”. Therefore the difficulty with using “mental condition”, apart from the possible inappropriate confusion
with mental illness (see para 2.1), is the need for consistency of usage between the
(NSW) and the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW). “Mental condition” is also used, without definition, in a broader sense in s 556A of the
(NSW) and in
Children (Detention Centres) Act
(NSW). Furthermore, in common usage it is often used neutrally, without an implication of impairment. The Commission therefore believes
that “mental condition” would be an inappropriate and confusing umbrella term. It prefers a term which gives an insight
into the nature of the condition involved, such as “impaired intellectual functioning”.
2.40 The Commission currently prefers the fourth option. Option 4 retains a recognised definition of intellectual disability, whilst
providing for the possibility of including in future legislative provisions other people whose intellectual deficit (however caused)
is of such significance that it affects their treatment in the criminal justice system.
CONCLUSIONS
2.41 Submissions have generally supported the introduction of an appropriate definition of intellectual disability in criminal legislation.
The Commission believes there is merit in proposing a new statutory definition of intellectual disability for the relevant New South
Wales criminal statutes in this area, the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990, and to make consequential amendments to the
Mental Health Act
. The Commission’s provisional proposals to this end are set out below. The Commission is presently of the view that, in the
interests of consistency, this definition should be considered for inclusion in other legislation, except where this may be inappropriate
for the objects of the legislation, such as in the area of service provision, where a broad definition in lay person’s terms
may be considered more appropriate. The proposed definition is similar to the clinical definitions referred to in paras 2.7-2.8 and
to the definitions of “intellectual disability” used in Victorian legislation. Though the definition uses technical terms
such as “adaptive behaviour”, the Commission has been unable, at this stage, to devise a sufficiently accurate definition
without these terms, which are clearly understood by professionals. The Commission believes that in the context of a criminal trial
it is inappropriate to have a vague or possibly over-inclusive definition. It seeks submissions, however, about whether it has achieved
the right balance in its proposals and about any preferable alternatives. It particularly seeks submissions from people who give
expert evidence in this area, such as psychologists and psychiatrists.
2.42 If the Commission’s proposals are implemented, the new definition would only affect the interpretation of the sexual offences
found in the
(NSW) (paras 2.11-2.13) and the diversionary procedure set out in s 32 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW), as they are currently the only instances of criminal legislation specifically referring to intellectual disability. If
the term “intellectual disability” is used in any future amendments to these Acts, the same definition would presumably
apply. The Commission also suggests that, if the exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) becomes law, that the same definition be included in that Act. The clauses in that Bill which refer to intellectual disability
are discussed in Chapters 7 and 8.
2.43 The Commission recognises the concern that people whose disability did not arise before the age of 18 years (or where the cause
of the disability is unknown) may be inappropriately excluded from the procedures or recognition afforded to people with an intellectual
disability. The Commission therefore also proposes that an umbrella term, “impaired intellectual functioning”, be introduced
into the Acts listed below to cover all conditions which impair a person’s intellectual functioning (but not including mental
illness). This term could be used by legislators in preference to “intellectual disability” wherever a policy decision
is made that a provision in one of the listed Acts should apply to all people with such an impairment, however that condition arises,
including intellectual disability, brain injury or dementia. The rest of this Discussion Paper, however, generally refers to people
with an intellectual disability, except in Chapter 4 (fitness) Chapter 5 (diversionary procedures) and Chapter 10 (the defence of
mental illness), where a broader group of people are already affected by the relevant provisions. The Commission’s terms of
reference refer to people with an intellectual disability, and the Commission has accordingly limited its research to this area,
except where there are existing areas of overlap with other groups. From the limited information received to date it seems illogical
to limit many of the proposals to people with an intellectual disability and not to extend them to other people with impaired intellectual
functioning. There may, however, be other factors which suggest that some of the proposals in this Discussion Paper should not be
extended in this way. At this stage the Commission invites submissions about which of the proposals should be extended to those other
groups, or alternatively why the proposals should remain limited at the Report stage to people with an intellectual disability, as
defined in this Paper.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
1. That a new statutory definition of intellectual disability be introduced as set out below.
(a) That the
Mental Health Act
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) and the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) (the “listed Acts”) be amended to include the following definition:
“Intellectual disability” in relation to a person means a significantly below average general intellectual functioning
existing concurrently with two or more deficits in adaptive behaviour, and which has manifested before the age of 18 years.
It is important that this definition remain uniform in criminal legislation.
(b) That the listed Acts replace “developmental disability of mind”, or variations of this term such as “developmentally
disabled”, wherever they occur in the listed Acts, with “intellectual disability”.
(c) That an umbrella term, “impaired intellectual functioning”, be introduced into the listed Acts to cover all conditions
which impair a person’s intellectual functioning (but not including mental illness) and that such a term be used wherever a
policy decision is made that a provision in one of the listed Acts should apply to all people with such an impairment, however that
condition arises, including intellectual disability, brain injury or dementia:
“impaired intellectual functioning” includes impaired intellectual functioning because of intellectual disability, brain
injury or dementia.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
An Introduction to Intellectual Disability in Australia
(Australian Institute on Intellectual Disability, Canberra, 1989) at 39.
. For example: The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 2; Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 3; Queensland. Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 1; and Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 2. Many submissions have also expressed a preference for “people with an intellectual disability”
rather than “the intellectually disabled”. The Commission acknowledges this comment and has used the phrase “people
with an intellectual disability” in preference throughout this reference. See also, in this regard, the comments of L Gething,
T Poynter and F Reynolds
Disability Awareness Package - Manual
(Community Disability and Ageing Program, University of Sydney, 1991) at 54.
. For example: Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 1; The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 3; and Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 2.
. Gething, Poynter and Reynolds at 49.
. Gething, Poynter and Reynolds at 48.
. Cocks at 24.
. A list of these and other myths about intellectual disability is provided in S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 24-26 and in Gething, Poynter and Reynolds at 57-58.
. Hayes and Craddock at 25: “[i]ntellectually disabled people can learn more than is often assumed, but they learn at a slower
pace and need educational programmes which are especially structured to their needs.”
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 2.
. The World Health Organisation uses the following IQ ranges for these classifications: mild (IQ 50-69); moderate (IQ 35-49); severe
(IQ 20-34); and profound (IQ less than 20):
The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines
(World Health Organisation, Geneva, 1992) at 227-230. Other categorisation systems vary slightly in IQ range.
. Depending upon the classification system used, the “borderline” IQ range is approximately 70-79 or 70-85.
. Hayes and Craddock at 25.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Discussion Paper 29, 1993) at para 1.4.
International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-9, World Health Organisation, Geneva, 1977), now (ICD-10, 1992), from which the WHO’s
International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps: A Manual of Classification relating to the Consequences of
(1980) was developed.
. American Psychiatric Association
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(3rd ed, revised, Washington DC, 1987) (“DSM III-R”).
. American Association on Mental Retardation
Mental Retardation: Definition, Classification, and Systems of Supports
(9th ed, American Association on Mental Retardation, Washington DC, 1992).
. World Health Organisation
The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines
(World Health Organisation, Geneva, 1992) at 226.
. DSM III-R at 28.
. The AAMR’s previous definition of mental retardation was: “significantly sub-average general intellectual functioning
existing concurrently with deficits in adaptive behaviour and manifested during the developmental period”: H J Grossman (ed)
Classification in Mental Retardation
(American Association on Mental Deficiency, Washington DC, 1983). The American Association on Mental Deficiency has been renamed
as the American Association on Mental Retardation. It has been stated that the new definition does not significantly change the
group of people who will be classified as “mentally retarded” and that the main change is the replacement of “adaptive
behaviour” by “the more realistic and functional construct of requiring that the intellectual impairment be accompanied
by related limitations in particular skills areas”: J W Ellis “Decisions by and for people with mental retardation:
balancing considerations of autonomy and protection”
Villanova Law Review
, at 1782. Significantly, the terms representing levels of disability (“mild”, “moderate”, “severe”
and “profound”) have been abandoned under the new definition. Classifications are still used, based on the individual’s
support needs, classifying the individual’s need as “intermittent”, “limited”, “extensive”
or “pervasive”, but these are not linked to IQ scores: see Ellis at 1784.
. National Council on Intellectual Disability
(18 December 1991) at 1. Note that the submission was referring to the definitions used in 1991.
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Criminal Law Review Division, Issues Paper, 1991) at 5; Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 2.
. See Chapter 9.
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 29 October 1987 at 15466.
s 61J(2)(g)
s 61M(3)(e)
s 61O(3)(d).
. New South Wales
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 28 November 1989 at 13570.
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Criminal Law Review Division, Issues Paper, 1991) at 6.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 1.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 4.
. A separate Discussion Paper has been released covering these issues: New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Provocation, Diminished Responsibility and Infanticide
(Discussion Paper 31, 1993).
. For example, referring to the range of terms used in the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) and the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) (for example, mental illness, mental condition, developmentally disabled), the submission of the New South Wales Department
of Courts Administration commented: “the complexity of the existing definitions would suggest that a judicial officer, even
with the assistance of expert witnesses, may well encounter great difficulty in interpreting the definitions and discerning the shades
of meaning that differentiate them. ... [A]ny attempt to simplify the definitions in the current legislation would be of great assistance
to judicial officers whose lot it may ultimately be to interpret such provisions”:
(28 August 1992) at 2.
. This definition is used in Victoria in the
Intellectually Disabled Persons’ Services Act
(Vic), s 3 and in the
According to these sections this definition applies only to a person over the age of five years.
. Intellectual Disability Review Panel (Victoria)
(17 December 1992) at 2-3.
. Intellectual Disability Review Panel (Victoria)
(17 December 1992) at 3.
. Intellectual Disability Review Panel (Victoria)
(17 December 1992) at 4, and generally 3-5.
. For example: The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 2; Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(8 January 1992) at 2; The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 4; Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 2-3; Western Australia. Department of Corrective Services
(19 November 1991) at 1; and Associate Professor S C Hayes
(6 November 1991) at 1.
. For example, comments made by Ms T Ovadia of the Mental Health Review Tribunal at a consultation with representatives of the Mental
Health Review Tribunal and the Mental Health Advocacy Service on 11 March 1994.
. The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 2.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 1.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 3.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 3-4.
. Ms S E Maxwell, Solicitor, Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(3 December 1991) at 1.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 1.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 2. See also The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 2.
. The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 2.
. See also New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 1, which suggested that one alternative was “a definition which focuses on a person’s functioning and
the effects or manifestations of intellectual disability ... [t]he focus should be on the person’s in/ability to function in
society with adequate support.” See also the New South Wales Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of
Community Services], Office on Disability
(26 November 1991) at 1, which stated: “[i]f there is a new definition it should not be based on IQ but on how intellectual
disability affects function eg slow development of social skills.”
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 1.
. Hayes and Craddock at 6-7, referring to S C Hayes and R Hayes
Mental Retardation: Law, Policy and Administration
(Law Book Co, Sydney, 1982) at ch 1.
. J H Noble and R W Conley “Toward an epidemiology of relevant attributes” in R W Conley, R Luckasson and G N Bouthilet
The Criminal Justice System and Mental Retardation: Defendants and Victims
(Paul H Brookes Publishing Co, Baltimore, 1992) at 21-22.
. Mr M Porter, Programme Director, Hunter Region Developmental Disability Service, Department of Community Services, New South Wales
(20 October 1992) at 1.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 2.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 4.
. Associate Professor S C Hayes
(31 August 1992) at 3.
. See, for example, R Perske
Unequal Justice
(Abingdon Press, Nashville, 1991), especially ch 7, referring to the availability of the death penalty.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 4. See also Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 3.
. Illawarra Area Consultative Committee
(12 August 1992) at 2.
. See footnote 19 above.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 3.
. 70% of severe brain injuries are sustained in road accidents according to Cuff Consultants
A Brain Injury Program for New South Wales: GIO’s Commitment Under Transcover
(GIO, May 1987), cited in Department of Community Services
Brain Injury: What is it all about?
(July 1993) at 1.
. According to a glossary provided by the New South Wales Department of Community Services: “[a]n individual is said to experience
acquired brain injury when that injury is sustained and/or manifested after an initially unexceptional, predictable development.
The terms: brain injury, head injury, traumatic head injury, traumatic brain injury and acquired brain injury, are all used to describe
different aspects of brain injury. However, ‘acquired brain injury’ is the most inclusive term”: see
Brain Injury: What is it all about?
Brain Injury: What is it all about?
Brain Injury: What is it all about?
at 3-5. See also Mr G Simpson, Social Worker, Head Injury Outreach Team, Lidcombe Hospital
(21 February 1994) at 3-5.
Oral Submission
(2 April 1993).
. Mr G Simpson, Social Worker, Head Injury Outreach Team, Lidcombe Hospital
(21 February 1994) at 11
. Noble and Conley at 20.
. The Victorian Law Reform Commission (“VLRC”) in its report
Mental Malfunction and Criminal Responsibility
(Report 34, 1990) stated, at para 9, that it used “ ‘mental malfunction’ ... to cover all the ways in which a person’s
mental condition may affect criminal responsibility, including conditions that arise from trauma or gross intoxication which fall
outside the ambit of the insanity defence. A narrower term, ‘mental impairment’, is used to refer to conditions - like
mental illness, intellectual disability, senility and brain damage - which do fall within the scope of the insanity defence.”
The VLRC commented at footnote 1, however, that “[t]he term ‘mental malfunction’ is not an entirely satisfactory
one - for example, intellectual disability is not a ‘malfunction’ but the normal state of the intellectually disabled
person. Similar considerations apply to the inclusion of intellectual disability under the term ‘mental impairment’.
However, for the sake of brevity, these terms have been used.” In its earlier report
Sexual Offences Against People with Impaired Mental Functioning
(Report 15, 1988), the VLRC made similar comments at paras 4-5 and used an umbrella term of ‘impaired mental functioning’,
which is now used in the
. Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General [now known as the Model Criminal Code Officers Committee]
Model Criminal Code: Chapter 2 - General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
(Final Report, AGPS, Canberra, 1992) cl 302, 302.1.
. Autism, if it affects a person’s intellectual functioning and adaptive behaviour, would also fall within the proposed definition
of intellectual disability.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
3. Lawyers and Legal Personnel
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
3.1 The legal profession and other court personnel play a crucial role within the criminal justice system for people with an intellectual
disability. For example, lawyers working with people with an intellectual disability are most likely to identify the disability,
probably because of the time spent with the client.
It falls to the lawyer to ensure that the client’s intellectual disability is properly assessed and presented to the court
in a manner which allows the client to receive a fair hearing and, if convicted, an appropriate sentence. Few lawyers, however, will
have received any instruction about the special needs of clients with an intellectual disability. This chapter considers intellectual
disability issues relevant to lawyers and other legal personnel (including judges and court staff), such as: the attitude of criminal
justice personnel towards intellectual disability, legal education, ethical issues arising in the lawyer/client relationship, and
the need for guidelines and improved training. The usefulness of specialist intellectual disability units within mainstream legal
services will also be examined. Provisional proposals for reform are set out at the end of the chapter.
ATTITUDES OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM PERSONNEL TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
3.2 A preliminary issue concerns the attitudes of criminal justice personnel (including lawyers) to people with disabilities. Associate
Professor Lindsay Gething of the University of Sydney’s Community Disability and Ageing Program (“CDAP”) has stressed
the importance of determining community and professional attitudes towards people with disabilities when assessing the needs of people
with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system. She states that evidence collected by CDAP indicates that community
attitudes towards people with disabilities are marked by negative stereotypes, which affect the manner and fairness of their treatment
by various organisations and institutions. She concludes that unless attitudes are changed by increased awareness of disability issues,
institutional and procedural changes to the criminal justice system will achieve little for people with an intellectual disability.
Hence, she advocates mandatory disability awareness training for police, lawyers, and correctional services officers, tailored to
the needs of the particular group.
3.3 Associate Professor Gething prepared a report for the Commission in September 1992, which suggested that:
there is a trend towards people anticipating higher levels of discomfort at the prospect of meeting someone with an intellectual disability
... than for most other forms of disabling conditions.
Findings also suggest that members of the judicial system [legislators, judges, lawyers, solicitors, police and legal clerks] experience
more discomfort and hence display more negative attitudes than members of the Australian population towards people with disabilities
The size of the overall sample, and the small percentage of legal personnel (59 of a total of 481), suggests that this finding is
significant but not conclusive; and that a larger survey of this group is necessary to gather information about their attitudes to,
and the accuracy of their knowledge about, intellectual disability.
3.4 A Western Australian study examined the attitudes and perceptions of service workers (including clinical psychologists, lawyers,
social workers, hostel managers, employment supervisors and a community education officer), police and members of the judiciary.
The study concluded that:
[a]ll groups interviewed agreed that people with an intellectual disability have several characteristics which would disadvantage
them when coming into contact with the criminal justice system. However, while members of the judiciary supported compensatory processes
to minimise this disadvantage, the responses from the other groups were not so supportive of such measures. It was concluded that
many of the responses reflected negative community stereotypes of people with an intellectual disability, and it was likely that
these stereotypes were directly related to their over-representation in the criminal justice system.
3.5 Submissions have also reflected these concerns about the attitudes of some lawyers. For example, the Queensland Department of
Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs stated that:
usually ... difficulty is experienced in locating a lawyer with appropriate attitudes towards people with an intellectual disability.
Often the attitudes expressed by lawyers are paternalistic and view the person with an intellectual disability as a child.
Another submission stated that:
[w]e have sometimes found lawyers’ attitude towards victims very disturbing with clear implications from their comment and behaviour
that crimes against people with an intellectual disability were somehow not so serious as the same offence against others.
LEGAL EDUCATION
3.6 The perception that lawyers will only rarely have a client with intellectual disability does not seem to be borne out, at least
in the criminal area, by the studies referred to in Chapter 1. Also, with increasing de-institutionalisation, higher life expectancy
of some people with an intellectual disability, and increasing numbers of people suffering (and surviving) head injuries, contact
by lawyers with people with an intellectual disability or a brain injury is more likely. Recent studies suggest a disparity between
the extent to which criminal justice personnel encounter intellectual disability in their professional capacity, and the training
they receive:
a significantly high proportion of the legal profession ... have had some form of legal contact with mentally retarded offenders while
relatively few have had any form of training in their background to prepare them to cope with this challenge.
Lack of training may lead to inadequate representation, misapplication (or non-application) of relevant legislative provisions, and
discriminatory treatment of people with an intellectual disability at all stages of the criminal justice process. Intellectual disability
is not an area which is well understood by the community and few lawyers are likely to have a familiarity with the issues involved
unless received as part of their legal education. As discussed below, it is an area which involves difficult questions of law and
ethical dilemmas for lawyers. It is therefore suggested that judicial officers and other lawyers require education on intellectual
disability issues.
3.7 The disproportionately high number of people with an intellectual disability involved in the criminal justice system suggests
that while lawyers, police and other workers in that system would benefit from education about intellectual disability, correspondingly
people with an intellectual disability and their carers would benefit from more information about the law and the legal system.
Accordingly this section considers both:
solicitors/barristers, the judiciary/magistracy, and court personnel:
how education about intellectual disability issues can increase awareness, and the capacity of the legal system to take account,
of a person’s intellectual disability; and
people with an intellectual disability and their carers:
how education about criminal justice issues can increase their awareness of offences, legal rights, and legal avenues of complaint/redress,
and so improve their access to the criminal justice system.
Lawyers, the judiciary, and court personnel
Solicitors/Barristers
3.8 A large proportion of legal representation in criminal matters is undertaken by lawyers employed by the Legal Aid Commission of
NSW, and private law firms whose criminal work is funded by the Legal Aid Commission or done on a
(“for the public good”) basis. Although submissions acknowledged the heavy workload of legal aid lawyers, there remained
concern about the quality of legal services provided to people with an intellectual disability.
Lawyers’ skills in communicating with people with an intellectual disability have also been questioned. This is relevant both
to the manner in which people with an intellectual disability are treated, and to the capacity of the lawyer to obtain enough information
to establish a conviction or defence. The capacity of lawyers to deal with the issues surrounding people with an intellectual disability
in the criminal justice system could be improved by increasing education and training for lawyers about intellectual disability,
both at the qualifying level and in practice.
The prevalence of intellectual disability suggests that it should form part of practical legal training, such as the College of
Law Graduate Diploma in Legal Practice, or the requirements for admission to the Bar.
3.9 In early 1993 the Commission wrote to all
ustralian university law schools, some other providers of legal and judicial education, and some social science faculties requesting
information on the availability and content of courses which deal with intellectual disability issues. The responses received are
summarised below:
Institution
Intellectual Disability Issues in Courses as at March 1993
Griffith University, Qld
No subjects offered.
James Cook University, Qld
No subjects offered.
Judicial Commission of New South Wales
Program for judges and magistrates “Attitudes to Minorities” refers to various disabilities.
La Trobe University, Vic
Referred to in various subjects (not specified) and in elective “Discrimination and the Law”.
Monash University, Vic
Referred to in the electives “Law and Discrimination”, “Sentencing”, “Current Problems with Criminal
Law” (fitness trial and defences).
Murdoch University, Western Australia
Referred to in “Criminal Law and Procedure” (compulsory) and “Advanced Criminal Law" (elective) in relation
to dangerousness and liability/defences.
Solicitors Admission Board/Barristers Admission Board, NSW
Referred to in "Criminal Law and Procedure" in relation to liability/defenecs and fitness.
The College of Law
CLE topics include criminal law topics and “Wills for Persons with an Intellectual Disability".
The Flinders University of South Australia
Referred to in “Criminal Law” in relation to liability/defences and fitness.
The Law Society of New South Wales
Seminars on intellectual disability and criminal law, wills, disability services/ guardianship have been offered. Other seminars anticipated.
The University of Adelaide, SA
Referred to in “Criminal Law” (undergraduate) and “Criminology” (postgraduate) in relation to criminal liability/defences
and in “Human Rights Law”.
The University of New England, NSW
Referred to in “Equal Employment Opportunity and Occupational Health and Safety Law and Practice” (elective).
The University of New South Wales
Referred to in “Criminal Law” (compulsory) in relation to criminal liability/defences, and “Crime and Society”
(Criminology); discussions on interviewing clients, and the lawyer/client relationship within “Clinical Legal Experience”
(elective) conducted at the Kingsford Legal Centre.
The University of Queensland
No subjects offered.
The University of Sydney
Referred to in: various topics dealing with the criminal justice system and criminology. Also referred to in “Legal Studies
in Secondary Schools”, offered to Legal Studies teachers.
The University of Western Australia
Referred to in “Criminal Procedure” (compulsory).
The University of Western Sydney
No law faculty until 1995: Business Law subjects only.
According to the responses, intellectual disability issues also are canvassed in various compulsory and elective social work subjects,
including those concerned with the interaction of social work and law.
Also, some social work faculties provide for student fieldwork placement, the nature of which may involve contact with people with
an intellectual disability.
Undergraduate/qualifying training
. From the above survey, it is clear that issues relevant to people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system
are not covered in detail in any course cited. Traditionally, legal education treats mental illness and intellectual disability as
relevant to criminal law defences, rather than as practical and ethical issues central to everyday practice. Any wider analysis usually
occurs late in legal curricula, as part of discrete elective courses. It has been suggested that:
[i]t appears that for those law students who eventually receive training, the common sequence is [to] complete the requirements of
the law school, begin professional practice, realise that training in mental retardation is needed, and then, receive training. The
logical solution to this problem is to implement information in the law school curriculum on mental retardation and the mentally
retarded offender in order that the potential lawyer will be prepared to defend a mentally retarded person.
One submission has suggested that “ideally a discrete subject covering the law relating to intellectual disability and mental
incapacity should be available, at least as an option, in Law Schools in Australia.”
Alternatively, issues relating specifically to intellectual disability could be canvassed within relevant areas of legal practice
studied (criminal law, discrimination law, succession). It has been argued that information on intellectual disability issues should
be presented to law students throughout their legal training, and should deal with identification, communication, and access to legal
and non-legal service providers.
Continuing Legal Education.
Many submissions to the Commission supported training for practising lawyers and the allocation of resources to facilitate it, some
stating that this should have a higher priority than the establishment of specialist units.
Such training in intellectual disability issues should increase knowledge of intellectual disability issues, communication skills,
and awareness of available service organisations.
Some training is regularly conducted by the Legal Aid Commission of NSW for its solicitors, by way of seminars on mental health,
fitness to be tried, and related issues.
The Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service (“IDRS”) has suggested that the Law Society of New South
Wales establish a Committee to: “look at the issue of legal services to people with an intellectual disability and [raise]
awareness of intellectual disability issues amongst the profession.”
Such a Committee could have an ongoing supervisory and consultative role in the development of various professional guidelines,
education, and interaction with various community groups.
The judiciary/magistracy
3.12 In submissions to the Commission, IDRS stated that judges and magistrates also need training in this area:
judges and magistrates also need to develop a greater understanding of the special needs of people with an intellectual disability.
... [M]agistrates on hearing that a person has a driver’s licence are unable to believe that the person may also have an intellectual
disability which may be relevant to the matter before the court. Alternatively, it would appear that some magistrates and judges
find it difficult to believe that a person with a “low IQ” can give reliable evidence.
[Also, m]any jurors, judges and magistrates have difficulty in understanding and correctly applying the various legal provisions which
relate to moral culpability, including such concepts as diminished responsibility, insanity, and fitness to be tried. This affects
the sentencing options available.
Mark Ierace, a Public Defender, has expressed concern that many judicial officers have not had the benefit of education about and
experience of intellectual disability. Thus, in his view, many judicial officers do not understand the basic implications arising
from intellectual disability in the court context and may be reluctant to accept that intellectual disability has significant implications
for the person before them.
3.13 The Commission considers that judicial education on intellectual disability issues would be desirable. Judicial education can
enhance: knowledge of new laws/procedures, and definitions of intellectual disability; skills, for example, communication techniques;
attitudes towards intellectual disability; and the exercise of judicial discretions, for example, to reject evidence on the basis
of unfairness.
3.14 There are several bodies concerned with judicial education. In New South Wales, the Judicial Commission provides the following
annual conferences dealing with changes in the law, judicial administration, and specialist technical information, together with programs
on judicial orientation, judicial skills development and judicial disposition;
voluntary workshops for judicial and non-judicial officers, involving the provision of appropriate dispensation from sitting duties
by the head of each jurisdiction;
publication of the
Judicial Officers Bulletin
, a monthly publication especially for judicial officers, which includes articles, digests of decisions, and information about judicial
education, and the
Judicial Review
, a journal publishing conference papers;
“Bench Books”, jurisdiction-specific confidential guides (now computerised and on-line) for the use of the judiciary only,
which contain model jury directions and other information (it is estimated that 90% of judicial officers use this service on a regular
daily, weekly or monthly basis);
the Sentencing Information System, a computerised database from which sentencing law information (including sentencing principles)
and penalty statistics can be retrieved;
the provision of training in the development of computer skills for both judicial officers and their support staff;
the research and publication of original monographs on subjects of interest to sentencers; and
the publication of collated statistical data on particular areas of sentencing.
3.15 The Australian Institute of Judicial Administration (“AIJA”) is an incorporated association affiliated with the University
of Melbourne, which conducts skills courses for the judiciary and court attendants, and researches and collects information on judicial
administration. Concerns have been expressed to the AIJA over the lack of guidance for judicial officers on intellectual disability
and mental illness issues, and the level of unrepresented people with an intellectual disability before the Local Courts. The AIJA
presently is devising a training package for judges, magistrates and court personnel.
3.16 In 1993, in Western Australia, a Committee convened by Justice R D Nicholson published guidelines for courts on intellectual
disability issues.
The guidelines deal with: the characteristics of intellectual disability and its distinction from mental illness; the recognition
in Western Australia in legislation of intellectual disability; the impact of intellectual disability upon the criminal process (including
bail, committal, fitness to plead, defences, confessional statements, sentencing, and psychological evidence); and additional issues
to be considered when a person with an intellectual disability is a juvenile and/or a witness. Representation in civil proceedings
by a guardian is also canvassed. It has been suggested that similar guidelines should be prepared for distribution in New South Wales.
3.17 A submission that special judges/magistrates be appointed to deal with legal matters involving a person with an intellectual
disability as a victim or an offender was also received.
The Commission considers that such an approach would raise logistical problems. If such a scheme were to operate only where an accused
had an intellectual disability, the involvement of a witness with an intellectual disability would raise the same difficulties before
other judges/magistrates. Specialised schemes may further separate and stigmatise people with an intellectual disability. The use
of specialist judges/magistrates, however, may reduce the length of trials involving people with an intellectual disability, through
a familiarity with issues relevant to the participants. The Commission seeks further comments in this area.
Court personnel
3.18 Awareness of intellectual disability issues by court personnel is also relevant. In New South Wales, court staff are trained
by the New South Wales Department of Courts Administration. The Commission considers that training in intellectual disability issues
should form part of basic training, and continuing education, for all court personnel. The Western Australia Committee (see para
3.16) has also published guidelines for Associates, Orderlies and Security Officers,
concerning in-court treatment of people with an intellectual disability. It outlines: the mental illness/intellectual disability
distinction; methods of improving communication with people with an intellectual disability generally, and in relation to court processes
(such as the swearing in of witnesses); and ways of assisting people before (courtroom familiarity) and after (general directions
and assistance) the hearing.
Legal education for people with an intellectual disability and carers
People with an intellectual disability
3.19 Participants in the Commission’s consultations expressed a keen interest in, and need for, educational material on the
criminal justice system; and suggested a range of educational tools, such as: classes, videos, posters, cassettes, brochures and
books discussing and explaining crime and legal rights, as well as a 24-hour disability information “hotline”. It was
suggested further that material should be accessible, and presented in a manner appropriate to the needs of people with an intellectual
disability. The idea of increased interaction between participants, lawyers and police, for the interchange of information, was welcomed.
3.20 The Commission believes that the provision of legal education for people with an intellectual disability is essential, but recognises
that providing such legal education is not a simple matter. IDRS offers courses and workshops for people with an intellectual disability,
their carers, disability workers/managers, and parents; and has conducted its own research on the effectiveness of various teaching
modes. Its research was based primarily on the distribution to people with an intellectual disability of tape-based teaching resources,
and subsequent interviews with the recipients and their service providers (a total sample of 33). Findings included:
awareness and understanding of “rights” among people with an intellectual disability is low, and acquired mainly through
their use of services;
the most effective method of education is personal explanation by peers, at the time when rights are being abused or threatened;
parents can obstruct education about rights, so they also must be educated, and their opinions and attitudes considered; and
the presentation, reiteration, and length of the resource material is crucial, and affected by the concentration span of the participants.
The Commission suggests that the discussion outline prepared, with the assistance of IDRS, for its own consultations
might be an appropriate starting place for devising further resources for people with an intellectual disability.
3.21 Education of people with an intellectual disability about legal issues could be conducted in institutions, schools, homes, sheltered
workshops and other places of employment.
Wherever conducted, education sessions should focus upon legal rights and obligations, victim services, victims’ compensation,
the recognition and reporting of crime, crime prevention, assertiveness, and ways to increase the self-esteem and empowerment of
people with an intellectual disability.
Education sessions could be run by police, lawyers, disability groups, service providers, and people with an intellectual disability
who have had experience with the criminal justice system.
3.22 Education of carers about the rights of people with an intellectual disability also is important, so that they may recognise
an infringement against, or by, a person under their care. The IDRS stated that:
some service providers have difficulty understanding that people with an intellectual disability can engage in acts which may be “criminal”
or be “victims of crime” even if they are living in a large residential setting.
3.23 It may also be useful for other personnel operating within the criminal justice system, such as welfare and disability services
personnel, to receive education about the criminal justice system's structure, organisation and procedures; as well as the availability
of specialist legal services. Such education occurs at the Kingsford Legal Centre.
Also, the CDAP has developed a Disability Awareness Package to provide training and information about disability issues for service
providers, particularly those not employed by specialist disability services.
LEGAL REPRESENTATION
3.24 Accompanying the popular misconception that an accused has a right to legal representation
is the notion that most people appear before courts with legal representation. Statistics indicate that 35.3% of people appearing
before New South Wales Local Courts are unrepresented.
Although studies have arrived at contrasting conclusions about whether the presence/absence of legal representation necessarily
affects the outcome of court appearances,
it is clear that the representation of people with an intellectual disability will be inadequate if the lawyer fails to recognise
and deal with issues arising from that disability. One submission to the Commission argued that:
... lawyers may only rarely have a client with an intellectual disability. They cannot be expected to have an appreciation of all
the implications of a client’s condition and may have difficulty in
obtaining instructions;
if such instructions are given through another person, ensuring that the instructions have been adequately conveyed and that the person
instructing has no conflicting interest, or, if he/she has, is not influenced by it;
explaining legal procedures or the subject of a legal document or a Will; and
representing such a client effectively in any Court proceedings.
The ability to recognise and deal with intellectual disability issues is crucial to representation, but, as discussed above, lawyers
receive little formal training in this area. The following sections deal with some of the difficulties faced by lawyers representing
clients with an intellectual disability, and how they may be resolved by the provision of appropriate education and professional
guidelines.
Identification
3.25 The identification of intellectual disability poses particular problems for lawyers, which have been canvassed already in the
Commission’s Discussion Paper on Policing Issues,
and which have been summarised as follows:
[a] person who has an intellectual disability cannot be relied upon to alert the solicitor to it. In fact, people with an intellectual
disability frequently seek to disguise its existence ...
Nor can the solicitor expect to perceive it if the client does not disclose it, particularly if the disability is in the mild range.
A person’s intellectual disability is generally not identifiable by innate physical characteristics.
There is no certain method for determining whether a client has an intellectual disability. Even if it is evident that the client
has a significant mental abnormality, it may not be clear whether it is in fact an intellectual disability.
Even lawyers experienced in intellectual disability issues may not detect a client’s intellectual disability until well into
Identification of intellectual disability can also be complicated by the effects on the client of drugs or alcohol. Indicators of
intellectual disability may be found in the person’s communication difficulties, behaviour, or task performance, or from other
social information such as receipt of an invalid pension.
Having regard to the high incidence of intellectual disability in the criminal justice system, the process of identification should
not be passive: “we need to actively anticipate it, rather than assume that it will be apparent to us or just be on the lookout
for warning signs”.
Further assessment
3.26 If the possibility of intellectual disability has been identified, the lawyer needs to obtain all relevant information, including
any existing psychological reports, and, subject to instructions, should speak to a family member, friend or support person.
Obtaining information about the person may be difficult, even if he or she is in regular contact with service providers.
Where information is incomplete, a psychological assessment should be obtained, on instructions, to: identify the relevance (if
any) of the disability to the alleged offence; assess legal competency; and ensure that all relevant matters are covered in subsequent
interviews.
It has been suggested that the extent of “under-identification” of intellectual disability in the criminal justice system
is attributable not only to the failure of lawyers to detect it, but also to their tendency to underestimate its extent when detected,
and so refrain from seeking further psychological assessment.
3.27 The collection of information about a client’s intellectual disability raises several difficulties:
civil liberties concerns arise, especially where competence to instruct is not clear;
people with an intellectual disability may not wish their disability to be publicised, may believe that its disclosure will impact
adversely upon them, or may have been tested repeatedly in the past - and so may refuse or be reluctant to undergo assessment;
psychological assessments are costly (many people with an intellectual disability receive a disability or other pension), and may
cause delays (such as repeated adjournments) which compromise the person’s legal position;
a proper assessment may be difficult or even impossible when the person is in custody.
3.28 Consultation and communication with the client and other people involved, such as the client’s family and the Department
of Community Services, who may be providing services to the client, is crucial. One submission expressed concern, through a detailed
case study, about the lack of consultation between a solicitor (in that case, the Legal Aid Commission) and a client with an intellectual
disability and other involved people. The submission commented:
I have this gut feeling that Y’s future has been decided between the solicitor and the judicial system without reference to
the family, and with no attempt to take instructions. Since Y is not competent to give instructions, who would do this for him?
Appropriate communication in interviews
3.29 According to one submission: “[t]he main difficulty presented by clients with intellectual disabilities is eliciting all
relevant information which may give rise to a defence or mitigating circumstance.”
Similar difficulties apply in relation to establishing a case for prosecution.
Hence, communication and questioning techniques appropriate to people with an intellectual disability may be required whether the
client is an offender, victim or witness.
A number of techniques have been suggested in this respect.
Language used should be: simple, direct, free of abstract concepts and unnecessary information, paced to allow understanding
(but not so slow as to be patronising), clear (but not loud), and mindful of the tendency of people with an intellectual disability
to take words literally.
Questions should be non-leading, short, and free of multiple-concepts and multiple-negatives.
All questions/information should be directed to the client, not service providers/carers.
Non-verbal clues (such as facial expressions) should be used carefully.
The use of pictures, role plays and other alternatives may be beneficial, but must be used with caution to avoid misunderstanding.
Reassurance and encouragement of the client often is necessary to overcome their inexperience and fear of legal decision making.
The interviewer, and interview procedure/environment should be familiar to the client to reduce fear and enhance recollection,
but this may be difficult where the client is in custody.
Extra time should be scheduled for interviews (although they should not be too long), and interruptions minimised
- a series of short conferences may be better.
Most importantly, the client’s understanding cannot be assumed simply because the client does not ask questions. Rather, the
client should be asked periodically to explain matters in his or her own words.
3.30 Many of these points arose in the Commission’s consultations with people with an intellectual disability. Participants
indicated little understanding of the role of the lawyer, and had difficulty understanding lawyers. Most believed that lawyers should
know that a client has a disability; but felt that lawyers’ knowledge of, and ability to identify, intellectual disability
is limited, and that training is necessary.
The legal profession appears therefore to need guidelines in this area.
Continuity of personnel
3.31 As discussed, many people with an intellectual disability are likely to be represented by legal aid lawyers, owing to their low
and may find, depending upon court duty rosters, that they are dealt with by more than one lawyer over the course of their matter,
or that they meet the lawyer handling their case only on the day of the hearing.
For example, one person had to instruct three legal aid solicitors for a District Court appeal.
Often legal representation lacks the continuity crucial for people with an intellectual disability. According to the IDRS:
[i]t takes some time before the parties can establish good communication and trust. People with intellectual disability do not adapt
well to change, and need to have time to get to know the person handling the case. Personnel also need to learn the vocabulary and
terminology of the person.
Even where continuity is possible, a person with an intellectual disability, as with any witness, will be required to tell his or
her story to several different people, including the police, a solicitor and a barrister.
3.32 It has been suggested that the police, the Legal Aid Commission of NSW, and the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
New South Wales (“DPP”), need to develop and implement policies which ensure continuity of personnel in cases which involve
(in any capacity) a person with an intellectual disability. The Commission supports such a proposal. If continuity is not possible,
the continuous involvement of a person outside the legal process may be appropriate (for example, a case manager, support person,
advocate, or family member). It was clear from submissions and the Commission’s consultations that for many people with an
intellectual disability one particular service provider, solicitor or police officer had become their constant contact and source
of information, with whom trust and understanding had been built up over a long relationship, and whom they would contact about to
any difficulties in the criminal justice system.
The role of a support person and the difficulties which may arise are discussed at paras 3.43-3.48. One submission argued that a
case manager with authority to acquire information, such as assessments, is necessary, to assist in preparing report(s), drafting
suitable court orders, supervising the person upon release, and facilitating communication.
In the likely absence of continuity the Commission supports the need for a case manager, presumably to be provided by the New South
Wales Department of Community Services, and seeks further submissions about his or her likely role and possible overlap with that
of a support person.
Difficulties in obtaining instructions
3.33 A lawyer may face a situation where the client’s communication skills are so inadequate that the client’s capacity
to provide proper instructions is questionable. This issue assumes great importance when obtaining the client’s history and
version of the facts, receiving instructions on how the matter is to be conducted/pleaded, and determining the appropriateness of
conditions in relation to bail and sentence. For example, Legal Aid Commission solicitors have suggested that obtaining instructions
to raise the diversionary procedure available for people with an intellectual disability in the Local Courts (see Chapter 5) is often
This section examines some of the often difficult ethical issues which arise in this area. An example of difficulties in obtaining
instructions was provided by the Kingsford Legal Centre in relation to one client, who could:
identify and articulate his needs, [but was] less able to receive information or to understand the implications of information being
given to him. Although capable of giving instructions, he is unable to understand the full import of legal advice. While seemingly
able to understand general concepts of law he has difficulty coming to grips with the processes. A further difficulty is that when
he does understand a proposition, or believes he understands it, that understanding becomes fixed. It is difficult then to explain
to him different legal considerations that arise in what appear to be similar circumstances on later occasions.
Lawyer/client relationship
3.34 A basic tenet of legal ethics is that a lawyer must act in pursuit of a client’s best interests as defined by a client’s
instructions. Simultaneously, as an officer of the court a lawyer is obliged not to mislead it. Problems can arise for a lawyer when
a client’s capacity to give instructions is marginal, or instructions appear to be irrational and inconsistent with what the
lawyer perceives to be in the client’s best interests:
[d]eciding upon the strategies to be used in the trial of an intellectually disabled accused is complex, and becomes more so if the
client is essentially incapable of giving sensible or consistent instructions to counsel. Important ethical issues are raised by
the question of the extent to which counsel may have to impose difficult and complex decisions upon the accused.
It is ironic that the complexity of the decisions to [be] made about the conduct of the defence case are increased in the very cases
where the accused is least able to participate fully in such decision-making.
3.35 A lawyer whose client has an intellectual disability may face a situation in which the incapacity of the client is such as to
suggest that some decisions should be made by the lawyer in the client’s best interests: “[s]hould the defendant’s
irrational choices be respected, or may counsel make choices based on her assessment of the client’s best interest? ... Is
there a point at which the defendant’s mental disability ought to change the lawyer’s role from that of advocate to that
of guardian or friend of the court?”
This concern is particularly apposite in receiving instructions in fitness proceedings, in that one of the criteria of fitness is
the capacity to instruct counsel.
Some commentators see the true nature of the lawyer/client relationship as containing less client autonomy than that generally assumed:
“[a]lthough the
is expected to make a ‘reasoned choice’ among alternatives, based on his or her specialised knowledge, and the client
to exercise an independent prerogative, client deference to the attorney’s judgment is the expected norm.”
3.36 Tremblay has suggested that a lawyer faced with a client whose competence is questioned may: withdraw, seek a guardianship order,
seek instructions from the client’s family, persuade the client to make “better” choices, proceed without instructions,
or follow instructions regardless of consequence.
Many of these options involve a breach of one or more professional duties. Unlike professional codes in other jurisdictions
the various codes of professional practice in New South Wales offer no assistance to lawyers on these issues. The issue of guardianship
warrants further consideration.
Guardianship
. At common law, only a person who suffers a violation of a right may enforce that right by court proceedings.
The capacity of infants and “incompetent” persons to participate in proceedings has been limited by statutory rules
and regulations of courts in civil,
Family Court
and Children’s Court
can participate as a party to proceedings only through a “tutor”. “Tutor” is a term which encompasses the
roles of “next friend” and “guardian
”. A “guardian
” is not a full guardian (that is, the guardian of the person’s body and estate), but is admitted by the court to assist
the person for the purpose of the particular suit. Historically, the criminal jurisdiction has stood apart from these developments,
as the decisions made by a person, such as whether or not to plead guilty are fundamentally different. In criminal matters an infant
(and presumably any other person fit to be tried) is capable of instructing a lawyer or conducting a matter on their own behalf.
Guardianship in New South Wales
. In New South Wales a guardian may be appointed either by: a court, in accordance with statutory rules; or the Guardianship Board
(the “Board”) for a person over 16 years of age.
In making its decision, the Board takes into consideration: the views of the person and any individual responsible for the person;
the preservation of the person’s existing family relationships, and cultural/linguistic environments; and whether services
can be provided without such an order.
The order must appoint a guardian and specify whether the order is continuing or temporary, limited or unlimited, and, if limited,
the relevant conditions.
A limited guardianship order may in its scope be equivalent to the appointment of a guardian
. Where there is no appropriate relative or friend who consents to being appointed as the person’s guardian, the court or Board
may appoint the Public Guardian.
Guardianship Act
(NSW) prescribes certain principles which guardians have a duty to observe, including: promoting the person’s welfare, interests,
self-reliance and protection; limiting restrictions on the person’s freedom; and ensuring the person’s views are always
considered.
The limitations of guardianship in criminal matters.
The role of a guardian, even under an unlimited guardianship order, within the criminal process is limited. If a person’s intellectual
disability is such as to render them incapable of pleading, understanding the trial process or of assisting in their own defence,
they would be found unfit to be tried. Such a finding would activate the special fitness process provided under the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW), see Chapter 4. The guardian can assist the person by organising the provision of services, during and after the criminal
process; but this role is limited as “[i]n general, the real problem is a lack of appropriate services, not the lack of a person’s
ability to consent to the services which are available.”
A guardian appears to be able to provide information to the court on matters such as sentencing and to provide instructions for
appeal hearings, applications for a life sentence re-determination,
and victim compensation (whether as applicant or respondent). The guardian’s role in other matters is less clear. According
to the Legal Aid Commission of NSW:
[a] procedure to appoint a guardian ad litem would be desirable to allow instructions to be given, reports obtained etc especially
in hearings other than the actual trial or special hearing. Whilst the special hearing procedure is designed to operate with a subject
unable to instruct, the same cannot always be said for subsequent hearings. In particular, when plans are being formulated for an
application for transfer, conditional release etc to a board such as the Mental Health Review Tribunal the inability of the intellectually
disabled person to provide proper instructions about these matters can and does present a very real problem.
3.40 In its submission to the Commission, the Office of the Public Guardian stated its involvement in a criminal justice matter may
occur at various stages in relation to its clients with an intellectual disability:
[i]n some cases the matters have been placed urgently before the Guardianship Board with the intention of the applicant having a guardian
appointed to advocate for the client to ensure access to appropriate services including support during the police interview process,
Legal Aid representation, appropriate assessment and where necessary treatment and accommodation.
In other cases the client has become involved in the criminal justice system while under the guardianship of the Public Guardian.
In these matters the guardian’s role has been to ensure that all appropriate procedures are in place and services are available.
The need for safeguards.
It was submitted to the Commission that safeguards should be implemented to ensure that the appointment of a guardian is: “a
last resort to be used only after real efforts have been made to assist the person to understand the proceedings and instruct their
solicitor or barrister.”
This acknowledges that the appointment of a guardian has the effect of depriving a client of autonomy:
many clients will find this to be an invasion of their rights and therefore it should not be done unless more informal methods have
been tried first. Many people with intellectual disabilities want to have control over their own lives and are willing to accept
that this will mean that they may make mistakes. ...
It has been argued that:
it is preferable to cope with the ethical tension [between the duty to act on instructions and the client’s questionable capacity
to give them] rather than to adopt measures that may deprive people with an intellectual disability of any greater degree of personal
3.42 There is also a danger that the guardianship option will be adopted too readily as a substitute for the giving of the time and
support necessary to ensure that a client with an intellectual disability understands the relevant issues and options: “the
appointment of a
guardian ad litem
might be used any time a client has difficulty understanding the process”
and “may come to be used as a convenient mechanism for the smooth operation of the legal system rather than give due recognition
to the individual’s rights and independence.”
Such concerns are addressed to some extent by the existing safeguards in guardianship legislation.
Support person
3.43 In the absence of a guardian, there may be concern that the person with an intellectual disability is overly influenced by their
lawyer, and/or that their instructions are not being followed. Parents, friends or carers cannot always attend lawyer/client interviews,
particularly if the person is in custody. One submission, for instance, expressed concern that there is no independent monitoring
of legal services allotted to people with an intellectual disability and queried what could be done about this, for example whether
a parent or advocate should always attend interviews.
Additionally, a person, whether the accused or a witness, may not require a guardian but may require assistance in understanding
3.44 One alternative, similar to that suggested for police questioning in the Commission’s Discussion Paper on Policing Issues,
is the attendance of a third person at lawyer/client interviews to monitor the interview and, if necessary, act as an interpreter
and support person. In a submission to the Commission, a lawyer working within the DPP stated:
I ... believe that it is extremely important to have a support person available to assist the person with the disability. It would
be of great benefit if legal personnel were able to access this ‘list of experts’ when interviewing victims.
The role could be filled by the support persons suggested in the Commission’s Discussion Paper on Policing Issues as appropriate
for police interviews.
3.45 Difficulties involved in the use of a support person include:
a friend or family member may be biased or unable to remain neutral and dispassionate, and so may inhibit or distort communication;
some people with an intellectual disability lack suitable or interested family representatives, but the use of a government worker
may be inappropriate owing to a possible conflict of interest;
as for police interviews, there needs to be some provision for people without an appropriate support person. The use of a judicially
appointed person may be more appropriate,
but this raises issues of resource and training levels;
unlike the police interview, the lawyer/client interview is not interrogatory, and may present difficulties such as conflict between
the client and support person as to the client’s best interests, and influence by the support person; and
the possibility that the support person may also be called by the other party at trial.
3.46 One area of concern in relation to the use of a support person is whether the client can rely on legal professional privilege
to resist disclosure by the support person of the content of the lawyer/client interview. The rationale behind the protection from
disclosure offered by legal professional privilege is that confidentiality encourages clients to seek the advice of the lawyer and
to give a full and frank disclosure of the circumstances of their case, thereby enhancing the administration of justice and hence
the public interest generally.
The two areas where concerns about privilege may arise are the lawyer/client interview itself, and conversations between the client
and the support person outside of the lawyer/client interview.
3.47 In relation to the lawyer/client interview, the support person could be viewed as an interpreter; as an integral part of the
interview process itself. The High Court has referred to an interpreter as a “translating machine”, the accuracy of which
could be verified; and hence the interpreters words are admissible as if they were the words of the accused.
Difficulties arise where matters relevant to an offence or trial are communicated by the person with an intellectual disability to
the support person outside of the lawyer/client interview. The client may make an admission, or clarify what had been said earlier
to the lawyer. In a Federal Court case Pincus J considered that material gathered by a solicitor or a client in preparation for litigation
is privileged in the same way as if it was a communication between solicitor and client:
the existence of the relevant privilege does not depend upon there being any relevant communication in fact between the solicitor
and client or persons acting on their behalf. ... [T]he relevant rules may, in the end, be held to be more soundly based on a separate
and narrower principle [than that enunciated in
Grant v Downs
and other Australian authorities], namely that a party is not in general bound to reveal to the court statements taken from witnesses
and the like for the purposes of litigation.
It could be argued that this principle may extend to conversations between the accused and the support person, outside of the interview
context, on matters relevant to the pending litigation. However, it may be difficult to identify at what point exactly the role of
the support person ends for the purposes of privilege.
3.48 In the Discussion Paper on Policing Issues,
the Commission proposed that the support person in police interviews should be a competent but not compellable witness in respect
of any hearing relating to the conduct and content of the interview. However, the nature of lawyer/client communications is fundamentally
different to that of the police/suspect interview, and it would be inappropriate to give to the support person the discretion of
testifying in relation to the content of a lawyer/client interview. Consequently, the Commission considers that a person with an
intellectual disability should be able to rely on legal professional privilege to bar disclosure, by a support person present at
a client/lawyer interview, of the
of that interview. It may also be appropriate to extend that privilege to cover any communication by a person with an intellectual
disability to the support person, where that communication has a direct relevance to the offence or the litigation arising from it.
Given that it is unclear whether the law on legal professional privilege would provide the protection envisaged, a statutory privilege
may be appropriate. The role of the support person at the trial is considered in Chapter 7.
SPECIALIST LEGAL SERVICES
3.49 One of the Commission’s terms of reference was to consider whether “specialist units should be established within
the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Legal Aid Commission ... and other related bodies” to consider intellectual
disability issues. The Commission sought submissions on what special procedures presently operate, and whether specialist units should
be established.
This section examines specialist legal services.
Existing legal specialist units
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
3.50 As stated in the Issues Paper,
the DPP does not have a specialist unit, but has internal practice directions on the management of matters involving people with
an intellectual disability, whether as a witness or an accused. All matters in which, before arraignment, the accused’s fitness
to be tried becomes an issue are forwarded to the Director with appropriate documentation. Also, the Deputy Solicitor (Legal) must
be notified within two days of any matter in which fitness is an issue, and is thereafter kept informed of further developments.
The DPP has provided its solicitors and Crown Prosecutors with internal training programs on these procedures and intellectual disability.
In its submission, the DPP stated that under existing procedures “matters involving the intellectually disabled are given special
emphasis and are closely monitored at a senior management level.” It further commented:
... given the relatively small number of special hearings and fitness to plead cases (8 special hearings and 21 fitness to plead matters
since November 1990) compared with the number of trials disposed of annually by my Office (3552 for the 1990-91 financial year) ...
the creation of a specialist unit is not warranted. Rather ... these matters can be adequately dealt with by good management practice
to ensure that they are treated with the due sensitivity and priority they require. To date, the practices developed in this Office
have ensured that these matters have been appropriately dealt with.
Also, it was argued that the establishment of a specialist unit would require extra staff, and so have funding implications.
3.51 The role of a specialist unit within the DPP could extend beyond monitoring cases involving a person with an intellectual disability.
For example, the unit may serve as a source of advice and assistance to DPP solicitors, police prosecutors and police, on issues
relevant to particular cases. Also, it may formulate policy and training initiatives. A submission to the Commission outlined a case
which illustrated how prosecutors may lack an appreciation of intellectual disability issues, and how this may impact negatively
on victims and witnesses. In that case it was submitted that the Crown Prosecutor:
lacked sensitivity, compassion and understanding of the victim’s position. Additionally his knowledge of the case (just one
week prior to the scheduled trial date) was extremely limited and required continual prompting from the detective present. ... I
feel it is vital that the [DPP] develop a network of staff who have an interest in and ability to relate to people with an intellectual
disability and the area of sexual assault.
The Commission would be interested in any comments or experiences relating to the treatment of intellectual disability issues by the
Legal Aid Commission of NSW
3.52 The Legal Aid Commission of NSW does not have a specialist intellectual disability unit. The Legal Aid Commission’s Mental
Health Advocacy Service (“MHAS”) provides assistance in mental health matters, including assistance to “forensic
of which approximately 3-5% have been identified as having an intellectual disability.
It has been suggested that the numbers of clients of the MHAS with an intellectual disability is increasing.
MHAS solicitors represent forensic patients at Mental Health Review Tribunal hearings. The majority of “fitness to be tried”
cases are not dealt with by the MHAS, but by solicitors at the Legal Aid Commission. In relation to fitness matters it has been stated
[t]his is a particularly complicated area of law. It requires specialist knowledge and expertise in resolving the issues and ensuring
that an accused person who is intellectually disabled, or a witness testifying in a matter who is intellectually disabled, is properly
advised of his or her rights and is properly represented. Solicitors should be given specialist training so that they are better
able to understand the special needs of the intellectually disabled. To that end, the establishment of specialist units may be appropriate.
3.53 Like the DPP, the Legal Aid Commission considers that “the number of people with an intellectual disability moving through
the justice system probably does not justify the establishment of a further specialist section.”
Rather, as discussed before, it includes intellectual disability issues in its continuing legal education programs, believing that
continuing legal education is better able than a specialist unit to “enhance the skills of a greater number of legal practitioners
within the criminal and other areas of the law.”
The Commission would be interested in any comments or experiences relating to the treatment of intellectual disability issues by
the Legal Aid Commission.
“Other related bodies”
3.54 Specialist units within “other related bodies”, such as the Public Defenders, the Law Society and the Bar Association
do not exist but their usefulness should be considered further. Some possible functions they could perform include: developing and
promoting professional guidelines; formulating educative material on legal and intellectual disability issues; providing information
to lawyers; and providing information about lawyers specialising in the area of intellectual disability.
Advantages and disadvantages of specialist units
3.55 Before assessing the relative advantages and disadvantages of a specialist legal unit, the scope of its activities needs to be
identified, for instance should such a unit be a policy unit, or rather a group of specialist practitioners? The Law Society of
New South Wales, while suggesting that the extent of the problem does not justify the creation of specialist units, saw merit in
the establishment of intellectual disability
units in the relevant organisations.
Apart from a policy role, some other possible functions of specialist intellectual disability units were suggested in submissions
to the Commission, namely to: provide legal advice/advocacy; monitor the efficiency and responsiveness of available services, as
well as assisting people to access them; provide community and professional education and training; and act as a point of contact
for, and interaction between, various professional organisations and service providers.
3.56 Many submissions to the Commission referred to the need for specialist units.
The advantages of creating specialist legal units include:
formalised access to, and increased interaction with, psychologists, advocacy services and counselling services;
improved access to services by people with an intellectual disability who come into contact with the criminal justice system;
greater continuity of personnel in matters involving a person with an intellectual disability (as suspect, witness or victim); and
greater accuracy in the identification of intellectual disability, liaison with carers and service providers, and advice and training
for other people within the respective services.
Disadvantages
3.57 Other submissions have not supported units,
or have recognised their disadvantages, including:
resources would be more appropriately spent on training general personnel,
as the person has to be recognised as having an intellectual disability before he or she is referred to such units;
specialist units may result in an increase in bureaucratic complexity to the detriment of services generally, which could more easily
and economically be improved through increased co-operation between service providers and the criminal justice system;
specialist units may lead to a reduction in the availability and diversity of legal services for people with an intellectual disability
throughout the State,
and may, if people with an intellectual disability were exclusively dealt with by such units, further stigmatise such people and
alienate them from mainstream services;
specialist units may suggest to criminal justice personnel generally that they no longer have a responsibility in matters involving
intellectual disability.
Additionally, matters involving people with an intellectual disability fall across various jurisdictions and legal areas, and so do
not lend themselves practicably to specialisation.
Alternatives to special units
Intellectual disability liaison officers
3.58 An alternative to establishing specialist units is for criminal justice agencies to allocate current legal staff, presumably
with a particular interest in this area, to perform the administrative, advocacy, educative, and advisory roles outlined above as
part of their general duties. Advantages of such an approach include providing established contact points, developing expertise and
encouraging continuity of legal representation, without restricting personnel to an area of possibly fluctuating demand. In other
words, resources would be employed only as necessary. Further, limited specialisation would not be seen as a substitute for general
staff education on intellectual disability issues. Such specialist staff could be located, if necessary, in different areas of the
organisation. By also performing general duties, they would remain responsive to the needs of the organisation. The workload, placement
and numbers of such officers would be a matter for the relevant organisation, considering the level of demand.
3.59 There are also disadvantages in such an individual-based approach, rather than a unit-based approach. For example: the difficulty
of finding appropriate staff to undertake specialisation in a demanding area; the loss, or imbalance, of expertise when the specialist
staff leave; and the need for specialists to acquire proficiency in diverse areas, such as advocacy, policy, and staff training while
meeting other competing demands from their general duties. Despite these disadvantages, however, the Commission considers that this
idea has merit, as it represents a compromise between, on the one hand, an absence of specialist services, and, on the other, concerns
over funding and over-specialisation. The Commission therefore proposes that specialist intellectual disability liaison officers
be established within the DPP and the Legal Aid Commission of NSW, rather than specialist units.
Independent unit
3.60 The other option which must be considered (in addition to the need for specialist personnel within the different criminal justice
agencies) is the establishment of a single independent body for access by all agencies. This option is considered further in Chapter
13, see paras 13.48-13.49.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
2. That the Law Society of New South Wales and the NSW Bar Association:
(a) develop and distribute to all solicitors/barristers in New South Wales a short summary of intellectual disability issues with
appropriate contact numbers; and
(b) ensure that their respective practice notes, manuals, and Codes/Rules refer to intellectual disability issues, and provide guidelines
for lawyers with a client with an intellectual disability. The issues covered should include:
(i) identifying intellectual disability, acquiring further psychological or psychiatric assessments, interviewing the client with
an intellectual disability, and the importance of continuity of personnel in legal representation;
(ii) ascertaining and pursuing the interests of the client with an intellectual disability in a way which maximises client autonomy.
Guidelines should provide lawyers with a set of options (graded according to the circumstances of the individual case) and information
on obtaining assistance; and
(iii) information about guardianship and people with an intellectual disability, with emphasis on what matters should be considered,
and measures taken, before the making of an application for guardianship is appropriate.
3. That intellectual disability issues be considered in: law school curricula; the educational requirements for admission to practice
(especially the College of Law, and reading for the Bar); courses satisfying the requirements of Mandatory Continuing Legal Education;
and in-house training for law firms and relevant government agencies (such as the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
New South Wales and the Legal Aid Commission of NSW).
4. That the Judicial Commission of New South Wales:
(a) commission research into intellectual disability issues including the incidence of intellectual disability, the judiciary’s
knowledge of and attitudes towards intellectual disability, trends in the sentencing and diversion of offenders with an intellectual
disability, and the effect upon case dispositions of the availability of intellectual disability services; and
(b) develop, with appropriate expert assistance, manuals, written/video/computerised educative materials dealing with intellectual
disability issues (both generally and in the context of the criminal justice system in particular), and seminars/programs involving
first hand contact by judges and magistrates with people with an intellectual disability.
5. That the New South Wales Department of Courts Administration develop courses/information on intellectual disability issues for
court personnel, and that such issues be included in training courses and on-going employee education.
6. That the New South Wales Department of Community Services, with the co-operation of police, lawyers, criminal justice system agencies,
the New South Wales Department of Education, and any other interested organisation (such as the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual
Disability Rights Service), fund and develop programs of legal education for people with an intellectual disability and their carers.
7. That a support person be able to attend the lawyer/client interview, but only at the request, or with the consent, of the client
with an intellectual disability. The person’s role is to be supportive of the person with an intellectual disability, to interpret
if necessary, and to ensure that the client’s wishes are being recognised and implemented by the lawyer. A support person should
be familiar with, and trusted by, the person with an intellectual disability, for example a family member, advocate or carer. Care
should be taken that the person is not favourably or unfavourably biased in relation to the interests of the client. Where such a
person is unavailable or unwilling to participate, the support person should be a crisis advocate provided by either the New South
Wales Department of Community Services or a non-governmental organisation. If possible, the support person should not otherwise be
connected with the trial, for example, a potential witness. The support person should be precluded by law from giving evidence in
respect of any matter relating to the content of the lawyer/client interview, unless the client otherwise consents. As it is not
clear whether such protection would be offered by legal professional privilege, a statutory privilege may be appropriate.
8. That government legal services develop and implement a policy that, to the extent practicable, the same lawyer have the carriage
of a matter involving a person with an intellectual disability as a suspect, witness or victim. As continuity will not always be
possible, a case manager from the New South Wales Department of Community Services should be appointed and be available if required
to assist the client in the criminal process.
9. That the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, New South Wales and the Legal Aid Commission of NSW establish intellectual
disability liaison officers. In addition to their general duties, such officers should have responsibility for and or input into:
(a) developing and implementing policy, guidelines, and education for all personnel within the particular institution;
(b) interacting with other specialist bodies and institutions to ensure that people with an intellectual disability are advised about,
and exposed to, available services;
(c) maintaining expertise in legal and policy developments involving intellectual disability, so as to provide expert assistance and
information on intellectual disability issues to persons within and outside the particular organisation, for example, to private
solicitors; and
(d) acting as a contact and referral point for their organisation, the legal profession, government bodies and the public.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. J McAfee and M Gural “Individuals with mental retardation and the criminal justice system: the view from the State Attorneys-General”
Mental Retardation
5-12, cited in New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances Before Local Courts
(Research Report 4, 1993) at para 4.15.
. Associate Professor L Gething, Community Disability and Ageing Program, University of Sydney
(5 July 1992).
. L Gething
Attitudes Towards People with an Intellectual Disability of Professionals within the Judicial System
(Report compiled for the New South Wales Law Reform Commission, Community Disability and Ageing Program, University of Sydney, 14
September 1992) at 2. This preliminary report relied upon information taken from the computerised database for the Interaction with
Disabled Persons Scale, which is the only widely validated Australian instrument designed to measure community and professional attitudes
towards people with disabilities.
. Gething (1992) at 10.
. See R Jackson, J Cockram and R Underwood “Intellectual disability and the law: noticing the negative and ignoring the obvious”,
paper presented at the Disability Discrimination and Justice Conference (Griffith University, Queensland, 30 November-2 December
1992). The study was based upon both an interview and subsequent questionnaire, involving 20 service workers, 22 police officers,
and 19 members of the judiciary. See also J Cockram, R Jackson, and R Underwood “Perceptions of the judiciary and intellectual
disability” (1992) 18
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities
. Queensland. Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 3.
. Community Living Programme Inc
(7 February 1994).
. T Russell and C A Bryant “The effects of a lecture training program and independent study on the knowledge and attitudes of
law students toward the mentally retarded offender” (1987) 11
Journal of Offender Counselling, Services and Rehabilitation
53 at 55-56 citing:
Atlanta Association for Retarded Citizens
A Study of Georgia’s Criminal Justice System as it Relates to the Mentally Retarded
(Atlanta, GA, 1975): 28% of lawyers and 23% of judges surveyed had received some type of training, while 80% and 90% respectively
had contact with people with an intellectual disability; and
Analysis of the Criminal Justice Personnel’s (Police, Lawyers, Judges) Understanding of Mental Retardation and of the Mentally
Retarded Offender
(ERIC Document Reproduction No ED 155 855): of 100 police officers, 75 lawyers and 35 judges, 90.8% had no formal training in the
area of offenders with an intellectual disability.
9. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 2; Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 5; and Mr P Hutten
(8 November 1993) at 16.
. Meeting with the Illawarra Criminal Justice Sub-Committee (2 March 1992); and Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights
(16 October 1992) at 8. See also Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(28 January 1994) at 16; and ACT Council on Intellectual Disability
(20 July 1992) at 4-5.
. See, for example: Queensland. Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 3; Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 4; and Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 6.
. Responses in this area were received from The Flinders University of South Australia, Northern Territory University, Royal Melbourne
Institute of Technology, The University of New South Wales, The University of Queensland, and The University of Sydney.
. Russell and Bryant at 65.
. ACT Council on Intellectual Disability
(20 July 1992) at 4.
. Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 4; Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 8; Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(8 January 1992) at 3; The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 8; South Australia. Court Services Department
(11 August 1992) at 1-2; Illawarra Disabled Persons’ Trust
(10 August 1992) at 4; ACT Council on Intellectual Disability
(20 July 1992) at 4; and Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(28 January 1994) at 16.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 8.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 8.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(28 January 1994) at 16.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 9; also Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(28 January 1994) at 19.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 3.
. Judicial Commission of New South Wales
Annual Report 1992-1993
(Judicial Commission of NSW, Sydney, 1993).
. Australian Institute of Judicial Administration
Personal Communication
(7 February 1994).
. Western Australia. Committee (Justice R D Nicholson, Convenor)
Persons with an Intellectual Disability: Issues for Consideration of the Courts
(1 June 1993).
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 6.
. Senior Constable P Fernandez
(8 December 1991) at 36.
. Western Australia. Committee (Justice R D Nicholson, Convenor)
Persons with an Intellectual Disability: Guidelines for Associates, Orderlies and Security Officers
(1 June 1993).
. Provisional proposals for reform. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Consultations
(Research Report 3, 1993) at para 4.16.
. J London “Effective communication research report” (unpublished paper, Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability
Rights Service, Sydney, May 1992) at 12-15.
. See NSWLRC RR 3 at Appendix A.
. The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 2. However, it has been suggested that it may be more appropriate that education occur in community-based centres
rather than, for instance, places of employment, to ensure that there is no misapprehension about the voluntary nature of attendance:
Queensland. Department of Family and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 2.
. The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 2; New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 1-2; and Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 5.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 5.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 6.
Dietrich v R
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 109 ALR 385
the High Court stated (per Mason CJ, Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ; Brennan and Dawson JJ dissenting) that an indigent [poor]
accused charged with a serious criminal offence has no right to legal representation at public expense, but does have the right to
a fair trial; and so, except in exceptional circumstances, where a person is charged with a serious criminal offence but is without
legal representation, and the subsequent trial is for that reason unfair, any conviction represents a miscarriage of justice and
must be quashed by an appellate court.
. New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research
New South Wales Criminal Courts Statistics 1993
(Attorney General’s Department, 1994) Table 1.4.
. Compare T Vinson and R Homel “Legal representation and outcome: a progress report on the relation between legal representation
and the findings of courts of petty sessions throughout New South Wales”
Australian Law Journal
at 133; and P Cashman “Representation in criminal cases” in J Basten, M Richardson and G Zdenkowski
The Criminal Injustice System
(Australian Legal Workers Group (NSW), Sydney, 1982) 195 at 208.
. ACT Council on Intellectual Disability
(20 July 1992) at 4.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
(Discussion Paper 29, 1993) at ch 3.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 7 [footnote references omitted]; also consultation with solicitors from the Legal
Aid Commission of NSW (17 March 1994).
. NSWLRC DP 29 at para 3.2.
. A list of these indicators is set out in Ierace (1989) at 8-9.
. M Ierace “Intellectually Disabled People and the Law”, paper presented at
Criminal Law Seminar
(New South Wales Attorney-General’s Department, Sydney, 7 July 1993) at 2-3 [footnote references omitted].
. Ierace (1989) at 8.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 2.
. Ierace (1989) at 8-9. R J Bonnie “The competency of defendants with mental retardation to assist in their own defense”
in R W Conley, R Luckasson and G N Bouthilet (eds)
The Criminal Justice System and Mental Retardation: Defendants and Victims
(Paul H Brookes Publishing Co, Baltimore, 1992) at 100.
. Bonnie at 98-99.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 4; consultation with solicitors from the Legal Aid Commission of NSW on 17 March 1994.
. Consultation with solicitors from the Legal Aid Commission of NSW on 17 March 1994.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 2.
. Mr P Hutten
(17 June 1994) at 28-29.
. Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 5.
. Ms J Lannen, Solicitor, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, New South Wales
(23 December 1993) at 2.
. See Ierace (1989) especially ch 2.
. Ierace (1989) at 9-10; M Scannell “Acting for a client with an intellectual disability: how to provide the best service”
paper presented at 1992 National Community Legal Centres Conference (Canberra, 1992) at 5-7; D Feben
The Right to be Heard: Obtaining Evidence from Intellectually Disabled People
(Office of the Public Advocate, Melbourne, 1988) at 18-66 ; NSWLRC DP 29 at para 6.5.
. Ierace (1989) at 9.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at para 4.25. See also Scannell at 5.
. South Australia. Court Services Department
(11 August 1992) at 2.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at para 4.30-4.31; Ierace (1989) at 9.
. Scannell at 6.
Confidential Submission
(24 July 1992) at 3.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 3.
. Ierace (1989) at 9.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at para 3.15-3.16.
. Queensland. Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 3.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 7; Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 8.
. Mr P Hutten
(6 January 1992) at 2.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 7.
. NSWLRC RR 3; Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 4.
. Mr P Hutten
(6 January 1992) at 8 and (14 July 1992) at 6-7.
. Consultation with solicitors from the Legal Aid Commission on 17 March 1994.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 2-3.
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 187-188.
. R J Uphoff “The role of the criminal defense lawyer in representing the mentally impaired defendant: zealous advocate or officer
of the court?”
Wisconsin Law Review
at 67. See also N H Mickenberg “The silent clients: legal and ethical considerations in representing severely and profoundly
retarded individuals”
Stanford Law Review
at 627; and M B Santamour and B West
Retardation and Criminal Justice: A Training Manual for Criminal Justice Personnel
(President’s Committee on Mental Retardation, Washington DC, 1979) at 41.
. See also Hayes and Craddock at 96-97, where the authors point out that the requirement in s 12(2) of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) that fitness proceedings not be conducted in an adversarial manner, raises the prospect that the lawyer may be required
to disclose information which is relevant to the accused’s fitness which is likely to lead to the accused’s incarceration
- an action in breach of duties under the Bar Rules.
. Bonnie at 112 [emphasis in original].
. P R Tremblay “On persuasion and paternalism: lawyer decision-making and the questionably competent client”
Utah Law Review
at 519-520.
. See for example American Bar Association
Model Rules of Professional Conduct and Code of Judicial Conduct
(August 1984) at Rule 1.14; American Bar Association
Model Code of Professional Responsibility and Code of Judicial Conduct
(August 1980) at EC 7-11, EC 7-12.
Gray v Pearson
(1870) LR 5 CP 568.
Supreme Court Rules
District Court Rules
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Rules
Family Law Act
(Cth) s 65.
Children (Care and Protection) Act
(NSW) s 66.
Supreme Court Rules
Family Law Rules
1984 (Cth) Or 23 r 6.
Haines v Leves
(1987) 8 NSWLR 442
at 449 per Street CJ.
Guardianship Act
(NSW). Such an application can be made by a person seeking guardianship, an individual responsible for that person, the Public Guardian,
or any other individual who in the opinion of the Board has genuine concern for the person’s welfare:
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 10.
Sentencing Act
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(8 January 1992) at 4.
. New South Wales. Office of the Public Guardian
(26 August 1992) at 1.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 8.
. Scannell at 8.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 3.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 8.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 8.
. See Mr G Breheny
Oral Submission
(23 February 1993).
. NSWLRC DP 29 at para 6.9-6.37.
. Ms J Lannen, Solicitor, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, New South Wales
(23 December 1993) at 2.
. Bonnie at 100.
Grant v Downs
[1976] HCA 63
(1976) 135 CLR 674
at 685 per Stephen, Mason and Murphy JJ.
[1960] HCA 70
(1960) 104 CLR 419
, see Kitto J at 431.
Dingle v Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia
(1989) 91 ALR 239
. NSWLRC DP 29 para 6.37.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper 8, 1992) at para 7.13.
. NSWLRC IP 8 at para 7.3.
. New South Wales. Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
(March 1992) at 1.
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 13-15.
. Forensic patients include: persons detained in a hospital, prison or other place under the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW), persons detained in a hospital pending committal for trial, and persons transferred to a hospital while serving a sentence
of imprisonment. The definition is found in Schedule 1 of the
Mental Health Act
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(8 January 1992) at 1. As at October 1991 there were 86 forensic patients in New South Wales. For further details see R Hayes,
M Sterry, T Ovadia, B Boerma and W A Greer “A profile of forensic patients in New South Wales and an assessment of the role
of the Mental Health Review Tribunal in effecting their release” in S Gerull and W Lucas (eds)
Serious Violent Offenders: Sentencing, Psychiatry, and Law Reform
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Conference Proceedings 19, Canberra, 1993).
. Consultation with the Mental Health Review Tribunal and the Mental Health Advocacy Service on 11 March 1994.
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper, 1991) at 12.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 8.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(8 January 1992) at 3.
. The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 5.
. New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of Community Services], Office on Disability
(26 November 1991) at 3; Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 4, 7; Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 12; and New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 6.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 4, 6; National Council on Intellectual Disability
(18 December 1991) at 2; The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 9; New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of Community Services], Office
on Disability
(26 November 1991) at 3; Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 3, 6; and
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 15.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 9.
. New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of Community Services], Office on Disability
(26 November 1991) at 3.
. Senior Constable P Fernandez
(8 December 1991) at 40.
. For example, Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 7-8.
. Ms S E Maxwell, Solicitor, Legal Aid Commission
(3 December 1991) at 2; Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 4.
. Associate Professor S C Hayes
(6 November 1991).
. Western Australia. Department of Corrective Services
(19 November 1991) at 7.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(8 January 1992) at 3; Queensland. Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 6.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 5.
. National Council on Intellectual Disability
(18 December 1991) at 2.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 7.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
4. Fitness to be Tried - Supreme and District Courts
History of this Reference (Digest)
OVERVIEW - APPEARING IN COURT
4.1 Chapters 4-10 of the Discussion Paper discuss the legal, procedural and practical problems faced by people with an intellectual
disability, when they come into contact with the court system, whether as a defendant, a witness, or a victim. The issues are covered
as follows:
Chapters 4 and 5: the fitness of an accused to be tried, and the use of diversionary procedures in the Local Courts.
Chapter 6: the competency of a witness to give evidence.
Chapter 7: if a witness is competent, whether special procedures should be available to assist the witness to give evidence.
Chapter 8: the reliability of the evidence of a person with an intellectual disability, whether as the accused or a witness, including
consideration of confessions, corroboration, and the evidence of expert witnesses.
Chapter 9: the use of specific sexual offences where the victim has an intellectual disability, and victim compensation.
Chapter 10: the availability to the accused with an intellectual disability of criminal defences.
FITNESS: AN INTRODUCTION
4.2 One of the first issues facing an accused person with an intellectual disability is his or her fitness to be tried by a court.
Under the common law an offender must be “fit to be tried”, that is, capable of participating in the court process, before
he or she can be dealt with by a criminal court.
It is not an accused’s fitness at the time of the offence which is relevant, but at the time of the trial. Intellectual disability
is one of many factors which may affect a person’s ability to comprehend the court process, to give instructions to lawyers
and to give evidence in court. Other such factors include age, mental illness and some physical disabilities. The current regime
for dealing with fitness to be tried in New South Wales came into operation on 22 August 1986 as a parcel of amendments to the
(NSW) and the enactment of part of the
Mental Health Act
1983 (NSW). The New South Wales Mental Health Review Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) was also established in 1986 to provide,
amongst other things, expert assistance to the courts in this area. Although the regime is largely unchanged, following the repeal
Mental Health Act
1983 (NSW) and amendments to the
it is now governed by the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) (the “MHCP Act”) and the
Mental Health Act
(NSW), which both came into force on 3 September 1990. The two Acts contain a complex series of procedures to attempt to deal fairly
with the accused’s possible unfitness.
4.3 The number of cases involving fitness hearings is relatively small: the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions was involved
in only 8 special hearings and 21 fitness to plead matters in the period from November 1990 to March 1992, compared to 3552 trials
disposed of in the 1990-91 financial year.
Between April 1992 and 16 March 1994 there were 64 fitness hearings and only four requests for special hearings.
It is likely, however, that the issue of fitness is not identified or raised in every case where it is appropriate,
particularly when defendants plead guilty.
The procedure to be followed in such cases differs depending on whether the matter is to be heard in the Local Courts (see Chapter
5) or alternatively in either the Supreme or District Courts. The procedures used in both the Supreme and District Courts form the
subject of this chapter.
What makes a person fit to be tried?
4.4 The new statutory regime does not define fitness to be tried, so the courts must rely on the common (or judge-made) law. The rationale
for questioning a person’s fitness to be tried is fairness to the accused, though case law does not specifically refer to fairness.
One of the most often quoted cases in relation to what comprises fitness to be tried is
R v Presser
, where Smith J of the Victorian Supreme Court set out a list of “minimum standards” to demonstrate the accused’s
fitness, though he commented that the test should be applied in a “reasonable and commonsense fashion”.
These can be summarised as the ability of the accused:
to understand what s/he is charged with;
to plead to the charge and to exercise his/her right of challenge to jurors;
to understand generally the nature of the proceedings;
to follow what is going on in court in a general sense (though not necessarily the purpose of court formalities) and to understand
the substantial effect of any evidence given against him/her; and
to decide what defence s/he will rely upon, and make this and his/her version of facts known to the court and his/her counsel. (The
accused need not, however, understand court procedure and need not have the mental capacity to make an able defence.)
However, it is unclear whether
these requirements need to be established before the accused is found fit.
test was endorsed by the Victorian Law Reform Commission.
However, some bodies have expressed their concerns about the practical application of the test as it affects people with an intellectual
disability, for instance the Victorian Intellectual Disability Review Panel (the “Review Panel”). The Review Panel referred
the possible danger of too readily dismissing the person’s capacity to comprehend, and ... the subjective nature of determining
the extent to which the person may satisfy the Presser criteria. It also fails to consider that the person may benefit from assistance
or tutoring, in order to better understand the proceedings. Recommendations by experts as to whether a person meets the Presser rule
are often made too simplistically and quickly judged in a single interview. A person may satisfy some criteria but not others and
subjective judgements are made by expert witnesses as to the degree to which a person satisfies each of the criteria. Full and thorough
assessments of a person’s cognitive ability, memory, comprehension etc, should be undertaken. Furthermore, the person’s
prior knowledge and experience of court proceedings is also relevant and basic tutoring should be provided prior to a recommendation
being made as to the person’s fitness to plead.
4.6 The Review Panel commented that, because of the enormous implications of a finding of unfitness for a person with an intellectual
disability, greater caution in its interpretation was required:
[t]he person should be given every opportunity, both pre-trial and during trial to improve their understanding of key concepts so
as to maximise their ability to meet the Presser criteria at a common sense level. This may include Courts allowing advocates to
assist the person with an intellectual disability
in understanding
the discussion and arguments during the Court proceedings.
Evidence led about unfitness to plead should be carefully examined (and cross-examined, if necessary) before being accepted by courts.
In order to overcome the general ignorance by professionals on issues related to intellectual disability, it is also suggested that
assessments provided to the courts by expert witnesses such as psychiatrists and psychologists, should be conducted only by those
who have the relevant knowledge and expertise in the area of intellectual disability.
[emphasis in original]
4.7 The President of the New South Wales Tribunal, when asked for his comments on this proposal, rejected the idea of recommending
the “instruction” of an accused person with an intellectual disability about court processes. He commented that:
[s]uch instructional programmes would have only short term goals, and might interrupt, or distract from the kinds of long term programmes
that need to be put in place for the education and training of intellectually disabled people who have fallen foul of the criminal
justice system.
It has also been stated that special instruction was an inappropriate solution because:
it takes the proceedings quite out of context. It would be unjust to try a person for an offence in circumstances where he or she,
by reason of special coaching, has a limited understanding of the proceedings but little else.
PROCEEDINGS IN THE SUPREME AND DISTRICT COURTS
Overview of the procedure
Who can raise fitness and when?
4.8 For criminal proceedings in the Supreme and District Courts, any party to the proceedings or the Court can raise the issue of
the accused’s fitness.
The question of a person’s fitness can be raised at any time during the course of the hearing but preferably is to be raised
before the person is arraigned.
If raised before arraignment, the Attorney General must determine whether an inquiry should be conducted into a person’s fitness
to be tried prior to the hearing,
or, if the question is raised after the person is arraigned, the Court must hear submissions, in the absence of the jury, about whether
there should be such an inquiry.
If the Attorney General has determined that an inquiry should be conducted, or the question of unfitness is raised in good faith
after arraignment, the Court must hold a fitness inquiry.
Before such an inquiry is carried out the Court may make any appropriate orders, including either granting the person bail or remanding
the person in custody, or requiring psychiatric examinations or reports.
The fitness inquiry is carried out by the Court either with a judge sitting alone or with a jury constituted for that purpose.
Appendix B, Table 2 provides a flow chart of these procedures.
If found fit/unfit to be tried by the court?
4.9 If the defendant is found fit to be tried, criminal proceedings may re-commence or continue.
If a jury has been used to determine fitness, a new jury will need to be empanelled.
If found unfit to be tried, the person is referred to the Tribunal,
which must determine (which determination is, for convenience, referred to in this chapter as the “initial determination”)
whether, on the balance of probabilities, the person will become fit to be tried during the period of 12 months after the finding
of unfitness.
The Mental Health Review Tribunal
4.10 The Tribunal makes or reviews a variety of orders and decisions affecting people with mental illnesses or mental disorders. It
also makes determinations and recommendations to government affecting people, including people with an intellectual disability, known
as “forensic patients”. Such patients include people found unfit to be tried by a court, people found not guilty on the
ground of mental illness (see Chapter 10), or those who have become mentally ill while in prison and have therefore been transferred
to a psychiatric hospital. The Tribunal consists of both full time and part time members, including lawyers, psychiatrists and other
suitably qualified or experienced persons.
When exercising its functions in relation to forensic patients, the Tribunal meets as a three person panel consisting of the President
or Deputy President, a psychiatrist and “a member (not being a psychiatrist or a barrister or solicitor) who has other suitable
qualifications or experience.”
Its meetings are to be conducted as informally as possible and it is not bound by the rules of evidence.
Proceedings of the Tribunal are open to the public except in cases where an objection made by one of the parties to the proceedings
is upheld by the Tribunal.
Determination by the Tribunal that the person will become fit to be tried within 12 months
Given that intellectual disability is a permanent condition, it is unlikely that a person with an intellectual disability will become
fit to be tried within the year. People with some forms of mental illness, however, may do so and a person with an intellectual disability
may also have a mental illness which impairs his or her understanding and may become fit when the mental illness is treated. If the
Tribunal determines at the initial determination that the person
become fit to be tried within 12 months, the Tribunal also must determine whether the person is suffering from a mental illness or
a mental condition for which treatment is available in a hospital.
The Court is then notified of the Tribunal’s findings and may make a number of orders in relation to that person, including
release on bail or detention for up to 12 months in a hospital or “other place”.
If the person is detained, he or she becomes a “forensic patient”,
and the Tribunal must review the person’s case again as soon as possible and determine whether in its opinion:
(a) the person has become fit to be tried for an offence; and
(b) the safety of the person or any member of the public will be seriously endangered by the person’s release.
If at this or subsequent reviews during the 12 month period the Tribunal is of the opinion that the person has become fit to be tried,
it must notify the Attorney General.
The Attorney General then either advises the Court that no further proceedings will be taken, and the person is released after certain
notification requirements are fulfilled, or requests the Court to hold a further inquiry about the accused’s fitness.
Appendix B, Table 4 provides a flow chart of these procedures. Section 29(1) of the MHCP Act requires the Attorney General to consult
with the Director of Public Prosecutions (“DPP”) before the Attorney advises the Court. The Attorney General’s
Issues Paper queried whether this required a “face to face” meeting or not, and suggested this section be clarified to
allow for written consultation.
4.12 If at subsequent reviews during the 12 month period the Tribunal still finds the person
has not become fit to be tried
and is satisfied that the safety of the person or any member of the public will not be seriously endangered by the person’s
release, the Tribunal must make a recommendation to the Minister for Health for the person’s release.
The Tribunal does not have the power itself to order the release of the person. The Minister must then notify the Attorney General
and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The DPP has 21 days to advise the Attorney General whether criminal proceedings will be taken against the person.
At this point the Attorney General can object to the person’s release either because the person “has served insufficient
time in custody or under detention” or the DPP intends to proceed with criminal charges against the person.
If the Attorney General does not object, the Minister for Health
may release the person, though such release may be subject to conditions. Although one would think that the Tribunal is the most
appropriate body to determine what conditions are necessary, the Act is silent on this point. Breach of conditions can lead to arrest
and further detention.
Determination by the Tribunal that the person will not become fit to be tried within 12 months
4.13 If the Tribunal finds at the initial determination (when the matter is first referred to it by the court) that the person
be fit to be tried within 12 months, the Tribunal must notify the Attorney General.
The Attorney General can then either direct that a “special hearing” be held or decide not to proceed against that person.
In the latter case the person must be released.
Appendix B, Table 3 provides a flow chart of these procedures.
Special hearing.
A special hearing is conducted like a normal criminal trial before a judge and jury or, if the accused elects, by a judge sitting
alone. The verdicts available at the special hearing are:
(a) not guilty of the offence charged [in which case the person is released];
(b) not guilty on the ground of mental illness;
(c) that on the limited evidence available, the accused committed the offence charged;
(d) that on the limited evidence available, the accused person committed an offence available as an alternative to the offence charged.
If a finding of guilt “on the limited evidence available” is made at that special hearing (that is, verdicts (c) or (d)),
the Court must indicate the sentence it would have imposed if the special hearing had been a normal trial with a finding of guilt.
Such a sentence, if any, is referred to as a “limiting term”.
There is a right for an appeal from such a verdict.
After sentencing, the Court refers the person to the Tribunal which must then determine whether the person has a mental illness/mental
condition or not and notify the Court of its determination,
following which the Court can order that the person be detained in a hospital or “in a place other than a hospital.”
In practice, the only other alternative in New South Wales to a psychiatric hospital is gaol, even though this generally will be
inappropriate for a person who is unfit to be tried.
Release after the special hearing.
After the special hearing, the responsibility of the Tribunal continues for the person serving a limiting term, who is classified
as a “forensic patient”. As for persons found unfit to be tried and ordered to be detained (see para 4.11) the Tribunal
must, as soon as practicable, review the person’s case and determine whether:
(a) the person has become fit to be tried for an offence; and
(b) the safety of the person or any member of the public will be seriously endangered by the person’s release.
The procedure then is identical to that set out in para 4.12. In any event, release will be automatic at the end of the limiting term.
There is no power to detain the person beyond the limiting term. However if the person is a “mentally ill person” or
a “mentally disordered person” and a medical practitioner is satisfied that no other appropriate means for dealing with
a person are reasonably available, the person can be detained as an involuntary patient.
Review of convictions.
A peripheral issue which arises in relation to special hearings is the right of the person who is not fit to be tried and has a finding
of guilt made at a special hearing to apply for an inquiry into their conviction under the
(NSW). The New South Wales Attorney General’s Criminal Law Review Division released in November 1992 an Issues Paper reviewing
the operation of (what was then) s 475 of the
(NSW). That Paper noted that as the type of “conviction” required before an inquiry could be undertaken did not include
a determination of guilt at a special hearing under the MHCP Act,
an inquiry was not available to such a person. The Attorney General’s Issues Paper questioned whether an inquiry under s 475
should be available to people found unfit to be tried (including some people with an intellectual disability) who received a special
finding of guilt. The problem was overcome by the
Crimes Legislation (Review of Convictions) Amendment Act
1993 (NSW), which inserted a new Part 13A into the
, including a definition of “conviction” which includes “a verdict of the kind referred to in section 22(1)(c) or
(d)” of the MHCP Act.
Continuing review by the Tribunal of forensic patients
4.17 The Tribunal may, at any time, review the case of persons detained who were considered unfit to be tried and make a recommendation
for release to the Minister for Health. In any event, such a review (as for all forensic patients) must take place at least every
six months.
The Tribunal shall not make a recommendation for release: “unless it is satisfied, on the evidence available to it, that the
safety of the patient or any other member of the public will not be seriously endangered by the person’s release.”
As part of the regular six monthly review, the Tribunal must notify the Attorney General if a detained person has become fit to be
The Attorney General must then either request the Court to hold a further inquiry about the accused’s fitness or advise the
Minister for Health that no further proceedings will be taken and the Minister for Health must do all things in his or her power
to order the person’s release.
Difficulties with the legislation
4.18 As the description above suggests, the procedures involving unfitness are lengthy and complicated. It has been noted, however,
that the issue of a person with an intellectual disability’s fitness to be tried “is now being more systematically addressed,
particularly before the District Court, and by prosecuting authorities, than was the case prior to [the new procedures]”.
The Commission has therefore proposed that, as the existing procedures are relatively new, it is more appropriate at this stage to
consider how the identified difficulties may be overcome rather than to propose a fundamental change in the system. The Commission
welcomes submissions in this regard. One area where a fundamental change could be considered is the presumption of fitness. Under
the current system, the court has to consider not the accused’s fitness to be tried, but rather his or her unfitness. Thus
the jury or judge is not asked to determine whether the person is fit, but whether the person has been
shown to be unfit
. If the evidence is evenly balanced, the jury should find that the person is fit. It has been suggested to the Commission that it
would be more appropriate to have to find that a person is fit to be tried and that, where the evidence is evenly poised, the person
should be presumed to be
, not fit. There are policy arguments either way: some would argue that since the 1986 amendments a finding of unfitness is not as
onerous as it once was and that it is more inappropriate to try an unfit person than to find a fit person unfit, while others would
argue (which is supported by some of the difficulties outlined below) that a finding of unfitness should be avoided at all cost and
therefore the presumption should be one of fitness. The Commission does not make a proposal at this stage but seeks submissions whether
there are compelling reasons to reverse the presumption in this way.
4.19 Though this chapter will largely consider legislative difficulties, many difficulties faced by people with an intellectual disability
in the criminal justice system are not easily overcome by legislation. The President of the Tribunal commented:
the problems faced by [people with an intellectual disability] caught up within the processes of the Mental Health (Criminal Procedure)
Act arise not from the Act itself, but from the lack of adequate community placements and programmes, ignorance on the part of many
judges and lawyers about mental retardation, the slowness of the criminal justice system, and other factors which ultimately go to
resources, planning, and education. These matters are beyond the capacity of the legal system to change, and are ultimately matters
for government policy and public sector management.
Similarly, the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service (“IDRS”) also noted that while the ability
of the Tribunal to recommend early release is of potential benefit, “it is of little practical value if there are no services
available for the people with an intellectual disability outside of Corrective Services.”
These issues are discussed further in Chapter 13.
The distinction between intellectual disability and mental illness
4.20 One preliminary issue is the difficulty caused by the reference to “mental health” in the titles of the MHCP Act
and the Tribunal. Though this may seem a minor point, the MHCP Act and the Tribunal both affect people with an intellectual disability
as well as those with mental illness. To do so under the title of mental health adds to the continuing confusion between mental illness
and intellectual disability. In neither the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) nor the MHCP Act is intellectual disability (or “developmental disability of mind” as it is referred to) defined.
In fact, though the MHCP Act purports, in its Preamble, to deal with “criminal proceedings involving persons affected by mental
illness and other mental conditions”, the definition of “mental condition” in s 3 of the Act specifically excludes
“developmental disability of mind”.
4.21 This definitional point raises other questions, for instance:
[s]trictly speaking, consequent to the definition of “mental condition” ... the Mental Health Review Tribunal is not called
upon to make any determination in relation to services or “treatment” for an intellectually disabled forensic patient.
See sections 16(2)(b); 24(2)(b); 27. Indeed the Tribunal is not required to determine specifically whether the person has a “developmental
disability of mind”, although in fact it does do so ... . Guidance should be sought from the Tribunal as to whether it considers
that it should have a legislative power to this effect.
4.22 The Tribunal has not raised this point directly in submissions to the Commission, although its President did comment that he
did not believe that further statutory elaboration of the Tribunal’s role under s 16-17 was necessary.
The Commission suggests that to overcome the confusion in this area and to ensure that specific consideration is given to the needs
of the forensic patient with an intellectual disability, either “mental condition” needs to be re-defined, or a reference
to intellectual disability be inserted into the MHCP Act where appropriate. The Commission considers it inappropriate to redefine
“mental condition” to include “intellectual disability” as that is clearly not the intention of the Act and
it may continue the confusion between mental illness and intellectual disability. In Chapter 2, Proposal 1, the Commission suggested
that references to “developmental disability of mind” or “developmentally disabled” be replaced by “intellectual
disability”. It further proposes that reference to intellectual disability be specifically inserted in those sections which
refer to the Tribunal’s determination about the person’s mental illness or mental condition, namely s 16(2)(b), s 17(3)(b),
s 24(2)(b) and s 27.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
10. The following sections of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) should be amended to read:
16. (1) ...
(2) If the Tribunal determines that a person will, during the period of 12 months after the finding of unfitness, become fit to be
tried for an offence, the Tribunal must also determine whether or not:
(a) the person is suffering from a mental illness;
the person has an intellectual disability
(c) the person is suffering from a mental condition
17. (1) ...
(3) If the Tribunal has determined:
(b) that the person
has an intellectual disability and
is not suffering from a mental illness ... the Court may order that the person be detained in a place other than a hospital, for
a period not exceeding 12 months.
24. (1) ...
(2) If a Court refers a person to the Tribunal, the Tribunal must also determine whether or not:
(a) the person is suffering from a mental illness;
(b) the person has an intellectual disability; or
(c) the person is suffering from a mental condition ...
27. If a Court is notified by the Mental Health Review Tribunal of its determination in respect of a person under section 24(3), the
(b) if the Tribunal has determined that the person
has an intellectual disability and
is not suffering from a mental illness ... - order that the person be detained in a place other than a hospital.
4.23 The Commission also suggests that, to overcome the confusion between mental illness and intellectual disability, name changes
should be considered in this area, for example changing “forensic patient” to “forensic person”, to avoid
any connotations of illness. The reference to “patient” implies that the person is either in hospital or under medical
care. Yet forensic patients with an intellectual disability (unless they also have a mental illness) are likely to be detained in
gaol rather than in hospital.
The forensic part of the Tribunal’s work, however, forms only a small percentage of its total workload
and people with an intellectual disability comprise a minority of these cases.
ccording to its statistics, the Tribunal has only reviewed 48 persons with an intellectual disability (a total of 132 reviews) under
the 1983 and 1990 Mental Health Acts.
As the majority of the Tribunal’s work is therefore concerned with its civil jurisdiction affecting people who have a mental
illness or disorder, the Commission considers a name change for the Mental Health Review Tribunal is not warranted, while acknowledging
that the name does cause some confusion.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
11. That references to "forensic patient" in the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) or the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) be replaced by "forensic person".
4.24 The Commission also suggests that the provisions of the MHCP Act would be better positioned in the
(NSW), as was previously the case, thus also removing the confusion caused by the name of the MHCP Act.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
12. That the provisions of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be relocated in the
4.25 While recognising the clear distinction between mental illness and intellectual disability, the Commission does not believe a
new structure, such as an “Intellectual Disability Review Tribunal” or any other form of duplicate bureaucracy, is warranted.
The Queensland Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs suggested that instead the existing system could
be made more effective by either: (a) training of members of the Tribunal about intellectual disability; or (b) when a person with
an intellectual disability appears before the Tribunal, including on the Tribunal a representative with expertise in intellectual
disability.
The Commission supports this proposal in relation to the New South Wales Tribunal.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
13. That, wherever practicable, the membership of the Mental Health Review Tribunal include, as one member of its three person panel,
a member with appropriate expertise in the area of intellectual disability in circumstances where the Tribunal knows or suspects
that the person appearing before it has an intellectual disability.
Standard of proof
4.26 The question of an accused person’s unfitness to be tried is determined on the balance of probabilities,
rather than the higher criminal standard of beyond reasonable doubt. Hayes and Craddock have commented that:
[t]his is a retrograde step. The intellectually disabled accused stands a more significant chance of being incarcerated because of
the disability under the NSW legislation [than under the common law]. The Crown is able to take advantage of the intellectual disability
of the accused to have the accused subjected to the rigours of the mental health system and the “special hearing” provisions
whether or not it has a case it can prove against the accused.
Submissions to date have not raised any concerns about the standard of proof. The Commission seeks further submissions in this area.
Trial by judge alone - the use of standard forms
4.27 As discussed above, there is provision for the accused to elect that the fitness hearing or the special hearing be heard by a
judge sitting alone, instead of with a jury, if the judge “is satisfied that the person, before making the election, sought
and received advice in relation to the election from a barrister or solicitor.”
It may save considerable time for fitness matters to be heard by a judge alone, particularly in relatively non-contentious matters,
for example if experts for both sides agree that the accused is clearly unfit to be tried.
Seeking and receiving advice about such an election is likely to be a difficult matter for an accused whose fitness and understanding
is questionable. Under the
District Court Rules
(rule 10B), the election is indicated by signing an approved form and lodging that form with the registry. If the accused is unfit
to make the election and to complete the form, it has been queried whether there should be some provision that the person’s
counsel or the judge in the matter can make this decision. It would be a very onerous obligation for counsel to assume, however,
and the suggestion was greeted with some concerns in the Commission’s consultations with the legal profession. An alternative
would be to avoid the likely farce of trying to obtain the informed consent of the accused by removing the element of choice. It
may be argued that a fitness hearing (which is largely dependent on expert evidence) is most appropriately heard by a judge alone,
and a special hearing (which is to be as similar as possible to a normal criminal trial) should be heard by a judge and jury. The
Commission seeks further input from professionals who have participated in fitness hearings or special hearings, whether the removal
of this right to election may result in an injustice to the accused.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
14. That the right to election for a hearing by judge alone in fitness and special hearings be removed and that:
(a) fitness hearings be always heard by judge alone; and
(b) special hearings be always heard by judge and jury.
Length of detention, delay and complexity
4.28 A number of submissions expressed concern about the delay caused by, and the complexity of, the fitness procedures.
Fitness proceedings can add as much as 12 months to the usual delay experienced in criminal proceedings.
The combination of delays and discretionary release may mean that a person is detained for a much longer period than he or she would
have served even if sentenced to the maximum term for the offence. This may lead to a person or his or her lawyer attempting to avoid
a finding of unfitness, or to avoid raising the issue in court. In the case of lawyers, this becomes an ethical issue, that is, whether
he or she, as an officer of the court, must raise the possibility of their client’s unfitness to be tried, even if this is
against their client’s interests or express instructions. Guidelines about making these decisions are better left to the ethics
committees of the Law Society and the Bar Association.
4.29 One alternative way to reduce delay and simplify the fitness procedure in relation to people with an intellectual disability
was proposed by IDRS. As intellectual disability involves a permanent incapacity, IDRS suggested that, after a finding of unfitness,
the requirement for a determination by the Tribunal of whether the person will become fit within 12 months be deleted.
The danger of this proposal is that it removes the protection provided by having the person appear before an expert Tribunal, which
not only makes a determination about the person’s likely fitness, which may in fact be different from that of the court, but
which also makes a determination about the person’s appropriate detention. The Commission proposes that this determination
by the Tribunal be retained, despite the potential for lengthening proceedings, because of the risk that a person may have a “dual
diagnosis” (that is, both an intellectual disability and a mental illness) or that they may be incorrectly diagnosed as having
an intellectual disability. The Commission seeks submissions about any other alternatives which may reduce delay and complexity.
4.30 The Legal Aid Commission of NSW is also concerned that the fitness procedure is unnecessarily complicated and impossible to explain
to a client who may be unfit to be tried. Its submission suggested that the procedure could be simplified by terminating the Court’s
involvement at the procedures laid down in
, that is at the referring of the person to the Tribunal after the Court has set a limiting term. The Tribunal could then make the
further order, which is currently made by the Court in s 27, that the person be detained, either in a hospital or in “a place
other than a hospital”, as the Tribunal immediately assumes this role in any event by
Mental Health Act
The Commission supports this proposal.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
15. That s 27 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be amended to the effect that orders are made by the Tribunal, not the Court.
Power to dismiss charge - the s 10(4) procedure
4.31 The Court may also decide not to conduct a fitness inquiry, but instead to dismiss the charge and order that the person be released
if “it is of the opinion that it is
inappropriate,
having regard to the
nature of the charge or offence, the nature of the person’s disability or any other matter which the Court thinks proper to
to inflict any punishment ...
” [emphasis added].
This alternative is only available for indictable offences (which are unlikely to be considered to be trivial offences) and it has
been stated that the section can only be used in rare circumstances.
Supporters of this section believe that its operation should be extended to avoid lengthy and futile fitness proceedings in appropriate
Its opponents suggest instead that this section should be repealed as it effectively enables the judge, rather than the Director
of Public Prosecutions, to “no bill” proceedings.
4.32 Another difficulty with s 10(4) is that even a person who has already spent more time on remand than any likely sentence for
the offence could not be discharged under this section, because a back-dated sentence (or even a bond) is still considered to be
“punishment”.
It has been suggested that, instead of the words “any punishment”, the wording of the equivalent section in the Commonwealth
legislation
be adopted, that is: “to inflict any punishment, or to inflict any punishment other than a nominal punishment ...”, together
with a specific mention in the legislation that the court may take into account the time already spent in custody. The Commission
supports the retention of the subsection with the amendments proposed.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
16. That s 10(4) of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be amended as follows:
10(4) If, in respect of a person charged with an offence, the Court is of the opinion that it is inappropriate to inflict any punishment,
or to inflict any punishment other than a nominal punishment, having regard to the trivial nature of the charge or the offence, the
nature of the person’s disability or any other matter including time already spent in custody which the Court thinks proper
to consider, the Court may determine not to conduct an inquiry and may dismiss the charge and order that the person be released.
If fit to be tried?
4.33 As discussed above, if the defendant is found fit to be tried, criminal proceedings may re-commence or continue.
In relation to the treatment of some of the evidence gathered for the purposes of the fitness hearing, Hayes and Craddock have made
the following proposal.
The trial judge has ample discretion to ensure fairness to the accused who has been subjected, possibly against his will, to a fitness
hearing. Nevertheless, legislation specifically excluding reliance by the Crown upon facts gathered about the accused or his case
in the course of the fitness inquiry would ensure fairness. The court’s power to request reports may allow the Crown an advantage
which it is denied in the ordinary course of criminal proceedings.
A specific legislative prohibition would have the additional attraction of decreasing the likelihood that disabled defendants would
seek to hide their disabilities to avoid the risk of giving the Crown an advantage should they be found fit to be tried.
Such a proposal needs to take into account the issue of admissions made to psychologists or psychiatrists (deliberately or inadvertently),
whether such experts should be compellable, and who makes this decision. Though such expert witnesses should not need to discuss
the facts of the actual offence in determining fitness, it is more difficult to prevent the accused from doing so. In other contexts,
for example, evidence given to the Independent Commission Against Corruption, where the right to refuse to answer on the grounds
of self incrimination has been removed, such evidence cannot be used in evidence against the person at their subsequent trial.
Though there could be a prohibition against the prosecution relying on admissions (made to an expert witness in the context of determining
fitness) at the subsequent hearing, this would probably not prevent the prosecution pursuing a line of inquiry suggested by a statement
made to one of their experts. Another possibility would be to direct the expert not to include such information in his or her report.
The current practice appears to be to allow the Crown experts to have qualified access to the accused, by seeking an undertaking
that the expert will not ask for a history of the events. This practice was challenged in the District Court where the prosecution
unsuccessfully sought to obtain an order that the accused undergo “an unrestricted psychiatric examination” by a psychiatrist
provided by the Crown.
It is obviously in the interests of justice, however, that the prosecution’s experts should have some access to the accused
to make their own assessment of fitness. The Commission suggests that, in fairness to the accused, the expert report(s) as to fitness
should not be able to be used in evidence at the subsequent trial. The Commission makes no comment about any arrangements which may
be made between the prosecution and the defence in relation to the terms on which access to the accused is granted, though it has
been suggested in consultations that this may be an area for an internal DPP policy.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
17. Any expert report prepared for the purpose of assessing the fitness of the accused to stand trial should not be able to be used
in evidence at the subsequent trial.
Directions to the jury
4.34 Concerns have been raised about the impact of the general misunderstanding and preconceptions about intellectual disability on
the fitness and special hearing procedures, and how best to overcome these through appropriate directions to the jury. Under s 21(4)
of the MHCP Act, at the commencement of the special hearing the judge must explain to the jury “the fact that the accused person
is unfit to be tried in accordance with normal procedures, the meaning of unfitness to be tried, the purpose of the special hearing,
the verdicts which are available and the legal and practical consequences of those verdicts.” Hayes and Craddock pointed out
some of the disadvantages of this procedure:
[f]irst, although it is quite immaterial to the proof of the Crown case, the jury will hear that the accused has a disability which
may trigger some erroneous prejudices about the intellectually disabled defendant. The jury may be under the misapprehension that
such people are prone to commit criminal offences, that they cannot control their urges, or that they are dangerous or perverted.
There is the additional risk that the jury will, inappropriately and mistakenly, believe that if they find that the accused committed
the offence, he or she will receive appropriate services or placement which will reduce the chance of re-offending. Whilst there
is the opportunity provided in s 22(3)(c) for appealing on questions of law, there is no opportunity to redress these prejudices
and wrong assumptions.
4.35 It has also been suggested that the Judge’s Bench Book (prepared by the Judicial Commission of New South Wales) should
contain both suggested directions to the jury pursuant to sections 12(4) and 21(4) of the MHCP Act, and suggested wording for the
“swearing in” of the jury for fitness hearings and special hearings, and for receiving the jury’s finding.
The Commission has received from the Judicial Commission the material relating to intellectual disability contained in the two Bench
Books prepared for Local Courts and Trial Courts. The Commission has reviewed the material provided to it and believes it could be
improved. For example, there is no definition of intellectual disability provided in either Book; there is no discussion of the diversionary
procedure for Magistrates available under the MHCP Act in the Local Courts Book; in the Trial Courts Book the consequences of unfitness
to be tried (including reference to special hearings and limiting terms and the likely place of detention) are not fully set out
in the suggested direction to the jury; and a suggested jury direction is only provided for fitness hearings - the judge is required
to adapt the special hearing direction from the fitness direction. The Commission suggests that expert assistance should be sought
by the Judicial Commission to review the adequacy of the Bench Books in this area. The Commission believes that the following material
would assist the judiciary and magistracy:
an explanation of intellectual disability, including reference to statutory definitions;
an explanation of the diversionary procedures for Magistrates under s 32-33 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW);
complete suggested directions for both s 12(4) and s 21(4) of the MHCP Act, including a detailed explanation of the consequences of
the relevant findings, as required by legislation;
an explanation of the appropriateness and acceptability of psychological evidence in relation to intellectual disability;
an appropriate wording for the “swearing in” of a jury at a fitness or special hearing as, due to the limited nature of
these hearings compared to a normal trial, the usual words for the “swearing in” are inaccurate and may be confusing;
general comments on the procedure to be followed at fitness or special hearings, including whether the indictment should be tendered
at the fitness hearing and what other material should be tendered.
Though information about the principles affecting the sentencing of people with an intellectual disability would also be useful, this
is probably more appropriately covered by the Judicial Commission’s Sentencing Information System, which already contains relevant
material on this subject.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
18. That the Judicial Commission of New South Wales review the adequacy of the material in the Bench Books in relation to intellectual
disability.
4.36 After a finding of unfitness, the Court is obliged to refer the person to the Tribunal in order to determine whether he or she
is likely to become fit within 12 months.
Pending the Tribunal’s determination, the Court may grant bail
or “make any ... order that the court considers appropriate.”
A possible difficulty is:
if the Tribunal determines that the person is unlikely to become fit within 12 months there is no expressed statutory power for either
the Court or the Tribunal to continue, vary or refuse bail. If a determination is made that the defendant is likely to become fit,
the situation is covered to some extent by section 17(3) of the [MHCP Act], although there is still a gap between the determination
and the Court’s response to the Tribunal’s finding. ... However there will be a problem if an unfit defendant requires
a variation of “bail” conditions, or breaches their “bail”, subsequent to a determination by the Tribunal
that he or she is not likely to become fit within 12 months, but prior to coming before the Court for a Special Hearing. Such a scenario
is quite possible, indeed inevitable.
This area needs to be clarified. The Commission suggests that the Court be given the power to have a matter brought back before it
on an application from either side in the period between a finding of unfitness and the special hearing to consider any possible
variation in the orders made under s 14(b) of the MHCP Act.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
19. That s 14 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be amended to provide that, in the period between a finding of unfitness and the special hearing, the Court may, on an
application by either side, have the matter brought back before it to consider any possible variation in the orders made under s
Special hearings and limiting terms
Recommendations of the Victorian Law Reform Commission (“VLRC”).
The VLRC’s Report
Mental Malfunction and Criminal Responsibility
recommended changes to Victoria’s current system of detention at the “Governor’s pleasure” for people found
unfit to plead.
Some people have criticised the artificiality of the special hearing system.
The VLRC, however, considered the operation of the New South Wales MHCP Act and reported a general satisfaction with the scheme apart
from two aspects. The VLRC first expressed concerns about the concept of a
finding of guilt
at a special hearing in situations where limited evidence is available and the accused is unfit to be tried. The VLRC commented:
Guilt is inextricably linked with intent and that is a matter which cannot be satisfactorily dealt with where the defendant is unable
to give proper instructions. The [VLRC] has concluded that the only possible findings should be “acquittal”, “not
guilty on the ground of mental impairment”, or that “no issues can be determined”. In the last case, the finding
of unfitness to stand trial remains extant.
4.38 The VLRC also disagreed with the setting of
limiting terms
. It commented:
The arguments against this are the same as those applicable to setting limiting terms after a “not guilty on the ground of mental
impairment” verdict. The limiting period is too artificial when a sentencing judge is asked to set it by reference to the sentence
for a guilty person: in unfitness cases, the key issue in sentencing - culpability - cannot be determined. For this reason, most
members of the Commission believe that the detention of a person should be open-ended. Release decisions should be made by reference
to the person’s dangerousness. The procedures governing release should be the same as for those found not guilty on the ground
of insanity. These provisions should minimise the possibility of over-cautious release decisions.
4.39 The VLRC therefore recommended a special hearing system with the three possible findings set out above.
It recommended, in addition, that it should not be possible to raise unfitness at committal proceedings:
if the evidence against the defendant is weak, he or she can be discharged anyway, and the jury should have the opportunity to determine
the fitness of the accused if there is sufficient evidence to warrant committal.
4.40 A further recommendation was that, for indictable cases involving people with an intellectual disability, the Office of the Public
Advocate (“OPA”) should be notified so that the need for the OPA’s services, including the possible appointment
of a guardian, could be assessed.
There is no direct equivalent of the OPA in New South Wales, however the Public Guardian can be appointed as a guardian for a person
who requires one but has no family member or other person who could, or is willing to, be appointed. The difficulty is that the Public
Guardian must be notified of the person’s situation to enable it to make such an application, or an application brought by
some other person to the Guardianship Board, before this need could be met. The Commission suggests that, where a person appearing
before it has no guardian and it appears to the Court that a guardian may be necessary, the Court should be empowered to adjourn
the proceedings and direct that an appropriate person (presumably the Public Guardian) be notified of the person’s position
and that that person consider bringing an application to the Guardianship Board. The Commission assumes that the Court would only
require such a power in the context of fitness or special hearings, but seeks further information about any other circumstances in
which such a need could arise and whether the power should be generally available. (Guardianship issues were considered in more detail
in Chapter 3.)
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
20. Where a person appearing before any court in a fitness or special hearing does not have a guardian and it appears to the Court
that a guardian may be necessary, the Court should be empowered to adjourn the proceedings and direct that an appropriate person
(presumably the Public Guardian) be notified of the person’s position and consider bringing an application to the Guardianship
Setting the limiting term.
In addition to the difficulty of ignoring the incapacity of the accused when setting a limiting term, it is impossible for the judge
to allow, as occurs in normal criminal proceedings, a reduction in sentence for a plea of guilty. It would be impossible for counsel
to indicate whether a plea of guilty would have been forthcoming if their client had been fit to be tried, because the ability to
enter a plea is part of the concept of fitness to be tried.
, Mathews J commented that having a fixed term for the limiting term was unfair as the unfit person is deprived of the benefit of
his sentence being divided into minimum and additional terms, especially where the total sentence would have been less than three
years, and release would occur automatically at the expiration of the minimum term. She continued that though the provisions of the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) meant that considerations of dangerousness were permitted to override sentencing considerations:
[n]evertheless it is a matter of some concern that a person who is unfit to be tried, and therefore does not stand convicted of any
offence, might well be detained in custody for a significantly longer period than would have occurred had he, in fact, been convicted
of the same offence. I raise this matter because it appears to me to be a matter of general concern ...
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
21. For the purpose of setting the limiting term, the judge should be required to give the person the benefit of assuming that the
person would have pleaded guilty. The legislation should also be amended so that the limiting term is divided into minimum and additional
4.42 The Legal Aid Commission raised a further concern in relation to special hearings:
states that a limited finding of guilt at a special hearing constitutes a bar to further prosecution in respect of the same circumstances,
but subject to
[which] removes this bar if the person is still in custody and becomes fit to be tried. I would submit that the bar should be absolute.
The prosecution has already presented its entire case and obtained an order that the person spend up to a maximum time in custody.
The person will only be released on a finding that to do so will not seriously endanger either that person or any other member of
the public. The prospect of having the case again presented is, in my view, oppressive.
The Commission supports the Legal Aid Commission’s proposal: it believes that it is onerous to the accused and to the witnesses
involved to have the possibility of a further hearing remaining. If the accused becomes fit and it is considered that an injustice
has been done at the earlier hearing there is now scope for a review of the earlier conviction under the new
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
22. A limited finding of guilt at a special hearing should be a bar to further prosecution in respect of the same circumstances, and
should no longer be subject to s 28 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW).
Acquired brain damage and fitness
4.43 As discussed in Chapter 2, some people acquire brain damage as an adult, for example as the result of an accident. Such people
may also be held to be unfit to plead as a result of their disability. This can raise, however, particular difficulties under the
MHCP Act if, as Mathews J pointed out in
the accused acquired the disability after being charged and committed for hearing for an offence. In this matter the accused, after
a failed suicide attempt, suffered severe brain damage and his mental capacity was grossly impaired. He was therefore found by a
jury unfit to be tried. At the special hearing the jury found, on the limited evidence available, that the accused had committed
each of the six (serious) offences contained in the indictment. It was therefore left to the Judge to state whether, if the defendant
had been fit to be tried, she would have imposed a sentence of imprisonment on him and, if so, to nominate a limiting term of imprisonment.
Her Honour found the case a difficult one because of potential injustices arising out of the interpretation of this section.
4.44 Section 23(1)(a), the Judge suggested, was based on the assumption that the cause of unfitness existed at the time of the offence,
not merely at the hearing. Her Honour doubted whether a term of imprisonment would serve any useful purpose, considering that the
accused was now “grossly disabled in memory and cognitive function”.
Her Honour was also concerned that the:
requirement under s 23(1)(b) that I notionally treat [the defendant] as a person who was fit to stand trial for these offences and
who stood convicted of them, means that I must ignore the most significant sentencing consideration of all in his case, namely that
by reason of the fact that he suffers from the condition which renders him unfit to stand trial, he is not at all the same person
as the one who committed these offences. ... The constraint thus imposed seems to me to be artificial in the extreme.
4.45 The Commission does not intend at this stage to make a proposal for such an unusual scenario as set out above. It considers that
a Judge would be able to apply ordinary sentencing principles in such circumstances.
Release - the discretion of the executive
The discretion of the executive to refuse recommendations of the Tribunal.
As discussed in paras 4.11-4.15, and 4.17 above, the Tribunal can make recommendations for the release of an “unfit” person
in a number of cases as long as the Tribunal believes that the person is not dangerous. Recommendations are made to the “prescribed
authority”, who is variously the Governor, the Governor-in-Council or the Minister for Health, depending on the particular
section under which the Tribunal makes its recommendations. Statistics compiled by the Tribunal show that, in the majority of cases,
the recommendations of the Tribunal are approved by the executive government; for example, in 1992, of a total of 180 reviews by
the Tribunal, 167 were approved, 2 were rejected and 11 were listed as pending.
4.47 The New South Wales
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee argued that having the final decision for the release of forensic patients with the executive
government was a problem because:
The decision maker
does not hear the evidence
on which his decision is based. Recommendations regarding forensic patients are based on the assessment of danger. The body hearing
this evidence is in a better position to make this assessment than a third party relying on recommendations and reports.
The Mental Health Review Tribunal also commented on the unique position of the Tribunal to assess the person’s dangerousness:
Unlike the courts, the Tribunal is in the position of being able to consider the forensic patient, and his or her situation, in a
series of (for most forensic patients) progressively less restrictive environments, in order to determine whether a move to a situation
allowing more freedom would be appropriate and safe. It can consider the conditions that would need to be imposed, and the circumstances
and environment that would have to be established, in order to ensure the safety and appropriateness of the next less restrictive
environment being developed for the patient. The Tribunal has the occasion to consider each forensic patient’s case at least
once every six months, and sometimes more often. ... The Tribunal has available to it, not only the court file and expert opinion
contained therein, but also, its own expertise, the expertise which it may especially commission, the expertise marshalled on the
forensic patient’s behalf by the Mental Health Advocacy Service, and the expertise and day to day experience of the treating
team which is managing the patient in the current environment.
Though more relevant to forensic patients with a mental illness than those with an intellectual disability, the Tribunal has also
commented that the need for executive government approval of recommendations:
can prevent the needs of forensic patients from being quickly and appropriately addressed when their illnesses deteriorate to an acute
phase. Further, it can mean that patients are maintained for excessively lengthy periods in an unnecessarily strict custodial environment,
after they have been returned, through acute psychiatric care, to reasonable mental health.
4.48 Other difficulties with the present system, identified by the
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee, include:
It has inherent
time delays
. Even with prompt processing at each stage, a recommendation which involves consideration by the Minister, Executive Council and
the Governor will involve considerable delay. Since there are now [1992 figures] approximately 97 forensic patients in NSW, a very
considerable burden is placed on the Minister in considering about 200 sets of recommendations per annum. ...
Denial of natural justice to the forensic patients.
Although the patient may give evidence at the review, and is to be legally represented unless s/he chooses otherwise, neither the
patient’s evidence nor the representative’s submissions are transcribed or presented to the ultimate decision maker.
Oral evidence which modifies the effect of written reports is not available, except to the extent that it is included in brief written
reasons for the Tribunal’s decision. No reasons have to be given by the Minister if he [or she] chooses not to accept the recommendations,
and therefore the patient has no opportunity to address any fresh concerns or correct apprehensions of fact with which he or she
A refusal by the prescribed authority to approve a recommendation for release may be in breach of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, Article 9(4). The article states that:-
9.4 Anyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings before a court, in order that
that court may decide without delay on the lawfulness of his detention and order his release if the detention is not lawful.
A decision by the Governor-in-Council to refuse a release recommendation (ie continue detention) is not reviewable by a court (see
O’Shea v Parole Board of South Australia
[1987] HCA 39
[1987] 61 ALJR 477).
Australia is a signatory to the Convention, and also to the optional protocol which allows aggrieved individuals to take an action
to the international court.
Other jurisdictions have removed or partially removed executive discretion from the decision making process regarding forensic patients.
4.49 The Monitoring Committee submitted three options for reform, of which Option 1 was the preferred option.
Remove executive discretion from all decisions regarding forensic patients. All decisions as to their placement, security conditions
and release to be made by the Mental Health Review Tribunal. Re-write relevant sections of the Act to enable the Tribunal to make
orders rather than recommendations.
Remove executive discretion from all decisions regarding forensic patients, except the decision to release. Place a time limit (suggested
6 weeks) on the executive to sign the order or refuse to do the same after receipt of the MHRT’s recommendation.
Executive discretion to remain. A time limit of 6 weeks after receipt of recommendation to be placed on the executive to process
the MHRT’s recommendation.
4.50 Another possibility would be to retain the executive discretion, but to establish an appeal mechanism. A further possibility
would be to replace the executive discretion with a judicial one, however, this marks a movement away from the concept of an expert
Tribunal in this area. The Commission presently supports Option 1, for the reasons outlined above. This proposal will also have implications
for the treatment of people found not guilty on the ground of mental illness, see Chapter 10.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
23. That the executive discretion be removed from all decisions regarding forensic patients (except as limited by Proposal 24) so
that all decisions as to their placement, security conditions and release are made by the Mental Health Review Tribunal. (This proposal
would require consequential amendments to the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) to enable the Tribunal to make orders rather than recommendations.)
Delays relating to orders for release.
The Monitoring Committee was also concerned about the time delays currently occurring, noting that it was not uncommon that a six
monthly review is conducted before notification of approval or otherwise from the previous review is received. It noted that the
appropriate recommendation depended upon which of the above three options was adopted. All of the possibilities suggested by the
Monitoring Committee required an order/decision/recommendation (as appropriate) to be made within six weeks of the hearing or receipt
of recommendation.
The Commission does not believe that it is appropriate to set a time limit on the handing down of the decision of such a decision-making
body as the Tribunal.
The Attorney General’s veto.
As discussed, the Attorney General has the power to veto the release of a forensic patient if charges are to be proceeded with or
“the person has served insufficient time in custody or under detention.”
According to Hayes and Craddock this veto is inappropriate as:
[t]here are serious ethical inconsistencies within the Attorney’s power to object, which is effectively a power to imprison.
If the system of detention of forensic patients is truly for the protection of the person and of society, there can be no basis for
the power to withhold release merely because the Attorney holds the view that the person “has served insufficient time in custody”.
4.53 The Monitoring Committee considered both bases upon which the Attorney General may veto release recommendations:
the sufficiency of time served in custody
: as dangerousness is the basis for detention, persons who the Tribunal no longer consider dangerous are entitled to their liberty:
“[t]o effectively impose a sentence of an unspecified additional period after the stated release criteria has been met makes
a mockery of both the verdict and the review system.”
pending charges
: the 30 day period allowed for a response by the Attorney General or DPP delays the release of all forensic patients, including those
not facing charges and otherwise entitled to release.
Where charges are pending, continued detention in the mental health system amounts to an inappropriate form of remand, especially
where the alleged offence is one for which the person would readily be granted bail.
4.54 The Monitoring Committee supported the removal of the “sufficiency of time in custody” veto except for forensic patients
who have been transferred to hospital while serving a sentence of imprisonment or life sentence. Such patients have been convicted
by a court and then observed in gaol to be mentally ill and transferred to hospital, and “where a court has imposed a sentence
[not a limiting term], it is proper that a consideration be made as to whether a sufficient proportion has been served prior to release.”
Such forensic patients fall outside the ambit of the Commission’s reference, and therefore the Commission does not propose
any changes in this area and accepts the retention of the veto. The Monitoring Committee also recommended that the “pending
charges” discretion be limited in its operation to forensic patients who have been found unfit to be tried or are in hospital
awaiting committal for trial or trial.
4.55 It may be appropriate to consider replacing the Attorney General’s power of veto with a requirement that the Tribunal notify
the DPP of a person’s pending release, so that any action considered necessary in relation to pending charges may be taken
upon the person’s release. For example, the person could be arrested immediately upon release. However, the Monitoring Committee
also recommended the deletion of the subsection which requires the prescribed authority to notify the Minister for Police and Emergency
Services of the date of a forensic patient’s release,
as it inappropriately “implies that the police will then have some role in monitoring that person in the community.”
Any provision requiring the notification of the DPP would have to avoid such an interpretation clearly.
4.56 The Commission proposes that veto on the ground that the person has served insufficient time in custody be removed, except as
suggested by the Monitoring Committee. The Commission seeks further submissions about the pending charges discretion, and the suggestions
in relation to the notification of the DPP referred to above. This area as a whole will obviously be affected by the proposal for
the removal of executive discretion discussed above.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
Mental Health Act
(NSW) be limited to apply only to forensic patients who have been transferred to hospital while serving a sentence of imprisonment
or life sentence.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. See, for example,
R v Presser
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45
Ngatayi v R
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1.
. New South Wales. Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
(March 1992) at 1.
. Mr R Howie QC, Acting Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
(22 March 1993). Mr Howie noted, however, that his office does not keep statistical information on such matters as a distinct category
and that it is therefore difficult to obtain reliable information.
. Mr M Porter, Programme Director, Hunter Region Developmental Disability Service, Department of Community Services
(20 October 1992) at 2.
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 122-123.
. Hayes and Craddock at 79.
R v Presser
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45
at 48. Note that this case was considering s 426 of the
. This list has been approved and applied by other Australian courts, for example,
[1970] VicRp 49
[1970] VR 379
, per Winneke CJ at 384, Smith and Gowans JJ concurring;
R v Bradley (No 2)
(1986) 85 FLR 111
, per Asche J at 114-115.
. See also Hayes and Craddock at 88, referring to
Ngatayi v R
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1
R v Dennison
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 3 March 1988, CCA 319/87.
. Victorian Law Reform Commission (“VLRC”) Report
Mental Malfunction and Criminal Responsibility
(Report 34, 1990) at para 126.
. Intellectual Disability Review Panel (Victoria)
(17 December 1992) at 8.
. Intellectual Disability Review Panel (Victoria)
(17 December 1992) at 8.
. Mental Health Review Tribunal (Dr Robert Hayes, President)
(25 February 1992) at 2.
. Hayes and Craddock at 104.
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) (the “MHCP Act”) s 5. The Court is unlikely to raise the issue on its own motion: Hayes and Craddock at
. MHCP Act s 7. The arraignment is a brief pre-trial procedure where the accused appears in court, the charges against them are read
and the accused pleads guilty or not guilty.
. This power has been delegated to the New South Wales Solicitor General: M Ierace
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 72-73.
. MHCP Act s 8-9.
. MHCP Act s 10(1). Note, however, s 10(2): “The Court must not conduct an inquiry into the question of a person’s unfitness
to be tried for an offence unless it appears to the Court that the question has been raised in good faith.”
. MHCP Act s 10(3).
. See MHCP Act s 11, 11A and 12 for detailed provisions about the circumstances in which the inquiry can be heard by a judge alone
and about the conduct of that inquiry.
. MHCP Act s 13.
. MHCP Act s 11(4).
. MHCP Act s 14. Once the provisions of the
Mental Health Amendment Act
1994 (NSW) are proclaimed, a person will become a “forensic patient” at this stage, pursuant to an amendment to Schedule
Mental Health Act
. MHCP Act s 16(1).
Mental Health Act
. There must be at least one person selected from a group of person who have been nominated by consumer organisations:
s 253(1)(3).
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
. MHCP Act s 16(2).
. MHCP Act s 17.
Mental Health Act
(NSW) Schedule 1. Note that the definition of “forensic patient” has been amended by the
Mental Health Amendment Act
1994 (NSW), though this Act is not yet proclaimed.
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
. MHCP Act s 29.
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Criminal Law Review Division, Issues Paper, 1991) at 4.
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
. According to Hayes and Craddock at 116, there is no indication in the Act that the possible charges are limited to those for which
the person was found unfit to be tried or subjected to a limiting term. They state that this should be clarified by legislation.
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
The Act does not refer to the Minister for Health directly but to the “prescribed authority”, which, pursuant to reg
20(1)(c) of the
Mental Health Regulations
1990 (NSW), is the Minister of Health.
Mental Health Act
. MHCP Act s 16(4).
. MHCP Act s 18. As to the nature, conduct and available verdicts of a special hearing see s 19, 21-28.
. MHCP Act s 20.
. MHCP Act s 22.
. It is unlikely that this possible verdict would be left with the jury if there was not evidence in the special hearing sufficient
for it to be available. For further consideration of the defence of mental illness see Chapter 10.
. MHCP Act s 23.
. MHCP Act s 22(3)(c).
. MHCP Act s 24.
. MHCP Act s 27.
Mental Health Act
. Hayes and Craddock at 120.
Mental Health Act
. MHCP Act s 22(3)(a).
(NSW) s 474A(1)(a). Section 474A(2) also states that a reference to a finding of guilt in
includes a reference to a qualified finding of guilt as in s 22(3) of the MHCP Act.
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
. MHCP Act s 29.
. Mental Health Review Tribunal
Annual Report 1992
at para 10.15.
. Mental Health Review Tribunal (Dr Robert Hayes, President)
(25 February 1992) at 2.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 9.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 1.
. Mental Health Review Tribunal (Dr Robert Hayes, President)
(25 February 1992) at 2.
. Detention of forensic patients with an intellectual disability is usually in one of the special units for inmates with an intellectual
disability (see Chapter 11).
. As at May 1993 there were 101 forensic patients in New South Wales, though the numbers fluctuate, for example in July 1993 there
were 113 patients: Mental Health Review Tribunal
Annual Report 1992
at para 10.14. Table 26 of the Annual Report sets out the location of these 113 forensic patients, the majority of which were in
hospital, including the Long Bay Prison Hospital.
. Ms T Ovadia, Mental Health Review Tribunal
(4 May 1994).
. Queensland. Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 4.
. MHCP Act s 6.
. Hayes and Craddock at 96.
. MHCP Act s 11A and 21A.
. It is interesting to note that some jurisdictions, for example the Northern Territory, require the issue of fitness to be tried
before a judge alone, not a jury:
(1991) 1 NTLR 157.
. For example Mr P Hutten
(6 January 1992) at 13. He queried whether guardianship may be more appropriate for people whose disabilities are severe enough
for them to be found unfit to be tried, though recognising the heavy burden on the particular guardian.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 1.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 9.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 4.
. MHCP Act s 10(4).
. See, for example
(unreported) District Court, NSW, 27 February 1990, Nash DCJ, 89/21/0940, referring to the predecessor of s 10(4),
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Criminal Law Review Division, Issues Paper, 1991) at 3.
(unreported) District Court, NSW, 27 February 1990, Nash DCJ, 89/21/0940.
. MHCP Act s 13.
. Hayes and Craddock at 103.
Independent Commission Against Corruption Act
(unreported) District Court, NSW, 20 January 1992, Bell J, 91/11/0407.
. Hayes and Craddock at 95.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 9.
. MHCP Act s 14(a), 16(1).
. MHCP Act s 14(b)(ii).
. MHCP Act s 14(b)(iv).
. Mr M Ierace
(6 April 1993) at 1-2.
. VLRC Report 34, Recommendations 20-25.
. For example consultation with Mr G Craddock, Barrister on 11 March 1994.
. VLRC Report 34 at para 124 [footnote references omitted].
. VLRC Report 34 at para 125 [footnote references omitted].
. VLRC Report 34, Recommendations 21-24.
. VLRC Report 34, Recommendation 20.
. VLRC Report 34 at para 112.
. VLRC Report 34, Recommendation 25.
. Hayes and Craddock at 110.
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Mathews J, 18 September 1992, 701210/90, at 9-10.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 5.
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Mathews J, 18 September 1992, 701210/90.
at 12. Compare, however, the comments of Viney DCJ in
(unreported) District Court, NSW, 10 February 1994, 91/21/1238 at 6, which appears to reach the opposite conclusion.
. Mental Health Review Tribunal
Annual Report 1992,
Table 25. In 1991 (Table 24) out of 154 reviews, 148 were approved by government, 4 were rejected and 2 were pending. Further information
provided by the Tribunal by facsimile dated 10 June 1994 reveals a similar picture for 1993: of the 253 reviews for that year, 183
were approved, 9 rejected, 2 pending and 59 did not require executive government action.
. Mental Health Review Tribunal
Annual Report 1992
at para 10.7.2
. Mental Health Review Tribunal
Annual Report 1992
at para 11.3.
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee (NSW)
Report to the Honourable R A Phillips Minister for Health on the NSW
Mental Health Act 1990
(New South Wales Parliamentary Paper 275, August 1992) at 31-32 [emphasis added].
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee (NSW) at 32-33.
Mental Health Act
. Hayes and Craddock at 116-117.
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee at 33.
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee at 34.
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee at 34.
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee Recommendation 4 at 34.
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee Recommendation 5 at 35.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
5. Fitness to be Tried and Diversion - Local Courts
History of this Reference (Digest)
5.1 The issue of fitness to be tried and the interpretation of the detailed fitness procedures available in the Supreme and District
Courts have been discussed in Chapter 4. The accused’s fitness to be tried is also of concern in the Local Courts, where the
overwhelming majority of criminal matters are heard. This chapter discusses the law applicable in the Local Courts and its advantages
and disadvantages. As with many areas involving people with an intellectual disability and the criminal justice system, difficulties
in obtaining instructions and other ethical issues arise for lawyers where the accused may not be fit to be tried. These issues have
already been raised in Chapter 3 and will not be covered in this chapter, as they are matters for ethics and legal education rather
than legislation.
5.2 The current legislation applicable in the Local Courts does not in fact involve a decision about fitness, but rather allows for
the diversion from the criminal justice system of defendants (persons charged with an offence) with specified mental conditions,
including intellectual disability, if the Magistrate considers it would be more appropriate to divert such a person rather than to
proceed with the matter in the usual way. This procedure, found in s 32-33 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) (the “MHCP Act”), is available for summary offences or indictable offences being tried summarily, that is,
it applies to all matters which can be heard to finality in the Local Courts. The legislation does not apply to committal proceedings.
It has been stated
that s 32 and 33 perform a similar role to s 10(3) and 10(4) of the MHCP Act, which allow the District and Supreme Courts to dismiss
trivial matters without proceeding to a fitness inquiry. It has been submitted to the Commission that there is some confusion about
the overlap between fitness issues and this diversionary procedure in Local Courts, particularly as there are so few reported cases
in this area. The Commission believes this confusion should be addressed and has therefore proposed changes to s 32 and related sections
(see para 5.28). This proposal also attempts to address the other concerns, outlined in this chapter, which have been raised in relation
to the diversionary procedure. The current legislation is set out in Appendix C for the purpose of comparison.
FITNESS TO BE TRIED
5.3 As with the Supreme and District Court fitness provisions discussed in Chapter 4, the predecessor of the current Local Court legislation
was originally introduced as an amendment to the
(NSW) in 1983.
This amendment introduced, amongst other things, a new
(“Unfitness to be Tried for an Offence”). Chapter I of that Part dealt with Supreme and District Courts and Chapter II
(s 428U-428Y) with Local Court procedures. These amendments did not come into force until 22 August 1986.
Though Chapter II did not mention fitness, it was generally assumed, pursuant to the heading of the Part,
that the procedures were designed to cover proceedings in the Local Courts where an accused may not be fit to be tried.
was later removed from the
(NSW) and inserted into the MHCP Act, which came into force in September 1990.
Part 3 of the MHCP Act (s 31-36) relates to Local Court proceedings and is headed “Summary Proceedings Before a Magistrate
Relating to Persons Affected by Mental Disorders”. According to the Second Reading Speech introducing the MHCP Act no significant
changes were made,
but the original heading (“Unfitness to be Tried for an Offence”) was not carried across to the new legislation.
5.4 Thus there is no reference in Part 3 of the MHCP Act to a person’s fitness to be tried for an offence. It seems clear that,
unlike the Supreme and District Court Judges, a Magistrate does not have the power to hold a fitness inquiry with consequent powers
in relation to the disposition of the person,
but that s 32 (or s 33) allows the dismissal of charges as a diversionary measure, whether or not the defendant is unfit to be tried,
and without the necessity of a determination about fitness.
If the question of fitness is raised for an indictable matter (even one which can be heard summarily in the Local Courts), the Magistrate
can refer the matter to a committal hearing, which means that, if the person is committed for trial, the Supreme or District Court
can determine the question of fitness. A recent case, however, suggested that, for indictable offences which can be heard in the
Local Courts, the question of whether the matter should be more appropriately dealt with under s 32 should be considered first, as
it “would be unfortunate for the matter to have to be dealt with in the District Court if there was an appropriate way for
the magistrate to deal with the matter under s 32.”
The Commission agrees that it seems unnecessary to draw out what may be quite minor offences through committal proceedings, particularly
as the accused is likely to have difficulty giving instructions or in understanding the procedures involved. This issue should, however,
be clarified in legislation, and is considered in the proposals set out at the end of this chapter. One difficulty which remains
is that, though many less serious indictable matters can be heard summarily under the discretion of the Magistrate, the consent of
the accused is currently required for some offences.
An informed consent may be difficult to obtain where the accused has an intellectual disability or a mental illness. This difficulty
may be largely overcome by legislation currently before the New South Wales Parliament, which, if passed, will mean that certain
indictable offences are automatically dealt with summarily by a Local Court unless the prosecuting authority, or (in the case of
more serious offences) the person charged with the offence, elects to have the offence dealt with on indictment.
5.5 For summary offences involving a defendant who is unfit to be tried, however, there is no option for a committal proceeding and
it has been held that there is no case law authority for a Magistrate to hear such matters.
This leaves no provision for an unfit accused charged with a summary offence, other than the provisions of s 32. This issue is also
addressed in Proposals 25B and 25C below, through provision for a fitness inquiry by a Magistrate.
DIVERSION BY THE LOCAL COURTS
The s 32/33 procedure
5.6 Under s 32 of the MHCP Act, if it appears to the Magistrate that the defendant is “developmentally disabled”, and
that on the facts or other evidence it would be appropriate to do so, the Magistrate has the power to adjourn the proceedings, grant
bail or make any other order. The Magistrate may also dismiss the charge and discharge the defendant either unconditionally or with
conditions. For example, the defendant may be discharged into the care of a “responsible person”. Conditions can only
be imposed on the defendant, not on any other person or organisation.
Furthermore, no sanction is provided if the conditions imposed are breached. The procedure is also available for a defendant who
is “suffering from mental illness or is suffering from a mental condition for which treatment is available in a hospital, but
is not a mentally ill person within the meaning of Chapter 3 of the
Mental Health Act 1990
(Section 33
applies to a person who is a “mentally ill person” within the
Mental Health Act
definition, and differs from
in the procedure to be followed.) Apart from the difficulties with the legislation discussed below, the provisions assume that appropriate
treatment or supervisory services are available, which is not always the case.
Submissions to the Commission have constantly stated that the lack of services to attempt to provide a solution to the offending
behaviour hinders the effectiveness of these sections and results in many defendants repeatedly coming before the court.
This issue is considered further in Chapter 13.
Intention of the sections
5.7 One preliminary issue which must be discussed is the
of this diversionary procedure. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability, while supporting the flexibility provided
by this procedure, commented that there was concern that such provisions contributed to a community perception that there were different
rules for people with an intellectual disability, and that they could escape responsibility for crimes. It believed that the intention
of the section was not clearly set out and that this could be remedied by an objects clause in the section.
The procedure is generally supported as a means of removing from the criminal justice system people who should not be processed through
the usual channels, and of providing for conditional release. For example, according to Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability
Rights Service (“IDRS”):
[t]he law has long recognised that certain people cannot be held morally culpable for their actions. The [MHCP Act] reflects this
and attempts to provide alternative processes for some of these people. This Act also recognises that traditional court procedures
are of limited use when the accused is unable to properly understand or take part in the proceedings.
A barrister with experience in this area has commented:
[i]t is my impression that, in spite of the conceptual difficulties that remain with section 32, it is a highly useful legislative
tool which allows magistrates to remove intellectually disabled defendants from the criminal justice system, in appropriate circumstances.
Inconsistencies and all, it has been adopted as a model in Commonwealth fitness legislation, and is likely to be so utilised in other
states. Whilst any attempt to re-draft the provision so as to rid it of its nonsensical aspects is welcome, it is important that
magisterial flexibility not be limited in the process.
Alternatively it has been stated that the sections operate to provide an (inappropriate) solution for matters in the “too hard
basket” rather than actually assisting the people who come before the court.
Use of s 32/33 by the courts
5.8 Table 1 (below) details statistics provided by the Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research and reveals that these sections are
raised for a variety of offences and, in 1992, nearly 400 charges were dismissed (out of a total of 149,699 charges) under these
provisions.
Table 1: Number of charges dismissed in 1992 under sections 32 and 33 by offence type
Offence (grouped by type)
No. dismissed
under s 32/33
Total charges
assault (actual bodily harm)
other assault
sexual assault
sexual offences against children
other offences against the person
break, enter and steal
larceny by shop stealing
other larceny
unlawful possession
vehicle theft
other property damage
environmental
breach of orders
other offences against justice procedures
betting and gaming offences
prostitution
liquor licensing
offensive behaviour
other offences against good order
possess/use opiates
possess/use cannabis
deal/traffic opiates
deal/traffic cannabis
deal/traffic other drug
manufacture/grow cannabis
manufacture/grow other drug
other drug offence
cause injury by driving
Driving under the influence: drink/drug
prescribed content of alcohol-high
prescribed content of alcohol-mid
prescribed content of alcohol-low
dangerous, reckless or negligent driving
other driving offences
other offences
5.9 Though according to Table 1 nearly 400 charges were dismissed using these sections in 1992, the sections may have been raised
and rejected many more times. If the numbers of people with an intellectual disability appearing on criminal charges before the Local
Courts are as high as Associate Professor Susan Hayes’ recent research suggests,
there is an enormous group of potential users for this procedure. It is therefore important that any existing difficulties with the
sections are overcome.
DIFFICULTIES WITH THE CURRENT LEGISLATION
Definitions: to whom does the procedure apply?
5.10 Section 32 contains contradictory references to the conditions to which it applies. In s 3 of the MHCP Act the term “mental
condition” is defined as “a condition of disability of mind
not including
either mental illness or
developmental disability of mind
”. The heading preceding s 32 (“Persons suffering from mental illness or condition”), though not strictly part of
the Act, may imply that the section does not refer to developmental disability, whereas developmental disability is specifically
As discussed in Chapter 2, concerns have also been expressed at the absence of a definition of “developmentally disabled”
and the resulting variation in the use of the section. “Developmentally disabled” is generally regarded as applying to
a broader group of people than those usually defined as having an intellectual disability, but the section does not provide guidance
The term is not generally used elsewhere to refer to people with a brain injury acquired after the age of 18. In practice it appears
that the procedure has also been used for such people, but this is an area which needs to be clarified.
Chapter 2 proposed that a new statutory definition of intellectual disability, applicable to the MHCP Act, be created: see Proposal
1. It also proposed that an umbrella term “impaired intellectual functioning” be introduced into Acts such as the MHCP
Act to cover all conditions which impair a person’s intellectual functioning (but not including mental illness) and that such
a term be used wherever a policy decision is made that a provision in one of these Acts should apply to all people with such an impairment,
however that condition arises. The Commission suggests that s 32 is one such provision, as it is clearly designed to apply to a broader
group than people with an intellectual disability.
5.11 The confusion caused by the current definitions (or lack thereof) under the Act has been constantly referred to in submissions
and consultations. The Commission believes that this confusion needs to be overcome but recognises the difficulty of doing so in
a way which will satisfy all interested groups, while remaining operationally practical. It must be recognised (as Table 1 shows)
that this section could be raised in a large number and variety of matters at the Local Court level, particularly with the increasing
number of indictable matters being heard summarily. As discussed in Chapter 2, the Commission does not want to propose a definition
of intellectual disability (or of any other term) which is not accepted by experts in this field for the sake of court convenience.
There are several possible alternatives, which are discussed below.
Option 1: Replace “developmental disability of mind” with “intellectual disability”, and retain “mental
condition”.
In s 32, “developmental disability of mind” could be replaced by “intellectual disability” while retaining
the reference to the general term “mental condition” to catch other relevant conditions. “Mental condition”
is currently defined as “a condition of disability of mind not including either mental illness or developmental disability
of mind”. In s 32(1)(a) the procedure is limited to “a mental condition
for which treatment is available in a hospital
”. It may be argued that some people have mental conditions which cannot be treated in a hospital but would be appropriately
diverted from the criminal justice system. If the phrase “for which treatment is available in a hospital” was removed,
this would broaden the operation of the section. This alternative has the advantage of being similar to the existing legislation,
but the term “mental condition” has already been rejected as a suitable umbrella term in Chapter 2, due to the confusion
with mental illness and the use of the term in other criminal legislation with different meanings.
Option 2: List all conditions covered separately.
In s 32, the mental disorders intended to be covered could be specifically listed, that is, specifying that the section cover intellectual
disability; mental illness as defined in the
Mental Health Act
(NSW); dementia (including senility and such disorders as Alzheimer’s disease); and brain injury. This section would not apply
to a “mentally ill person”, which is also specifically defined in the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and for which there are specific procedures under
The difficulty with this proposal is finding acceptable definitions, which do not operate too narrowly, for the listed conditions.
There may be other mental conditions which also would be appropriately covered by this section, but attempting to list and define
them all would be extremely difficult, and would require constant updating. Such a list may also lead to arguments about definitions,
rather than focusing on whether the person’s mental condition is such that they should be diverted from the criminal justice
Option 3: Use of umbrella term “impaired intellectual functioning”.
To overcome the difficulties set out in Option 2, the inclusive “umbrella” term “impaired intellectual functioning”
could be used, as discussed in para 5.10 above, rather than specifically listing all the conditions designed to be covered by the
section. “Impaired intellectual functioning” is defined (see Proposal 1) as including (but not limited to) impaired intellectual
functioning because of intellectual disability, brain injury or dementia. A definition of “intellectual disability” would
also be provided, in the same terms as that proposed for the
(NSW) (see Proposal 1).
would therefore apply to people with mental illness (as defined in the
Mental Health Act
(NSW)) and people with impaired intellectual functioning. The Commission currently supports Option 3, but recognises that this is
a particularly controversial area. Further submissions are invited on this issue.
Proving that a person is “developmentally disabled”: supporting evidence
5.15 An issue related to definitions is the degree of proof of a person’s “developmental disability” required to
satisfy the court. The Magistrate is given little assistance about the operation of the section, for example whether medical, psychiatric
or psychological evidence is required and whether it should be produced orally or in writing,
though in practice most Magistrates require a written report by an appropriate professional. The attendance of the expert is unlikely
to be necessary. Magistrates support flexibility being maintained in this area.
5.16 Concerns have been raised, however, about the lack of understanding in the judiciary generally (including Magistrates) about
intellectual disability and the effect this has on the expert evidence required and the application of the procedure. The Kingsford
Legal Centre commented:
Magistrates have an unsophisticated grasp of the concept [of intellectual disability] and require some specialist evidence before
they will be satisfied that they are dealing with a person who ought to be treated other than in accordance with the usual criminal
justice process. This expert evidence is not readily available or affordable.
The Legal Aid Commission of NSW also commented on the cost of the expert reports required for
CHP5_29" href="#fnDP35CHP5_29">
A later submission of the Legal Aid Commission also commented that the
procedure could not operate effectively if Magistrates were not sufficiently trained in this area.
For example, people without training in this area are often confused by the use of the psychological terms “mild”, “moderate”,
“severe” and “profound” intellectual disability. There appears to be a common misconception that a “mild”
intellectual disability is not significant and is not of the level of seriousness envisaged by the section. Such confusion was noted
matter observed by the Commission. However, as discussed in Chapter 2, the Commission does not believe that replacing these terms
through legislation would assist. The Commission does not believe that, if there is a clear definition of intellectual disability
and the other terms contained in the legislation, guidelines about proving intellectual disability should form part of the legislation,
but rather the material necessary to prove the alleged disability should be left to the Magistrate’s discretion. (This comment
is made, however, in the context of the Commission’s proposals, in Chapter 3, for increased judicial education in this area.)
Legislative guidelines may reduce the flexibility required to allow the section to operate effectively.
5.17 The availability of expert assistance to courts and lawyers remains a matter of concern. Expert assistance needs to be
available, particularly to legal aid lawyers, who may only meet their clients on the morning of the case. The lawyer may suspect
that a client falls within the terms of the section but may be unable to arrange an assessment in the limited time available. Similarly,
Magistrates may have concerns about the mental condition of a person appearing before them, but expert assistance is not immediately
available. This issue is discussed further in Chapters 11 and 13.
Release with conditions
5.18 As outlined above, the accused can be released either with conditions or unconditionally. Once the charge is dismissed there
is no right to bring the matter back before the court or for court supervision of the conditions. As there is no conviction, some
supervisory options, such as using community corrections, are not possible.
The Kingsford Legal Centre stated:
Magistrates are reluctant to use the provisions to allow for conditional discharge in the absence of any mechanism for review by the
Court. ... It is difficult to suggest any alternative in the absence of appropriate supervisory services.
Similar comments about the unwillingness of Magistrates to use the procedure due to the absence of sanctions have been made by the
Legal Aid Commission of NSW.
5.19 Magistrates have expressed their concern in consultations with the Commission about the “revolving door” syndrome,
with some people constantly returning before the court.
According to the Chief Magistrate of the Local Courts:
[t]he matter that causes concern is the intellectually disabled person who, while not appearing to be adequately supervised, repeatedly
commits offences which in themselves might be considered minor but could have serious consequences. ... [For example] a young woman
who was given to lighting fires, usually in public rubbish bins. It seems that despite conditions being set which are designed to
ensure supervision and thereby safeguard against further similar acts, there does need to be some responsible body that will monitor
the situation.
As the Chief Magistrate has noted, one of the major difficulties in this area appears to be a small number of people who commit many
minor offences and repeatedly have their charges dismissed under this section, but who continue to offend. The Commission is aware
of a number of offenders who have had large numbers of charges dismissed under these provisions, for example, in one case study provided
by the New South Wales Department of Community Services, the client had over 120 charges (including theft, break and enter, offensive
language, exposing in public) dismissed on the same day in court. The person’s case adviser commented that the person now had
no respect for courts, magistrates or lawyers, and the court procedures had failed to deter.
Such a state of affairs does not help the offenders themselves or the general community. In a matter observed by the Commission,
was raised, the Magistrate commented that
had been applied on at least three previous occasions and so did not appear to be working as he believed it was intended to do -
that is, as a deterrent. He commented that the community must have some expectation that there be an attempt at deterrence. The matter
was adjourned (with conditions imposed on the accused), so that further medical reports could be sought.
5.20 As outlined above, the Magistrate may dismiss the charge and discharge the defendant “into the care of a responsible person,
unconditionally or subject to conditions”,
but there are no guidelines about the proper role of any responsible person into whose custody a defendant may be released, including
what action that person may take if the accused does not comply with the conditions.
Presumably the agreement of the responsible person should be sought before such an order is made, but this is not clear in the legislation.
The Office of the Public Guardian, however, perceives benefits in this procedure:
[t]here is potential for solicitors and magistrate to put pressure on the Department of Community Services by way of adjourning proceedings
until case plans are presented which allow effective use of [the responsible person procedure]. Some magistrates are prepared to
do this, others are not.
The New South Wales Department of Community Services is concerned by such procedures, particularly by attempts by Magistrates to make
orders binding on the Department.
The role of the Department of Community Services is considered in Chapter 13. Where an accused is released “on the condition
that the defendant attend on a person or at a place specified by the Magistrate for assessment of the defendant’s mental condition
or treatment or both”,
there is no mechanism to ensure the notification of the relevant service or the person’s attendance, which has also caused
difficulties. As discussed at para 5.6, the lack of appropriate services will also limit the usefulness of this provision.
Dismissal under
possible options
5.21 From the discussion above, it appears that there are at least four possible options for
in relation to the terms upon which the person is dismissed from the criminal justice system.
Option 1: Conditions without sanctions.
This option reflects the present position, that is, there is no power to bring the person back before the court if the conditions
are not complied with. The court can, however, take into account non-compliance in a subsequent case. It has been questioned whether
the court should have the power to discharge the defendant subject to conditions without a finding of guilt and, if so, whether there
is any point in having the power to formulate conditions, when a breach of them is without remedy.
One Magistrate has commented that, in his opinion, it is worth retaining conditions as they are frequently observed, even without
a sanction. Also, the Magistrate did not see any difficulty in providing to a criminal court the power to impose sanctions upon a
person against whom no criminal offence has been proved, as
operate to provide an advantage which the rest of the population do not have: “if a person - having been offered this advantage
- will not or cannot abide by any necessary conditions on his discharge, then he should simply be placed in the same position as
the rest of the population.” He suggested, however, that there should be a maximum period (six months) after which the charge
is finally dismissed and the risk of being brought back to court disappears,
see Option 3, below. Though the Commission believes that it is more appropriate that a Magistrate imposes conditions in open court,
rather than providing this power to other bodies, for example the police,
the Commission does not believe that what is, in effect, a fiction of “conditional release” should be maintained.
Option 2: Conditions and sanctions for breach.
The lack of sanctions to ensure compliance with the conditions has been commented upon.
One possibility for consideration would be the amendment of the section to impose a penalty if conditions are breached. The Kingsford
Legal Centre’s submission argued, however, that such a provision “disregards the varying capacity of the intellectually
disabled to appreciate the need to comply with the conditions and the consequences of a breach.” Appropriate supervision was
seen as more effective.
Similarly the New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability commented that a penalty for the breach of a condition was inappropriate
[i]t could be seen to punish the person for the lack in the system. It would provide another way in which a person may be “set
up to fail”, and be caught up in the spiral once more, which is specifically what this provision should try to avoid.
IDRS also opposed sanctions for similar reasons and added that sanctions would invalidate, or at best undermine, the underlying assumption
(which the Commission assumes to be that the procedure exists for people who are not appropriately dealt with through the traditional
criminal justice process). IDRS added that sanctions were inappropriate due to the minor nature of many of the offences involved,
which would not merit a custodial sentence or even a Community Service Order in many cases.
The Commission believes that the imposing of any sanction would be unjust as, under the s 32 procedure, there has been no hearing
or finding of guilt.
Option 3: Conditions and the ability to bring the matter back before the court
if the conditions are breached within a specified period (for example, six months) after dismissal.
This would mean that s 32 would operate in a similar way to s 33, where, six months after the matter is dealt with under the section,
the charge is automatically dismissed unless the defendant has been brought back before a Magistrate to be dealt with further in
relation to the charge. This option would impose an additional restriction on the person with an intellectual disability, who has
not been found guilty of any criminal offence. As such it is subject to the same objections as Option 2 above, though this option
is, in the Commission’s view, preferable to the previous option.
Option 4: Dismissal without conditions.
The Commission suggests that it is inappropriate to impose (unenforceable) conditions, particularly where there has been no finding
of guilt against the defendant, and presently supports this option. The Commission therefore suggests that the provision for dismissal
with conditions be removed. The possibility of adjournment with conditions prior to dismissal remains, see Proposal 25A(2). The proposal
also states, see Proposal 25A(3), that the Magistrate may take into account, in making his or her determination whether or not to
exercise the discretion to dismiss the charge, any proposal relating to the care and treatment of, and provision of services to,
the defendant.
THE DEFENCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS
5.26 Currently there is no legislative provision relating to the defence of mental illness (also known as the “M’Naghten”
or “insanity” defence) in Local Courts. Presumably if the defence of mental illness (misleadingly named, as it is also
applicable to people with an intellectual disability)
was made out, the charge would be dismissed and the defendant discharged. While it is uncommon, if not unheard of, it may be appropriate
for there to be some legislative provision making clear that the defence is available, and what is to occur if it is successful.
It is likely that the issue is currently avoided by the dismissal of the charge pursuant to sections 32 or 33. It is not inconceivable
that a Magistrate may properly decline to apply these sections and then have to contend with the defence, and more particularly,
what to do with the defendant if the defence is made out. If the defence is successful in the District and Supreme Courts, the person
is detained in custody and subjected to a complex system of review by the Mental Health Review Tribunal, the Attorney General and
the Minister for Health. Release is dependent upon, firstly, a finding by the Tribunal that the person is not dangerous, and a recommendation
that the person be released, and secondly, the acceptance of that recommendation by the government.
This defence is discussed in more detail in Chapter 10 below.
5.27 If there is not to be a similarly involved process for matters dealt with in the Local Court, it is arguable that there should
at least be some mechanism for alerting the appropriate authorities to a need for services or treatment. A similar concern arises
if a charge is dismissed because a defendant in the Local Court is found unfit to be tried by a Magistrate. If the defendant has
a mental illness which poses a danger to himself or herself or to the community, it is possible that he or she will be scheduled
as an involuntary patient and presumably there is no need for a further legislative provision. The need for legislation arises if
the defendant has an intellectual disability (or another mental condition other than mental illness) and a consequent need for services,
perhaps to reduce his or her chances of being drawn back into the criminal justice system. This is addressed in the notification
provisions in Proposals 25B(7) and 25D.
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 32 AND RELATED PROVISIONS
5.28 The flexibility of the current s 32 has allowed the appropriate diverting of some defendants who have an intellectual disability,
or other mental condition, out of the criminal justice system. The following proposed alternative is intended to maintain the section’s
flexibility and at the same time clarify the above-mentioned areas of concern. The proposal responds to the need for both a diversionary
provision (where the defendant has a mental abnormality) and a general fitness provision in the Local Court with separate sections.
The proposal also includes provision for the defence of mental illness in the Local Courts. The Commission seeks submissions on the
advantages and disadvantages of this proposal. Specific questions for discussion are listed at the end of the proposal which may
assist people making submissions in this area, however comments need not be limited to the questions. The Commission acknowledges
the assistance of the Parliamentary Counsel’s Office in drafting this proposal in New South Wales legislative style.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
25. That s 32 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be re-drafted with the aim of overcoming some of the concerns highlighted in this chapter (see P25A). That provisions for
fitness hearings (see P25B, P25C) and the defence of not guilty on the grounds of mental illness, which is renamed as the defence
of mental impairment to be consistent with Chapter 10 below (see P25D), be introduced into Local Courts. No changes are proposed
to the application of the provisions (see s 31) or to the provisions for mentally ill persons contained in s 33. Consequential amendments
will also be required to s 37-39 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW).The definitions of “intellectual disability” and “impaired intellectual functioning" are those found
in Proposal 1.
PERSONS WITH INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, MENTAL CONDITION OR ILLNESS
25A. (1) A Magistrate may dismiss the charge and discharge a defendant if, at the commencement or at any time during the course of
the hearing of proceedings before a Magistrate, it appears to the Magistrate that:
(a) the defendant has impaired intellectual functioning or a mental illness, but is not a mentally ill person within the meaning
of Chapter 3 of the
Mental Health Act
(b) on an outline of the facts alleged in the proceedings, or such evidence or other material as the Magistrate may consider relevant,
the Magistrate is satisfied that to commence or continue the proceedings would not be in the interests of the community and the defendant.
(2) Before deciding to take action under this section, the Magistrate may do any one or more of the following:
(a) adjourn the proceedings;
(b) grant the defendant bail in accordance with the
(c) order the defendant to undergo a psychiatric examination or other examination;
(d) order that a psychiatric report or other report relating to the defendant be obtained;
(e) make any other interim order that the Magistrate thinks appropriate.
(3) In making a decision under this section, the Magistrate may take into account any proposal relating to the care and treatment
of, and provision of services to, the defendant.
(4) A decision under this section to dismiss a charge against a defendant does not constitute a finding that the charge against the
defendant is proven or otherwise.
UNFITNESS TO BE TRIED BY A MAGISTRATE
25B. (1) The question of a defendant’s unfitness to be tried for an offence may be raised:
(a) by a Magistrate; and
(b) by any party to proceedings before a Magistrate; and
(c) at any time during the course of the hearing of the proceedings in respect of the offence but, so far as is practicable, must
be raised before the hearing commences; and
(d) on more than one occasion in respect of the same proceedings.
(2) If the question of the defendant’s unfitness is raised the Magistrate must:
(a) consider taking action under
(b) if the Magistrate does not dismiss the charge under
or 33, conduct an inquiry into the defendant’s unfitness to be tried.
(3) The Magistrate must not take action under subsection (2) unless it appears to the Magistrate that the question has been raised
in good faith.
(4) Before conducting an inquiry the Magistrate may do any one or more of the following:
(a) adjourn the proceedings;
(b) grant the defendant bail in accordance with the
(c) remand the defendant in custody for a period not exceeding 28 days;
(d) order the defendant to undergo a psychiatric examination or other examination;
(e) order that a psychiatric report or other report relating to the defendant be obtained;
(f) make any other interim order that the Magistrate thinks appropriate.
(5) The question of a defendant’s unfitness to be tried is to be determined on the balance of probabilities.
(6) If, following an inquiry, the defendant is found fit to be tried for the offence, the Magistrate must recommence or continue the
proceedings.
(7) If, following an inquiry, the defendant is found unfit to be tried for the offence, the Magistrate:
(a) must dismiss the charge or charges and discharge the defendant; and
(b) if the Magistrate has concerns as to the adequacy of care, treatment or services for the defendant, notify (or cause to be notified)
in writing the appropriate Minister or Ministers of the concerns.
Fitness inquiry procedure
25C. (1) At an inquiry, the defendant is, unless the Magistrate otherwise allows, to be represented by a barrister or solicitor.
(2) An inquiry is not to be conducted in an adversary manner.
(3) The test of unfitness to be tried by a Magistrate is the same as the test of unfitness to be tried in the District and Supreme
(4) The onus of proof of the question of a defendant’s unfitness to be tried for an offence does not rest on any particular
party to the proceedings in respect of the offence.
EFFECT OF FINDING OF MENTAL IMPAIRMENT IN LOCAL COURT
25D. If, following a hearing before a Magistrate, the person is found not guilty by reason of mental impairment the Magistrate must;
(a) dismiss the charge and discharge the defendant; and
(b) if the Magistrate has concerns as to the adequacy of care, treatment or services for the defendant, notify (or cause to be notified)
in writing the appropriate Minister or Ministers of the concerns.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
Diversion (P25A)
. Application of the section.
The proposed version of
now applies to people with impaired intellectual functioning or a mental illness, but not to a person who is a mentally ill person
within the meaning of Chapter 3 of the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and who is therefore covered by the provisions of
“Impaired intellectual functioning” includes [but is not limited to] impaired intellectual functioning because of intellectual
disability, brain injury or dementia. It is not designed to cover mental illness.
(a) Should the procedure apply to all these groups of people? Are there other groups which should be covered? Should the reference
to “a mental condition for which treatment is available in a hospital” be retained?
(b) Are the terms chosen appropriate and sufficiently unambiguous?
(c) Would it be preferable to remove the reference to “impaired intellectual functioning” and provide instead a list
of the types of other mental disorders the section is intended to cover?
Criteria for discretion.
The proposed new test for the exercise of the Magistrate’s discretion is that he or she “is satisfied that to commence
or continue the proceedings would not be in the
interests of the community and the defendant
”, replacing the current test that the Magistrate may exercise his or her discretion “if it would be
more appropriate
to deal with the defendant in accordance with the provisions of this part than otherwise in accordance with law”. Is the new
test appropriate?
Dismissal without conditions.
As discussed above, dismissal without conditions prevents orders in relation to treatment or care of the person. It has been suggested
that this may limit the usefulness of the provisions and discourage Magistrates from using the provisions.
Implication of lack of services.
In the proposal at P25A(3) the Magistrate can take into account any proposal relating to the care and treatment of, and provision
of services to, the defendant. This may mean that, if no services or appropriate supervision are available, the Magistrate may choose
not to exercise his or her discretion. To simply dismiss the charge in circumstances where there is a lack of services or supervision
means that the person is not assisted may defeat the intention of the section. Are there other alternatives?
Fitness (P25B, P25C)
Definition.
Fitness is not defined by legislation, but rather the proposal at P25C(3) states that the “test of unfitness to be tried by
a Magistrate is the same as the test of unfitness to be tried in the District and Supreme Court, except in so far as the procedure
in the Magistrate’s court is different.” Is such a statement necessary, or would it be preferable to leave the issue
to the common law of fitness?
Notification requirements.
In the proposal at P25B(7), if a person is found unfit to be tried, the charges are to be dismissed without conditions. The Magistrate
must also notify the appropriate Minister(s) if he or she has concerns as to the adequacy of the care of a person. One Magistrate
A court should not be compelled by the legislature to take a particular course of action on anything so flimsy or so thoroughly subjective
as a “concern”. Any conscientious and sympathetic Magistrate will - nearly always - have a concern as to the adequacy
of care, etc, for any person in his court who has the misfortune to suffer from a mental illness or disability.
The Magistrate also expressed his concern whether a Magistrate would know who was the appropriate Minister and suggested instead that
such a provision should be enabling rather than mandatory and should operate “if it appears to the Court that adequate care,
treatment or services are not available to the person.” Additionally the utility of notifying the Minister has been questioned.
Alternatively it may be preferable that if the defendant is found unfit to be tried, that the Magistrate be required to take action
under the diversionary procedure. The Commission seeks comments about the notification provisions, which also apply for the defence
of mental impairment (see P25D) and possible alternatives.
Applicable offences.
Should the provision to enable a Magistrate to hold a fitness hearing only apply to summary offences, not indictable offences which
can be heard summarily? For the latter should the Magistrate just order a committal hearing?
Difference to fitness in the District and Supreme Courts.
The proposal for the Local Courts does not provide, unlike the present procedure in the District and Supreme Courts, for the possibility
that a person may
fit to be tried, nor does it include any provision for the defendant other than the notification procedure. It may be suggested that
the procedure does not achieve any more than the diversionary procedure in P25A. It does however require a Magistrate who has refused
to utilise the discretion to divert to consider the person’s fitness to be tried. The Commission seeks comments about the appropriateness
of fitness provisions without a role for the Mental Health Review Tribunal and the other procedures which apply in the District and
Supreme Courts.
Defence of mental impairment (P25D)
Dismissal if defence succeeds.
It has been suggested by a Magistrate that merely dismissing the charge if the defence of mental impairment succeeded is inappropriate
for many offences which fall under the jurisdiction of the Local Courts (see Table 1 for an indication of the range of offences),
particularly considering the increasing number of indictable offences which are heard summarily. It was suggested that for the more
serious offences there is no reason to make a distinction between the Local and Supreme/District courts in this area. The Magistrate
added: “the drastic consequences of a special verdict under the present
means that the defence of mental illness is rarely raised. The certainty of an unconditional dismissal in the Local Court (if the
defence succeeded) could be expected to make it vastly popular there.”
Advantages over the current
The MHCP Act already provides for the diversion of people with a mental illness. The Commission seeks comments about whether the
proposal will provide significant advantages over the existing procedure. The relationship between the proposal and the current s
33 will need to be considered further.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. MHCP Act, s 31(1).
Perry v Forbes
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 21 May 1993, Smart J, CLD 11333/93, at 10.
Crimes (Mental Disorder) Amendment Act
1983 (NSW), Schedule 1.
. New South Wales Government Gazette No 134 of 22 August 1986. The sections were subsequently amended by the
Crimes (Mental Illness) Amendment Act
1986 (NSW) and by the
Crimes (Mental Disorder) Amendment Act
1989 (NSW).
. There is almost no commentary on the legislation which introduced these amendments. According to the Second Reading Speech of the
Hon L Brereton MP, the Minister for Health: “[t]he next matter dealt with in [the Bill] is that of fitness to be tried. These
provisions ... remain broadly provisions for a scheme whereby mentally handicapped people, the developmentally disabled, have a proper
opportunity, when charged with criminal offences, for their presumed innocence to be demonstrated. ...” New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard),
Legislative Assembly, 22 November 1983 at 3090.
Miscellaneous Acts (Mental Health) Repeal and Amendment Act
1990 (NSW).
. The Hon P E J Collins MP, Minister for Health, commented in this regard: “The [MHCP Bill] re-enacts provisions relating to
proceedings involving persons affected by mental illness and other mental conditions which are currently contained in
Crimes Act 1900
with appropriate amendments consequential upon the drafting of the Mental Health Bill. It was considered that these provisions should
more appropriately be placed in a new principal piece of legislation.” New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard),
Legislative Assembly, 22 March 1990 at 892-893.
Mackie v Hunt
(1989) 19 NSWLR 130
at 135-136.
Mackie v Hunt
(1989) 19 NSWLR 130
in relation to the predecessor of section 32, namely s 428W of the
Perry v Forbes
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 21 May 1993, Smart J, CLD 11333/93, at 18. Smart J previously stated: “[i]f the magistrate
takes the view, after hearing any medical evidence, that the charge should not be dealt with under
and there is still a real question of fitness to plead and to give instructions then it would be appropriate for the magistrate to
exercise his discretion under s 497 of the
and to commence committal proceedings.”
(NSW) s 476.
Criminal Procedure (Indictable Offences) Amendment Bill
1994 (NSW).
Pioch v Lauder
(1976) 13 ALR 266.
(This case was also referred to in
Mackie v Hunt
(1989) 19 NSWLR 130
, at 135.) In
Forster J of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory stated that at common law the correct approach was to treat the defendant
as if he were insane. His Honour commented, at 271: “[t]his rather bizarre and no doubt offensive result seems to follow from
the authorities (
R v Pritchard
[1836] EngR 540
(1836) 173 ER 135
[1876] 1 QB 447;
R v Presser
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45
[1960] 1 QB 325; [1959] 3 All ER 418). If this be right, and it seems clear that it is, what should the learned stipendiary magistrate
do? If this were an indictable offence he should proceed with the hearing and commit the defendant for trial. ... In the case of
simple offence, however, there appears to be neither authority nor statutory provision to deal with the matter of a defendant who
is insane, whether properly so called as being a person suffering from a sufficient defect of reason, or disease of the mind, or
a person like the defendant here.” [The defendant in that case was an Aboriginal person who was totally deaf, unable to use
speech, and who, it was stated, had not absorbed the cultural or moral values of Aboriginal, tribal or European society.]
Minister for Corrective Services v Harris
(1989) 8 (12)
Petty Sessions Review
3892 at 3896-3897.
. Mr I H Pike, The Chief Magistrate of the Local Courts (New South Wales)
(30 July 1992) at 1.
. For example, Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 2.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 2, 10.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 2.
Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 4.
. Consultation with the DPP, Police Prosecutors, Legal Aid Commission of NSW, Law Society of New South Wales, Public Defenders, Aboriginal
Legal Service and the Judicial Commission on 1 March 1994.
. Extracted from “NSW Local Criminal Courts 1992: Number of charges, outcome of charges” provided by the New South Wales
Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances Before Local Courts
(Research Report 4, 1993). The study found that 14.2% of the sample of 120 people had an intellectual disability and a further 8.8%
were in the borderline category.
. At s 32(1)(a). Subsection 32(3)(b) also refers to the defendant’s “mental condition”.
. See, for example Inspector P Morgan
Oral Submission
(5 January 1994).
. Mr G Simpson, Social Worker, Head Injury Outreach Team, Lidcombe Hospital
(21 February 1994) at 15.
. Mr I H Pike, The Chief Magistrate of the Local Courts (New South Wales)
(30 July 1992) at 1.
. Consultation with Magistrates, Downing Centre on 22 March 1994.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1991) at 4.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(8 January 1992) at 2.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 6. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability made similar comments: “many solicitors, magistrates
and judges ... do not fully understand the procedures, or their intended operation. Council would welcome the development of resources
and educational programs which better explain this and related issues ...”:
(16 September 1992) at 10.
. Mr I H Pike, The Chief Magistrate of the Local Courts (New South Wales)
(30 July 1992) at 1.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 4.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 6.
. Consultation with Magistrates, Downing Centre on 22 March 1994.
. Mr I H Pike, The Chief Magistrate of the Local Courts (New South Wales)
(30 July 1992) at 1.
. Consultation with the New South Wales Department of Community Services on 29 November 1993 and letter from the Department dated
16 December 1993.
. MHCP Act s 32(3)(a).
. Mr I H Pike, The Chief Magistrate of the Local Courts (New South Wales)
(30 July 1992) at 2.
. New South Wales. Office of the Public Guardian
(26 August 1992) at 2.
. Consultation with the Department of Community Services on 8 March 1993.
. MHCP Act s 32(3)(b).
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 4.
. Magistrate M C Beveridge
(5 April 1994) at 1.
. See New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
(Discussion Paper 29, 1993), ch 7.
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper, 1991) at 4-5.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1991) at 4.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 10.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 9.
. This option was suggested by Magistrate M C Beveridge
(5 April 1994) at 1.
. See Chapter 10, which proposes that the defence be re-named as the defence of mental impairment.
Mental Health Act
. The Commission has discussed several versions of the draft proposals with a variety of people, including the New South Wales Parliamentary
Counsel’s Office, Magistrates from the Downing Centre and Legal Aid Commission solicitors. The Commission is very grateful
for their detailed comments and has included some of their suggestions in the proposals or the points for discussion. Except where
indicated, however, the proposals should not be seen as representing their views.
. Magistrate M C Beveridge
(5 April 1994) at 2.
. Magistrate M C Beveridge
(5 April 1994) at 2.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
6. Competence to Give Evidence
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
6.1 For witnesses with an intellectual disability, the preliminary issue is whether the court will allow them to give evidence. The
law of competency is currently a complex combination of common law and statutory amendment, designed to determine who should be able
to give evidence in court. As a general proposition, witnesses are assumed to be competent. However, people with an intellectual
disability are one category of witness whose competence to give evidence is often disputed. It is argued that the present law may
operate unfairly to exclude from evidence the reliable testimony of certain types of witness (including people with an intellectual
disability). The rules of competency may also affect pre-trial decisions, as police officers and lawyers may assume that prosecuting
a suspect is pointless if the alleged victim, or the only witness to the crime, will, they believe, be found to be an incompetent
witness and thus unable to give evidence.
6.2 The Australian Law Reform Commission (“ALRC”) stated in its Interim Report on Evidence that a test of competence is
Without it, the courts would be faced, on occasions, with evidence of no probative value, thus adding to the cost and expense of the
trial. However, the wrong balance is struck under existing law. It is most important for the fact finding exercise and for the fairness
of the trial system that a person who can give relevant evidence be permitted to do so.
6.3 A court obviously needs to decide if a witness is
of giving accurate and reliable evidence. The issue to be discussed in this chapter is whether the present rules are the most appropriate
ones. The common law of competency is first briefly discussed, followed by an overview of changes which have resulted from legislative
reform. Finally, the legislative position that would result from the passing of the exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) is outlined. The Bill, if passed, should overcome some of the difficulties set out in this chapter.
6.4 Throughout the chapter, reference will often be made to cases and legislation involving children as witnesses. This is for several
reasons. Many of the cases in which competency has become a contentious issue have concerned children who have been called as witnesses,
and whose ability to understand the necessary concepts has been called into question. Secondly,
of the difficulties encountered by children are similar to those faced by people with an intellectual disability. It should, however,
be emphasised that people with an intellectual disability do not have the same intellectual capacity and development as children,
and should not be treated as such. Thirdly, all Australian jurisdictions have now enacted legislation which makes it easier for children
to be able to give evidence. It has been argued that these provisions should be extended to include people with an intellectual disability.
THE REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPETENCY
6.5 According to the ALRC, the traditional test for competence is that “a person taking the oath understand its nature and consequences”.
The existence of a mental disorder does not necessarily render the witness incompetent, for example, in the English case of
a witness who had delusions that spirits spoke to him (and who was otherwise rational and sane) was held to be competent. The High
Court has commented: “[s]ince
an insane person is not rejected as a witness unless his form of derangement is such as to affect his testimony on the particular
facts or class of matter to which he is to depose.”
It has been stated that, while these observations were directed toward witnesses with a mental illness, they may apply to witnesses
with an intellectual disability.
6.6 At common law, a witness was required to have a religious belief before being considered competent to swear an oath before the
Significant changes, however, have been brought about by legislation which removes the requirement for witnesses to possess religious
beliefs. Such changes recognised that while many people were technically ineligible to be called as witnesses for this reason, there
was no substantive basis for their evidence to be regarded as unreliable. The
(“the Act”) allows witnesses to make an “affirmation” (declaration) instead of an oath. The affirmation simply
omits those parts of the oath which give it a religious character.
6.7 However the removal of the requirement of religious belief does not assist a witness who does not understand the meaning of the
oath. In the case of
Cheers v Porter
the High Court held that s 13 of the Act is “designed to prevent possible loss of testimony by the fact of religious unbelief
or religious disbelief.” It does not assist a person whose incompetence to give evidence “results from mental incapacity
or defective intellect”.
According to a later case, a witness must still be “... sufficiently intelligent to be capable of giving a rational account
of what he has seen and heard, and understand the duty of telling the truth.”
For a witness to possess an understanding of the duty to tell the truth, he or she must realise that giving evidence to the court:
... is a grave and weighty matter calling for great care to tell the truth beyond what might be necessary for matters of trivial importance
in ordinary daily living.
6.8 The test for competence therefore remains that the person taking the oath have “sufficient intelligence” to understand
its nature and consequences. The case law is not clear about whether it is necessary that the witness have some awareness of the
divine sanction attending a breach of an oath such that it would have some binding effect on the witness’ conscience.
Unlike Australia,
the English courts have recently moved away from imposing such a strict requirement. For example, in the case of
the English Court of Appeal stated that:
[i]t is unrealistic not to recognise that, in the present state of society, amongst the adult population the divine sanction of an
oath is probably not generally recognised.
The important consideration, we think, when a judge has to decide whether a child should properly be sworn, is whether the child has
sufficient appreciation of the solemnity of the occasion, and the added responsibility to tell the truth, which is involved in taking
an oath, over and above the duty to tell the truth which is an ordinary duty of normal social conduct.
[emphasis added]
Following this case the English Court of Appeal upheld a decision to admit the testimony of a rape complainant with “low mental
ability” (said to have a mental age of about 10 years). The trial judge had decided that the victim was competent though without
sufficient belief in the existence of God. The Court of Appeal confirmed that it was no longer necessary that a witness should have
an awareness of the divine sanction of the oath to be properly sworn.
Special provisions for children
6.9 In New South Wales changes to the Act substantially alter the relevant test for the “sufficient intelligence” of witnesses
under the age of 12 years,
by relaxing some of the strict requirements that previously have excluded their testimony. Section 33 of the Act was inserted in
1985 so that children unable to take an oath could make a declaration and give evidence.
The interpretation of this section meant that significant restrictions on the ability of children to give evidence remained in place.
In 1990 the section was therefore again amended
to allow a child to give evidence even where he or she does not understand the duty of telling the truth before the court. The Attorney
General, in his Second Reading Speech, referred to expert opinion that a child under the age of six does have the
to tell the truth, yet could not be expected to understand the
to tell the truth before the court.
Inquiries into the (child) witness’ possession of “sufficient intelligence” are no longer directed toward an appreciation
of the solemnity of the court’s processes and of its importance, but simply to whether or not the witness can tell the truth
6.10 The position in New South Wales now is that “when the court, justice or [authorised] person is satisfied, having regard
to the child’s age and any other matters thought relevant, that the child is not competent to take an oath,” the child’s
evidence is to be received
as if it were given on oath,
provided that the court tells the child the importance of telling the truth; and that the child makes the declaration “I will
not tell any lies in court”.
There are two presumptions: that the child understands the difference between the truth and a lie; and that the child can respond
rationally to questions.
If either of these presumptions is rebutted to the satisfaction of the court, the evidence is inadmissible.
It has been commented that the Act is deficient in not specifying when, how and by whom these presumptions are to be rebutted, and
in not clarifying the role of the court. The same author suggests that “[w]hile it looks as though it has removed a competency
test, it is clear it has only rephrased it in part and included a new criteria ‘to respond rationally to questions’.”
Difficulties faced by the witness with an intellectual disability
6.11 There are no such special provisions for the witness with an intellectual disability who is over the age of 12 years, although
such people could fall into the category of persons who have the capacity to tell the truth, but who may have difficulties under
the current competency test. The difficulties faced by such a witness have been set out in a case study prepared for the Commission
was challenged at trial:
The committal Voir Dire was of about 2 hours duration and concluded with Magistrate [Y] finding [X] competent to give evidence.
The trial commenced with a Voir Dire lasting about three days. In the defence submission they requested that [X] give ... evidence
Fortunately, Judge [Z] would not permit this to happen and hence [X’s] evidence during the Voir Dire was regarding [X’s]
ability to tell the truth and [X’s] ability to take an oath or make an affirmation. However, some of the issues dealt with
went way beyond that.
As part of the Voir Dire, evidence was given by [X, X’s mother, X’s teacher, the Crown psychologist and the Defence psychologist].
[X] was found competent to give evidence and made an affirmation prior to giving evidence. ...
In [X’s] case a lengthy debate occurred about whether [X] understood the “duty to tell the truth” as opposed to
knowing what the truth is.
The Crown examined the Defence Psychologist as to
understanding of the concept ... and with his level of intelligence he had difficulty expressing his understanding of “duty
to tell the truth”, yet he expects [X], who
has assessed as a four year old to understand.
To overcome such difficulties the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service suggested that amendments similar to
those enacted for children be considered for adults with an intellectual disability.
The New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee suggested that changes to the Act should be made to enable evidence to be received if
an undertaking, rather than an oath, was given.
6.12 Similar problems arise under the
Justices (Committal Statements) Amendment Act
1990 (NSW) which allows written statements to be tendered at committal hearings instead of oral evidence in certain circumstances.
Section 48C provides two forms of endorsement for the statements, one for children under 12 years (“I have not told any lies
in this statement”) and a more complicated one for people over 12 years (“This statement made by me accurately sets out
the evidence which I would be prepared, if necessary to give in court as a witness. The statement is true to the best of my knowledge
and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated
in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.”) The latter statement would have obvious difficulties
for many people with an intellectual disability over the age of 12 years.
THE EVIDENCE BILL
6.13 Following the recommendations of the Australian and New South Wales Law Reform Commissions
a new test for competency to give evidence is now contained in the exposure draft of the New South Wales
Evidence Bill
1993, which, if passed by Parliament, will replace the present
Evidence Act
(NSW). The Commonwealth has already introduced into Parliament its
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth), which is in almost identical terms to the New South Wales Bill to ensure uniformity between the treatment of federal
and state offences. The
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) contains a simple and comprehensive approach to the determination of competency. All persons are to be presumed competent
to give evidence, unless the contrary is established to the court’s satisfaction.
Instead of a test based upon the person’s understanding of the nature and consequences of the oath, the requirement is that
the witness understand the obligation to give truthful answers and be able to understand and respond rationally to questions.
Clause 12 therefore provides that a person who is incapable of understanding the obligation to give truthful evidence is not competent
to give sworn evidence. Such persons, however, are competent to give
unsworn evidence
(a) the court is satisfied that the person understands the difference between the truth and a lie; and
(b) the court tells the person that it is important to tell the truth; and
(c) the person indicates, by responding appropriately when asked, that he or she will not tell lies in the proceeding.
The clause also provides that persons incapable of giving a rational reply to questions about a particular fact are not competent
to give either sworn or unsworn evidence on that fact, but may be competent to give sworn or unsworn evidence on other facts. Furthermore,
a person is only incompetent to give either sworn or unsworn evidence if the person is incapable of hearing or understanding questions,
or replying to them,
this incapacity cannot be overcome, (presumably by the use of interpreters etc, see Chapter 7).
Clause 13 of the Commonwealth Bill is in identical terms. The proposed changes are contained in general provisions applicable to
all witnesses, not only to specific groups such as children. For the time being, however, the issue of competency of the witness
with an intellectual disability largely remains to be determined at common law.
Unsworn evidence
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) is significant in introducing the concept of unsworn evidence by a witness into New South Wales. It is important to note
the difference between evidence given by way of an affirmation (instead of an oath) or evidence given by children by declaration
(which is to be treated as if it were on oath) and
evidence. In New South Wales currently there is no provision for unsworn evidence. In other States there is provision for unsworn
evidence, though the groups of people which can give such evidence and the way it is to be treated (for example, whether there are
corroboration requirements or not) varies from state to state. It remains to be seen how the New South Wales courts will treat such
unsworn evidence.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
26. The Commission does not make a new proposal in relation to competence but rather supports cl 11 and cl 12 of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
(Interim Report 26, 1985) Vol 1 at para 521.
R v Brasier
[1730] EngR 38
(1779) 1 Leach 199:
Cheers v Porter
[1931] HCA 51
(1931) 46 CLR 521
(1851) 2 Den 254:
, cited in ALRC Interim Report 26, 1985, Vol 2, Appendix C at para 1.
(1851) 2 Den 254,
169 ER 495.
Sinclair v R
[1946] HCA 55
(1946) 73 CLR 316
, per Dixon J at 333.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 103.
. See, for example,
R v Brasier
[1730] EngR 38
(1779) 1 Leach 199
168 ER 202.
For subsequent Australian cases see
[1977] Qd R 220
R v Schlaefer
(1992) 57 SASR 423.
Cheers v Porter
[1931] HCA 51
(1931) 46 CLR 521.
The leading judgment was given by Evatt J (Gavan Duffy CJ and Starke J agreeing).
. Per Evatt J at 536. See also
(1941) 59 WN (NSW) 8
at 10, per Jordan CJ, Davidson and Halse Rogers JJ agreeing;
R v Johnston
[1982] 2 NSWLR 897
Passlow v O’Bourne
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 4 September 1987, Allen J, CLD 15693/87.
(1941) 59 WN (NSW) 8
at 10 per Jordan CJ, Davidson and Halse Rogers JJ agreeing. See also
R v Johnston
[1982] 2 NSWLR 897
at 900 per Street CJ.
Passlow v O’Bourne
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 4 September 1987, Allen J, 15693/87 at 3.
. ALRC Interim Report 26, 1985, Vol 2, Appendix C at para 1.
[1977] Qd R 220.
[1977] 2 All ER 288 at 291, per Bridge L J, delivering the judgment of the court. Note, however, that the
Criminal Justice Act
1991 (UK) s 52(1), now provides that all children under the age of 14 are to give their evidence unsworn in criminal proceedings,
thus eliminating difficulties in understanding the oath.
R v Bellamy
(1986) 82 Cr App R 222.
Criminal Law Review
was also applied by the Court of Appeal in
(1989) 91 Cr App R 36.
. For the purposes of the
(NSW), “child” means a person under the age of twelve years:
Oaths (Children) Amendment Act
1985 (NSW). To give evidence the child had to demonstrate the ability to understand the duty to tell the truth before the court.
R v Vincent
(1990) 50 A Crim R 25
, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that, in order to allow a child to give evidence in this fashion, the trial judge
“must be satisfied not only that the child tells the truth but also that the child understands the duty of telling the truth”,
per Meagher JA at 27, Campbell and Newman JJ agreeing.
Oaths (Children) Amendment Act
1990 (NSW).
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 14 November 1990 at 9667.
, Tenth Schedule.
Section 33(4).
Section 33(3).
. L Rogers “New rules on evidence for the under 12s” (April 1991) 29 (3)
Law Society Journal
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 26-28.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 6.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 4.
. Rogers at 49.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
(Report 38, 1987) and New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Report 56, 1988).
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW), cl 11, 12(5).
. ALRC Report 38 at para 64-65. This test was also supported by the New South Wales Law Reform Commission.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 12(2). This subsection was not contained in the original Australian Law Reform Commission and New South Wales Law
Reform Commission Bills.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 12(4).
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
7. Giving Evidence in Court
History of this Reference (Digest)
7.1 Despite a finding of fitness to be tried (in the case of an accused) or of competence (for a witness), people with an intellectual
disability may still be significantly disadvantaged giving evidence in court, through communication difficulties or lack of understanding
of the court process. This chapter will analyse existing and proposed procedures to assist a person with an intellectual disability
to give evidence in court. The chapter first considers general issues such as increasing understanding of the court process, the
need for witness support, the use of interpreters, appropriate examination and cross-examination, case management options and the
new provisions in the exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW). The chapter then discusses special procedures for giving evidence (such as screens, closed-circuit television and videorecording)
which have already been implemented for certain “vulnerable” witnesses, including, in some jurisdictions, people with
an intellectual disability, and questions whether these should be extended in New South Wales. Chapter 8 will consider issues relating
to the reliability of the evidence of the person with an intellectual disability, whether the accused or a witness, and the role
of expert evidence. Many of the procedures discussed have been previously recommended for children, who are also considered to be
particularly vulnerable in the criminal justice system. The Commission believes that it should not be assumed that alternate arrangements
for children will automatically assist people with an intellectual disability, as the two groups have different needs, experiences
and abilities.
UNDERSTANDING THE COURT PROCESS
7.2 A witness with an intellectual disability may have difficulty understanding the court procedure, their role in it, and overcoming
the anxiety involved in giving evidence. Submissions have stated that greater effort is required to ensure that the court system
is comprehensible to such witnesses.
Procedures for preparing the witness for the trial and supporting him or her in the court room are considered below. The questioning
techniques which are used, particularly in cross examination, may also affect the witness’ ability to give evidence, and this
is discussed further at paras 7.14-7.19.
Witness support - before court
7.3 In South Australia, the Police Department has prepared guidelines for its police prosecutors about intellectual disability
to allow them to assist witnesses to feel more at ease before giving evidence. The police prosecutors are encouraged to show witnesses
through the court room, to explain what the witness should expect and to use the Court Companion service offered by the Victims of
Crime Service.
In New South Wales there have been several recent initiatives involving witness support. For example, the Office of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (“DPP”) has established a Witness Assistance Service and prepared brochures about the court experience.
The DPP has employed three counsellors to provide information and assistance to victims and witnesses, and to recruit community volunteers
to provide additional assistance.
The DPP has commented that social workers within the prosecution service are believed to be far more effective in dealing with victims
and witnesses pre-trial than external social workers who do not understand the constraints of the law.
7.4 A case study presented to the Commission commented on the efforts made by the DPP and one of the Crown Prosecutors involved to
make a witness with an intellectual disability [“X”] feel comfortable and to gain X’s trust. Time was spent explaining
court procedures and getting to know X’s communication skills. The DPP allocated an additional solicitor known to the witness
for support throughout the trial, to overcome the difficulties caused by unavoidable changes in personnel, even though that solicitor
was not directly involved in the conduct of the trial. The support continued after the trial.
The submission commented on the need to prepare the witness with an intellectual disability before going to court, but noted the
danger that, if this was not done properly, the preparation could be used to suggest the contamination of evidence. Though the submission
commented that the DPP’s video for young people going to court was extremely effective for a child with an intellectual disability,
it was suggested an appropriate video for adults should be prepared.
Accused persons with an intellectual disability could also benefit from such a video.
7.5 There are also a variety of general witness support or “court companion” initiatives, largely provided by volunteers,
attached to particular courts throughout New South Wales. These include services provided by the Redfern Legal Centre,
by a number of church groups and by specific government agencies, such as the NSW Police Service.
A community-based organisation, the CRC Justice Support Inc, operates a Court Support Scheme in 16 Local Courts.
The Scheme’s volunteers offer emotional support for defendants, victims, witnesses, families or friends during the court experience
and provide information on court procedure, the availability of legal and interpreter services and about welfare or other community
agencies in the local area. They also make representations on behalf of clients to appropriate agencies. In six courts a domestic
violence support service is also offered, but they do not have any specialist service for people with an intellectual disability.
The Commission is unaware of any witness support service with particular expertise in intellectual disability issues. Special programs
for the preparation of child witnesses have been recommended.
Similar proposals would be helpful for the witness with an intellectual disability. (Witness support in the court room itself is
discussed as part of the special procedures for vulnerable witnesses at paras 7.24-7.25 below.)
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
27. The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, New South Wales should develop guidelines for preparing witnesses with an intellectual
disability for court. A video explaining court procedures to adults with an intellectual disability should be produced.
CASE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS
Closed courts and adjournments
7.6 In court, a witness with an intellectual disability is likely to find giving evidence mentally exhausting and to lose concentration
more quickly than a non-disabled witness. The Commonwealth Office of Legal Aid and Family Services suggested that frequent adjournments
and closing the court during the giving of evidence by a witness with an intellectual disability might be valuable protections.
In New South Wales the court can hear evidence relating to certain defined offences “in camera” (that is, excluding the
media and the general public).
This provision is used, for example, in many child sexual assault cases. Other jurisdictions have similar provisions. The Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia (“WALRC”) has also recommended, where child witnesses were giving evidence, that courts
should remain closed.
This option may minimise stress for the witness but provides limited additional protection to the witness. The Commission believes
that these issues should be left to the discretion of the courts and that no further proposal is necessary.
Expedition of cases involving people with an intellectual disability
7.7 A number of submissions have suggested the need to “fast track” cases involving people with an intellectual disability,
whether a witness or the accused. The Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service (“IDRS”), for example,
recommended priority listings, owing to the fact that many people with an intellectual disability have difficulty recalling events
in sequential order after the event and the longer the delay between the event and the trial, the more difficult it was for the person
to give their evidence.
The Kingsford Legal Centre also commented that the time people with an intellectual disability spend in custody awaiting trial should
be kept as short as possible, owing to their vulnerability in custody.
The advantage of expedition of cases involving witnesses with an intellectual disability is that there is no disadvantage to the
accused, other than the fact that delay can sometimes advantage the accused in dulling a (prosecution) witness’ memory.
7.8 Other submissions have commented on the need to minimise court appearances and delays, due to the difficulty for the person with
an intellectual disability (whether the accused or a witness) in comprehending what is happening.
For the accused with an intellectual disability, proceedings may have been considerably delayed by fitness issues. In New South Wales,
so-called “paper committals” are now available
for an “offence involving violence” to reduce the distress to the alleged victim in having to give evidence at both the
committal and the trial. For such offences, the victim’s written statement is provided and the victim is not required to attend
at the committal hearing unless the court is satisfied there are “special reasons” for oral evidence. This will reduce
the number of court appearances and will remove the stress of giving evidence twice. The Commission proposes that matters involving
an accused or a victim with an intellectual disability should be expedited wherever practicable, but seeks submissions from the agencies
involved such as the NSW Police Service, the DPP, the Legal Aid Commission of NSW and the Department of Courts Administration about
the logistical and other difficulties involved and how these may best be overcome.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
28. Matters involving an accused or a victim with an intellectual disability should be expedited wherever practicable.
THE LANGUAGE USED IN THE COURT ROOM: QUESTIONING AND “INTERPRETERS”
“Interpreters” for people with an intellectual disability
7.9 People who come from non-English speaking backgrounds or who are deaf often use an interpreter to give evidence in court. The
use of interpreters for such people has been considered in detail.
The use of interpreters and communication boards to assist people with limited verbal speech, however, needs to be clarified.
The New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee, for example, submitted that the right to an interpreter must be provided by legislation
and extend to the use of communication translators.
A person with an intellectual disability may not be able to communicate in a conventional manner, but may be able to use simple sign
language, a communication board, or a combination of speech, gestures and pointing to symbols (for example, “Compic”
symbols) to communicate. A person familiar with the means used can “interpret” the answers of the witness.
Alternatively the person may not need to use such methods as a communication board, but his or her language may still be limited
or hard to understand. It has therefore been argued that appropriate support people should be recognised in the same way as a court
interpreter in those cases.
The Canadian Roeher Institute commented that support:
may be especially important for witnesses who have a severe intellectual disability. Often these persons have limited use of language,
and can only be understood by those familiar with their speech patterns and vocabulary. They may also have difficulty understanding
strangers and may need someone to interpret counsel’s questions.
The Institute, however, also recognised the possibility of bias (actual or perceived) where a close relative acts as the interpreter
of a victim in a criminal trial. This is a difficult issue as only someone well known to the person (usually a family member or a
carer) may be able to provide the interpretation needed.
Difficulties also arise because each person’s method of communication may be different, depending upon their level of disability
and, in some cases, the effect of an additional physical disability.
7.10 Currently there is no general right to an interpreter in court; the decision to provide one or not is a matter of judicial discretion.
In a criminal trial, fairness to the accused is paramount; both the accused and the judge/jury must be able to hear and understand
a witness’ evidence.
The Commission is not aware of any cases where the role of an “interpreter” for a witness with an intellectual disability
has been considered. However, a conviction for rape was upheld in a 1907 case
after the mother of a complainant of “weak intellect” repeated unintelligible parts of her testimony for the benefit
of the judge. She was not required to have been sworn as an interpreter. The situation of deaf and mute witnesses has been raised
by way of analogy, though the two are not directly comparable, as the low level (or complete absence) of spoken language for a person
with an intellectual disability involves more than a physical disability. The use of an interpreter to explain the court proceedings
in general to a deaf and mute applicant (rather than to just translate questions and answers involving the applicant) was recognised
by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in a civil matter, where Kirby J noted that the entitlement to due process of law:
... normally includes an entitlement to be informed, in a language which the litigant understands, of the nature of the case. Where
the litigant cannot communicate orally in English it also normally includes, in my opinion, the entitlement to the assistance of
an interpreter.
While such rulings do not directly provide for special “interpreters” to be used for witnesses whose intellectual disability
affects their ability to communicate and understand proceedings, they provide a strong policy argument for their use.
The Evidence Bill
7.11 Following the recommendations of the Australian and New South Wales Law Reform Commissions
the use of interpreters is now contained in the exposure draft of the New South Wales
Evidence Bill
1993 (“the Bill”), which, if passed by Parliament, will replace the present
Evidence Act
(NSW). The Commonwealth has already introduced into Parliament its
Evidence Bill
1993, which is in almost identical terms to the New South Wales Bill, to ensure uniformity between the treatment of federal and state
offences. The provisions in relation to interpreters are found in cl 31-32 of the New South Wales Bill,
which are set out in full in Appendix C. In brief, the Bill provides a general right to a witness to give evidence by an interpreter,
provided that he or she cannot “understand and speak English sufficiently to enable the witness to understand, and to make
an adequate reply to, questions”. This creates a presumption in favour of the availability of an interpreter, though the decision
rests with the court, not the witness. Further, witnesses who cannot either hear and/or speak adequately may be questioned or give
by any appropriate means,
which presumably would include the use of recognised communication systems.
7.12 Some witnesses with an intellectual disability may have speech that is impaired to the degree that they cannot make adequate
replies in English. The level of speech incapacity required before an interpreter can be used, however, would seemingly preclude
the assistance of people playing an essentially supportive role. The Commission supports cl 31-32 of the Bill but seeks submissions
disability. The Commission also seeks further information about the numbers of people with an intellectual disability who may require
some form of interpreter assistance. Some witnesses with an intellectual disability who cannot “understand and speak the English
language sufficiently” may be found to be incompetent to give evidence in any event. The more difficult area is people with
an intellectual disability with limited language skills.
7.13 Three other issues which arise in relation to interpreters are: whether only accredited interpreters should be used; whether
they should be available to an accused for the whole criminal trial: and, if so, who should pay for this. In its 1992 Report on
Multiculturalism and the Law
, the Australian Law Reform Commission (“ALRC”) stated:
The arguments in favour of using only a professional interpreter are very clear in the context of a criminal trial. Given the potential
consequences of a conviction of a criminal offence, it is particularly important that there should be no misunderstanding. The evidence
of witnesses in a criminal trial should be interpreted by a professional interpreter if interpretation is necessary.
The Commission seeks submissions about whether accreditation is possible or appropriate for the types of interpreters necessary for
witnesses with an intellectual disability. The ALRC also recommended that if the accused cannot understand what is said in court,
he or she should be entitled (at the expense of the government) to an interpreter to interpret the whole of his or her trial for
the offence, whether or not her or she chooses to give evidence.
It is likely that most accused persons with an intellectual disability will have difficulty understanding the level of language used
in a court room. The Commission seeks submissions about whether some form of interpreter should be provided for the accused with
an intellectual disability for the
criminal trial (not just for the giving of their evidence) and, if so, what should be the test for the provision of such assistance.
Appropriate questioning
7.14 Even if an interpreter is not necessary, the language used in court will be particularly hard to understand for a person with
an intellectual disability. Difficult questions for such people include leading or lengthy questions, those spoken rapidly, or containing
many concepts or double negatives.
Such questions are likely to arise in cross-examination. The need for lawyers to use appropriate questioning or communication techniques
has already been discussed in Chapter 3 in relation to interviews.
The Evidence Bill
7.15 Under the present
Evidence Act
1898 (NSW) the court has a discretion to forbid indecent or scandalous questions, questions intended to insult or annoy and questions
which only affect the credit of the witness if, in the court’s opinion “the matter is so remote in time, or of such a
nature that an admission of its truth would not materially affect the credibility of the witness.”
Such protections are not likely to provide much assistance to a person with an intellectual disability. The Bill (see excerpts in
Appendix C) provides for additional court control over the questioning of witnesses,
for example:
the court can make orders about the way witnesses are to be questioned and the presence and behaviour of any person in connection
with the questioning of the witness (cl 27);
a witness can give evidence in “narrative” form rather than by questions and answers (cl 30); and
the court can take a number of matters into account in disallowing “improper” questions or leading questions in cross-examination,
including the witness’ intellectual disability (cl 42 and cl 43).
7.16 The above clauses, if they become law, are likely to lessen the disadvantages faced by the witness with an intellectual disability.
Their effectiveness, particularly in relation to the disallowing of leading and improper questions in cross-examination, will only
become apparent after use. Being able to tell their story in narrative form may assist some witnesses and may lessen the potential
for misunderstanding, or being confused by, questions. It may also lead to an increase in accuracy for some witnesses, as research
has suggested that the accuracy of child witnesses, including children with “learning difficulties” decreases in comparison
to adult witnesses when specific (but not leading) questions were used, rather than free recall or general questions.
Limits on the use of leading questions in cross-examination are important as it has been stated that, for people with an intellectual
disability, “more accurate information is likely to be obtained if leading questions are not used ... general questions appear
to yield the most accurate information.”
The question remains whether the provisions in the Bill are sufficient. It has been recognised that some of the disadvantages faced
by witnesses with an intellectual disability, such as susceptibility to authority figures, difficulty with abstract concepts or double
negatives, and the possibility that they may answer “yes” to a question they do not understand are difficult to overcome
by legislation. It is unclear whether counsel could object to a question involving an abstract concept under cl 42 on the ground
that it is “misleading” or “unduly annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive, oppressive or repetitive”.
Therefore the legal education and court support proposals outlined in Chapter 3 and above become crucial.
Limited cross-examination
7.17 It has been stated that cross-examination is particularly difficult for witnesses with an intellectual disability
and that there should be additional limits on the cross-examination of such witnesses. This is an extremely contentious issue, as
it has been argued that any such limitation would adversely affect the rights of the other party. One submission stated that the
use of interpreters (see above) to assist in the comprehension of questions asked of a witness with an intellectual disability was
preferable, as it may not be possible to limit cross-examination and remain fair to the accused in all cases.
7.18 Another submission provided a review (from transcripts) of the cross-examination of an alleged victim with an intellectual disability.
The submission commented on the fact that the language used by the cross-examiner served “to obfuscate, confuse, unsettle and
negate the testimony the witness has to give.” The cross-examination included: indeterminate language (not defining the scope
of the question and thus confusing the possible answers); repetition of the witness’ answers; sudden topic changes; questions
relating to conversations about the experience rather than the experience itself; multifaceted or over-general questions; imprecise
use of expressions such as “often” or “lots”; negative rhetorical questions; misinterpretation of the witness’
use of “I don’t know”; and specialist legal terms such as “lower court”. The cross-examiner then submitted
that the witness was “incapable of giving coherent evidence” and had given numerous unresponsive answers.
Another submission on cross-examination commented on the numbers of questions relating to time, distance and sequence, which had
been identified as difficult areas for the witness, and the long periods spent in the witness box despite the short attention span
(15-20 minutes) of the witness. The submission concluded that not limiting cross-examination led to injustices for the person with
an intellectual disability.
7.19 The Commission at this stage of its enquiry supports the provisions of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) in the area of cross-examination. It is difficult to comment on how effective the Bill will be to overcome the disadvantages
discussed above until it is in operation. The Commission seeks submissions about whether any further protections, other than those
outlined in the remainder of this chapter, are necessary to ensure that people with an intellectual disability are not disadvantaged
by questioning techniques.
SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR “VULNERABLE” WITNESSES’ EVIDENCE
7.20 Apart from the above issues relating to what questions can be asked and whether the witness needs an interpreter, there remains
the issue of
his or her testimony ought to be given. For instance, should it be given in the witness box in the usual way with the accused present
in the court, or should some special procedure be adopted, such as giving evidence from another room by way of closed-circuit television
(“CCTV”), or giving evidence with a screen shielding the accused from the line of vision of the witness. The criminal
justice system assumes that witnesses will not be unduly intimidated by the court process, otherwise the meaning and weight to be
properly attributed to their evidence may be distorted. It is increasingly recognised, however, that some witnesses may be unusually
intimidated by the court setting or the presence of the accused (and therefore disadvantaged) when giving evidence. Such witnesses
often include children (particularly where crimes of sexual and/or physical violence are concerned), those with an intellectual disability,
sexual assault victims, and those from minority cultural and/or linguistic backgrounds.
In most Australian States there is legislation to allow witnesses who fall within some of these categories to give evidence in a
way which is designed to be less intimidating.
7.21 The Commission has been asked by the Attorney General to examine whether the
(NSW) should be amended so that the alternate arrangements for giving evidence which currently exist in New South Wales for certain
child victims, are available for all witnesses of whatever age.
It has been suggested that courts in New South Wales have the inherent power to make such orders in any event,
but it may be advantageous to give that inherent power statutory force. The focus of this section will be on the existing procedures
in New South Wales (screens/alternate seating arrangements and the use of CCTV) and whether, as has been suggested in several submissions
to the Commission,
these procedures should be extended to the witness with an intellectual disability. It has also been argued that such procedures
should be extended to other adult witnesses, for example, victims of sexual assault, but consideration of other potentially vulnerable
witnesses, apart from people with an intellectual disability, extends beyond the scope of this reference. This section will also
consider the use of evidence which is videotaped prior to the trial, as this procedure has been proposed in other jurisdictions for
“vulnerable” witnesses. It must also be noted that such procedures are not without their critics, for example the Legal
Aid Commission of NSW has expressed concerns about the rights of the accused when such procedures are used.
The Commission believes that such procedures should not be seen as a panacea for the difficulties facing vulnerable witnesses in
court and that any reforms must be considered in the context of making the whole process of giving evidence more accessible, as the
first part of this chapter illustrated. The Commission’s proposals for special procedures for giving evidence are found at
the end of this chapter.
Existing procedures
New South Wales
7.22 In New South Wales, the courts have a discretion to adopt special procedures, including CCTV, screens and other alternative arrangements,
for receiving evidence from some child
of certain specified offences who are
under the age of 16 years
at the time of giving evidence in the proceedings. The purpose is “to assist children to give more effective testimony and
to reduce the trauma associated with doing so.”
A warning must be given by the judge to the jury that no adverse inferences against the accused are to be drawn from the use of special
procedures.
These procedures, found in s 405D-I of the
(NSW), are set out in full in Appendix C. They are also currently being reviewed by a Children’s Evidence Task Force set up
by the Attorney General. People with an intellectual disability may be particularly fearful about having to face the alleged offender
in a court room, or may satisfy the current requirements for the use of CCTV by children, namely that “it is likely that the
child would suffer mental or emotional harm if required to give evidence in the ordinary way; or that it is likely that the facts
would be better ascertained if the child’s evidence is to be given in accordance with such an order” (s 405D(3)). However,
the procedures outlined above are not applicable in New South Wales if the person is aged 16 or over.
Other jurisdictions
7.23 Other States have not limited their procedures to child victims. For example, in Victoria “alternative arrangements”
can also be made for the giving of evidence by witnesses who have “impaired mental functioning” where the proceedings
relate to a sexual or other assault.
“Alternative arrangements” include CCTV and screens.
In Queensland a “special witness” can include a witness with “intellectual impairment”. When a special witness
is giving evidence a list of special measures is available, for example, the exclusion of the accused from the court room, the provision
of a support person for the special witness and the use of videorecorded evidence. CCTV is not specifically mentioned, but is now
available in Queensland courts. Such an order may not be made if it “would unfairly prejudice any party to the proceeding or,
in a criminal proceeding, the person charged or the prosecution.”
The Queensland Attorney-General, the Hon Dean Wells, commented in December 1993 that lawyers were not making full use of these provisions
and that anecdotal evidence from the Office of the Director of Prosecutions showed the provision had been used only 20 times since
it was introduced in 1989.
Recently such procedures have been introduced in evidence legislation in South Australia,
the Northern Territory
and, following the recommendations of the WALRC, in Western Australia,
and proposed for Tasmania.
However, it must be stressed that all these amendments are extremely recent, and the Commission is unaware of any detailed evaluation
of such provisions.
Witness support - in court
7.24 IDRS suggested that in some cases it may be appropriate for a support person to sit with a person with an intellectual disability
while they are giving evidence.
Similar provisions already exist in Victoria
and Queensland
, South Australia,
Northern Territory
and Western Australia.
The more difficult issue is whether that support person should play a more active role in the proceedings. The use of an interpreter
was considered above, but other, more interventionist, roles for a support person have been suggested. For example, one submission
suggested that a support person, similar to that used for police interviews, be used in court, with the power to intervene in questioning
and to ask that a question be re-phrased.
Such a proposal was also raised in consultations by intellectual disability interest groups. It should be noted that where the accused
is unrepresented, the English Court of Appeal in
McKenzie v McKenzie
has held that a party has the right to have a friend with him or her, to assist by prompting, taking notes and quietly giving advice.
Such a person is therefore known as a “McKenzie friend”. The McKenzie friend has been recognised in Australia.
Recently in Western Australia a law student was permitted to address the court on behalf of the accused from a written statement
prepared on his behalf.
Presenting submissions, however, is of a different nature to allowing a person to intervene in the examination and cross-examination
of witnesses.
7.25 The Commission proposes that a support person should be available for a witness with an intellectual disability, but that the
support person should be court approved, that is, only available where the court believes it is necessary. Nor should such a person
be a witness in the proceedings. The Commission does not believe that the involvement of such a person should involve,
during the taking of the witness’ evidence,
intervention in the questioning of the witness with an intellectual disability, unless the support person is required as an interpreter.
Any further role, for instance involving challenges to questions, is more appropriately undertaken by the prosecution or, where the
person giving evidence is the accused, by his or her lawyer. The Commission, however, seeks further submissions on the role of an
“in court” support person including issues such as in what circumstances (if any) such a person should be able to speak
to the witness while the witness is being questioned (over the period including both time spent in the witness box and in adjournments).
Should the support person be able to indicate to the court that the witness has not understood a question and should the support
person be able to provide any clarification to the court, for example by interpreting a particular word used by the witness? A limited
role may actually make giving evidence harder for the witness, for example the witness may find it difficult to understand why their
support person will only answer their questions at certain times. The Commission also seeks submissions about the advantages and
disadvantages of such a support person being independent. As with the role proposed for the support person in the Policing Issues
Discussion Paper, a person known to the witness is much more likely to be able to provide emotional support for the witness than
an independent stranger, but such a close relationship also has disadvantages. The Commission is also concerned that such a role
is not exploited to disadvantage an accused or to provide an advantage to one witness which is not available to another. It is also
obviously not to the advantage of victims with an intellectual disability (or of the justice system) if convictions are overturned
for lack of procedural fairness. Thus, if provision for a support person is enacted, clear guidelines about its usage are needed.
Screens and other “alternative arrangements”
7.26 A screen may be used while a witness is giving evidence to prevent visual contact between the witness and the accused. The witness
remains visible to other people in the court room, including the judge, jury and lawyers. As discussed above, the court has the power
to make “alternative arrangements” for children’s evidence where the accused has allegedly abused the child or
has committed any other personal offence against the child.
The section does not limit the possible special arrangements, but they include screens, changed seating arrangements for persons involved
(including the level at which they are seated and persons in the child's line of vision) or adjournment to other premises. Screens
appear to be frequently used in the Local Courts, where juries are not used, though there are no New South Wales statistics available.
The prosecution does not have to establish that the child would suffer any emotional harm if the alternative arrangements were refused.
Advantages and disadvantages
7.27 Advantages of screens (and some other seating arrangements) are:
both the accused and the witness remain in the court room and can be seen by the court, but the accused cannot be seen by the witness;
the accused can communicate with his or her lawyers while the witness is giving evidence; and
screens are relatively easy and inexpensive to set up.
7.28 Disadvantages include:
the inability of the accused to observe the witness while giving evidence. (This could be overcome by the more expensive alternative
of one-way mirrors instead of a screen.);
screens cause special difficulties where the accused conducts his or her own defence, and where the witness is required to identify
the accused;
a witness who is aware that the accused is behind the screen may remain intimidated in any event; and
even with judicial warnings, the use of a screen could create a presumption of guilt against the accused person, as the jury may interpret
the need to separate the witness from the accused as an indication that the accused did, in fact, commit the offence charged as the
Court considers it necessary to “protect” the child from the accused.
Closed-circuit television (“CCTV”)
7.29 The use of CCTV has aroused considerable interest in both Australian and overseas jurisdictions. The Australian Capital Territory
was the first Australian jurisdiction to introduce CCTV for giving evidence.
CCTV involves setting up an audio-visual link between the court room and another room from which the witness gives his or her testimony.
Monitors for viewing the proceedings are set up in both rooms. Thus, witnesses who use CCTV to give evidence avoid the trauma of
a court room appearance and contact with the accused, yet the accused can still hear and see the witness and communicate with lawyers
as desired. The child can also view parts of the court room on the monitor if necessary, for example if identification of the accused
is required. It has also been suggested that the use of CCTV “can be explained to the jury as a measure to safeguard the child
from the drama, emotions and trappings of an adult court, rather than from the accused”.
Use of CCTV in New South Wales
7.30 Since 1990, CCTV has been available in New South Wales, though only for the evidence of victims under 16 years of age in cases
where the accused is alleged to have committed a “prescribed sexual offence” on the child.
Before the child can give evidence by CCTV, the court must be satisfied either that the child would be likely to suffer mental or
emotional harm if required to give evidence in the usual manner, or that it is likely that the facts would be better ascertained
if given by CCTV.
The court may also order that a court officer or other person be present with the child to provide support or to act as an interpreter.
Originally this procedure was only available in one Supreme Court and one Local Court. Facilities for CCTV are now available across
the State in 16 courts at eight locations.
In 1993 it was used 36 times in District Courts and nine times in Local Courts statewide. (It was not used at all in the Supreme
Courts as the relevant matters are heard in the District Courts.)
Though CCTV is presently limited to prosecutions for certain offences, the Attorney General’s Second Reading Speech suggested
that this was primarily due to the limited facilities available and the need for evaluation of the procedures. He commented: “I
hope that its application will be extended not only to additional courts but also to additional offences.”
Until recently CCTV appeared to be more widely used in the Local Courts for committals and summary hearings, but its use appears
to be decreasing due to the availability of s 48EA of the
Justices Act
This section allows a victim’s written statement to be tendered at the committal hearing and a prohibition on his or her cross-examination
unless the Magistrate finds that the victim should give oral evidence “in the interests of justice”.
Advantages and disadvantages of CCTV
7.31 As far as the Commission is aware, there are only two Australian
research studies of the use of CCTV for child witnesses: a Research Paper prepared for the ALRC and a Western Australian study.
The Western Australian study is not particularly useful for comparison purposes as it involved the removal of the accused from the
court room, not the child. While the findings of the ALRC study are specifically concerned with obtaining evidence from children,
the study identified positive and negative aspects of the use of the procedure that may be relevant to any proposal to extend the
provisions to include people with an intellectual disability. As the study was limited to Magistrates’ courts, the impact on
juries were not addressed. Though a total of 56 children were involved in the study, only 26 actually used the CCTV facilities.
Advantages.
The ALRC study found that, generally, children wanted to use CCTV to avoid intimidation by the accused, and to eliminate the embarrassment
of being aware of everyone watching them in court. The child’s emotional state was influenced more by whether they were able
to use CCTV
when they wanted to,
than by whether they actually used it. Thus, children who wanted to use CCTV but were denied the opportunity to do so tended to be
in a worse emotional state and perform more poorly than
the children who used it or refused it. The study found that children performed better as witnesses if they were under less stress;
and being allowed to use the CCTV procedure when desired was a means of minimising the stress.
A further indirect effect of the use of the CCTV procedure was that the behaviour of magistrates and lawyers altered when it was
used. It was reported that both groups were more supportive of child witnesses when CCTV was used, and that magistrates intervened
more often, especially to clarify language.
Disadvantages.
In the ALRC study most of the magistrates, lawyers, social workers, psychologists, and police who had been involved in the use of
CCTV generally supported the use of the technology,
and the majority of legal professionals did not believe that the use of CCTV prejudiced the conduct of the defence case.
The actual effect on convictions is impossible to determine. However the following disadvantages, from the ALRC study and other sources,
have been noted:
both defence and prosecution lawyers have expressed concern about the changed impact of the evidence given by CCTV.
For example it has been suggested that the elimination of some of the trauma of giving evidence (through CCTV) may unwittingly remove
the distress which is perceived as supporting the veracity of the witness’s evidence. Conversely, it has been argued that the
witness’s isolation from the confronting court room environment may make it easier for him or her to lie undetected;
video can distort the physical appearance and apparent maturity of the witness, a relevant factor where children are concerned;
the focus of the trial might be shifted away from the evidence of the witness to disputes concerning the manner in which the testimony
is recorded and received in the court. The ALRC study found considerable variation in the way the decision to order CCTV was made:
In some cases submissions from the bar table were accepted as enough. In other cases, formal assessments of the child’s psychological
state had to be provided. Parents, social workers, psychologists, doctors or police had to give oral evidence in some cases. Sometimes
they were cross examined at length. Defence counsel disputed the meaning of “mental and emotional harm” in some cases.
Lawyers and magistrates had a range of views on whether a “common sense” assessment of the “likely” effects
of a child’s testifying in court was enough, or whether expert evidence was needed. Magistrates took different approaches to
the question whether less or any evidence was needed if the defence consented to the use of closed circuit TV. Finally, the evaluation
showed that magistrates and lawyers had a range of views about, and approaches to, the question whether or not the court can take
into account the wishes of the child in deciding whether to order closed circuit TV;
a minority of lawyers interviewed by the ALRC claimed that the accused was prejudiced by the inability to confront the witness, face-to-face,
with the allegations that had been made against him or her. The majority of respondents, however, believed that the right to confront
the witness consisted of the ability to test the evidence, rather than face-to-face confrontation;
CCTV is relatively expensive to implement, requiring the installation of high quality audio and video equipment. Possible technical
and sound problems may also arise;
The English Report of the Advisory Group on Video Evidence (the “Pigot Report”) stated that it was possible that in some
cases CCTV:
could make children feel more isolated and insecure. It may place a greater burden upon the child witness, who must cope with intrusive
technology and a sense of remoteness from contemporaneous proceedings, than other solutions which we have considered.
It has also been commented that studies on the effect of child witnesses using CCTV leave a number of questions unanswered, for example
the impact of video testimony on jurors, the impact on the withdrawal of the witness from the court room on the perceived guilt of
the accused and whether the judge’s required warning is sufficient to eliminate prejudice in the eyes of the jury. It has also
been questioned whether CCTV actually enhances the status of the evidence by making it seem more authoritative than conventional
oral testimony.
7.34 The Commission has discussed this issue with a number of officers from the New South Wales DPP and the Department of Courts Administration,
who generally have been supportive of the CCTV procedure for child witnesses, as it usually puts children at ease and they are not
as afraid of court. It was commented that, as the Crown Prosecutor goes through the procedure before the trial with the child (usually
in the presence of a parent), the child is actually better prepared for court than usual. There is, however, a perception that some
Crown Prosecutors believe the procedure makes a conviction less likely, by reducing the impact of the evidence on the jury, and are
therefore loath to use it.
The Commission has also been told that some children find the procedure artificial and difficult to use; they find it hard to concentrate
or to understand what they are doing in a separate room. However, other people have commented that after the first five minutes the
technology is forgotten and the questioning progresses smoothly. The Commission has not received any comments about current technical
problems, for example distortion, through the CCTV procedure.
Extension of CCTV
7.35 As discussed, CCTV is presently available in New South Wales only for child victims, and not, for example, for the sibling of
the alleged victim, who may be the only other witness to the sexual offence. The New South Wales Child Protection Council has recently
recommended that the availability of CCTV be extended to all child witnesses. It also recommended that the requirement to show either
that the child would suffer from mental or emotional harm if required to give evidence in the ordinary way or that the child’s
evidence would be better ascertained by CCTV be abolished. The Council commented that this requirement was unsatisfactory because:
additional interviews are required to assess the child’s emotional reaction to giving evidence in court; there was uncertainty
to uncertainty for the child about how their evidence will be given and to delays while the matter is argued. Rather, the Council
proposed that the procedure be available whenever the child wished, unless the defence could demonstrate the use of CCTV would prejudice
the defendant’s right to a fair trial or would lead to an unreasonable delay.
Extending the use of CCTV to all victims of sexual assault has also been proposed.
7.36 Following the research study discussed above, the ALRC released its Report, recommending that the evidence of
children (under the age of 18 years) for
legal proceedings be presented in court through CCTV as a matter of course, subject to the wishes of the child or to the existence
of some other convincing reason why it should not be used, rather than requiring that the judge or magistrate first be satisfied
that it is likely the child will suffer mental or emotional harm if required to give evidence in the normal way or that the facts
will be better ascertained if the evidence is given by CCTV. The ALRC’s reasons included:
the research study and the submissions to the Commission indicated that the CCTV procedure led to benefits for the children (less
anxiety, some sense of control over their role in the proceedings and more support from lawyers and magistrates) and for the court
processes (enabling cases to proceed which may not have proceeded without the use of CCTV, improved quality of evidence without prejudicing
the conduct of the defence case, and, according to some magistrates, a better “close-up” opportunity to see the child
and assess demeanour);
the wishes of the child witness were still able to be heard and respected;
any age limit lower than the age of majority (18 years) would be arbitrary and would give the impression that CCTV was a less valid
way of giving evidence;
there was no reason to exclude a particular class of case from using the procedure or to make a distinction between a victim or a
witness, as “the benefits of reducing the stress on children involved in court proceedings are the same whatever the capacity
in which the child is involved”; and
reversing the presumption will remove some of the uncertainty and difficulty involved in deciding whether or not to apply the procedure.
7.37 Protections for the accused were retained by recommendations that the judge be required to warn the jury not to draw any inference
adverse to the accused from the use of CCTV, and that the court’s duty to ensure a fair trial be expressly preserved.
The ALRC also recommended certain practical changes to the procedure, such as improving sound quality, training lawyers, familiarising
children with the equipment and informing parents and children about the procedure to avoid misconceptions,
and procedural safeguards to prevent cases being unduly delayed.
Following the ALRC’s Report, amendments have been made to the Australian Capital Territory’s legislation.
The amendments now provide that the general rule is that, where the equipment is available,
all children
(under 18 years) give evidence by CCTV in criminal and related proceedings,
the child wishes to give evidence in the usual way or the proceedings would be unreasonably delayed or the court believes that “there
is a substantial risk of the court being unable to ensure that the proceedings are conducted fairly”.
The ALRC research study also indicated general support for the extension of CCTV procedures to other groups of people who have been
identified as being vulnerable witnesses, including people with an intellectual disability.
The ALRC’s Report did not, however, consider the issue of extending the procedures to other witnesses.
7.38 A 1990 report by the New South Wales Women’s Co-ordination Unit
proposed that the option of CCTV be extended to adults with an intellectual disability who are victims of sexual assault to avoid
the victim facing the accused in court. The WALRC also recommended that CCTV also be available for a “special witness”
(which may include a witness with “intellectual handicap”) if the court was satisfied that the person would be likely
to suffer emotional trauma or would be so likely to be so intimidated or stressed as to be unable to give evidence if required to
give evidence in the usual way.
Several submissions to the Commission have also supported the extension of CCTV to adults with an intellectual disability.
One submission outlined a case in which a teenager with an intellectual disability who was allegedly sexually assaulted was unable
to take advantage of the provisions, because the witness was 16 at the time of committal. It was alleged that the accused had threatened
the witness on a number of occasions about disclosing the assault and legal advisers believed that the witness’ preoccupation
with the threat of violence was such that the matter should be heard by CCTV. The submission argued that if the defence could claim
(in relation to competence and reliability) that a witness was functioning intellectually at the same level as a child, then surely
the defence should not object to the use of protections which currently exist for children for giving evidence.
7.39 The Commission believes that it should not be assumed that the alternate arrangements for children, such as CCTV, will automatically
assist people with an intellectual disability, as the two groups have different needs, experiences and abilities. The Commission
is hesitant to propose, on the basis of the ALRC study alone, that the procedure should be adopted for
witnesses with an intellectual disability. The Commission is not aware of any study of the use by people with an intellectual disability
of CCTV. In consultations people have commented that they would wish to see research data that suggested that people with an intellectual
disability were likely to be assisted, not disadvantaged by, such a procedure. For example, in some cases it may be more beneficial
for the jury to see the witness’ “foibles”, which may not be as apparent via CCTV. The range of disabilities which
exist were commented upon, and the concern that many people with an intellectual disability generally want to participate in any
process in as normal a way as possible, and therefore would be likely to oppose making such a procedure mandatory. It was questioned
whether, if the courts were too protective of the witness with an intellectual disability, the jury may query the weight to be given
to his or her evidence, though at the same consultation examples were given of cases where CCTV would have helped the witness, for
example a 35 year old person with an intellectual disability who was terrified of the court environment.
In favour of proposing that the procedure be extended to witnesses with an intellectual disability is the fact that it is only likely
to be sought in a small number of cases and that the current judicial discretion involved does allow the judge or magistrate to allow
the procedure to be used only in what he or she considers to be appropriate circumstances, which should alleviate some anxiety about
the use of the section. The wide range of issues for consideration involved in extending and evaluating special procedures such as
screens and CCTV are considered further below.
Extending and evaluating special procedures: issues for consideration
7.40 The ALRC in its evaluation of the operation of CCTV identified four key questions which are useful to any evaluation of alternative
procedures for giving evidence:
1. Did the innovation reduce the stress of testifying for witnesses and improve the quality of their evidence?
2. Did those involved in its use believe that it had positive effects?
3. Did they see it as a fair procedure and one that they were prepared to use?
4. What, if any, were the negative aspects of its use?
Implicit in the third and fourth considerations is the issue of ensuring fairness to the accused person, whose right to a fair trial
is regarded as more important than protecting a witness from distress. The importance of a fair trial is reflected in the traditional
right of accused persons to be present when the case is being made out against them, and to test the evidence against them, by way
of cross-examining the witness and observing the witness’ demeanour.
As discussed, it has been argued that these rights are compromised by some special procedures. The Commission would wish to be satisfied
that the right of the accused to a fair trial is not abrogated by the extension of these procedures.
7.41 Apart from the rights of the accused, the issues which need to be carefully addressed in considering the extension of these procedures
Which offences? - should the special procedures for giving evidence be available for all criminal offences, or only certain offences
such as sexual assault;
Victims only? - should the procedures only be available to alleged victims of crime, or to all witnesses excluding the accused, or
to all witnesses including the accused;
Which witnesses? - to which witnesses should the procedure apply, that is, to all witnesses, or only to certain categories of witnesses,
such as people with an intellectual disability;
Which categories? - if the procedures are only to be available to certain categories of witness, such as people with an intellectual
disability, which categories should be included (and where do you draw the line), and how will these be defined;
What availability? - is the procedure to be available to all people within the listed categories, for example to all people with an
intellectual disability, or only to those who satisfy an additional test, for example, on a “needs” basis, that they
would be unable to give evidence in any other way. This question raises the issue of the numbers of necessary specialist facilities
available (or likely to be available) to the courts;
What test? - if the procedure is to be limited in availability, what is the most appropriate test and how is it to be satisfied (through
psychological evidence or otherwise) and then explained to the jury;
When is the decision made? - should the vulnerable witness have to try to give evidence in the usual way first, or should the issue
of how the witness is to give evidence be resolved in pre-trial directions;
Discretions given to the judge? - presumably the judge should have some discretion to reject the use of the procedure in the interests
of justice: what form therefore should that discretion take;
Warnings by the judge? - under the present procedure in New South Wales the judge is to warn the jury not to draw any inference adverse
to the accused from the use of the procedures. Is such a warning sufficient to overcome the possible prejudice to the accused; and
Evaluation or sunset clauses? - should there be an evaluation undertaken, either before the legislation is passed (though this presents
logistical difficulties) or during a defined period of operation? Should the legislation have a “sunset clause” that
is, be only introduced for a set period, to allow for evaluation after that period for fairness and effectiveness? Evaluations in
this area present enormous difficulties because of the range of variables and the difficulty of comparing individual cases. For example,
if the conviction rate either increases or decreases after the introduction of the procedures, this could be explained by a variety
of factors. In any event, an increase in conviction rate may not be seen as desirable, as it could be argued that the procedure may
have led to an increase in wrongful convictions. As the ALRC study recognises, the procedure is usually assessed by asking the witnesses
how they felt about it and by observing the court proceedings to see how the witness performed. Even if all witnesses said they felt
better using the procedure, is that necessarily a sufficient justification for its availability? The effect on the jury is impossible
to determine in an actual trial, particularly as, even if you could question the jury after the trial, they would not be able to
compare the witness’ CCTV evidence, with that of the same witness given in the box.
The Commission’s proposal
7.42 Though the Commission recognises that there is now considerable support for the use of procedures such as CCTV, at least for
children, it repeats its earlier comment that the rights of the accused should be paramount. The Commission believes that children
can be considered as a different category to other vulnerable witnesses and does not propose to enter the debate about what is appropriate
for them. In relation to extending the use of the special procedures outlined above (support person, screens and seating arrangements
and CCTV) to other vulnerable witnesses, the Commission sees no logic in limiting the procedure to victims, or to particular categories
of witnesses or to particular offences, as it is easy to identify examples of where such distinctions cause injustices: witnesses
may be just as intimidated as victims (for example in domestic violence situations), an elderly victim may also be distressed or
intimidated giving evidence, giving evidence about relatively minor (as well as serious) offences can also cause distress and embarrassment
to the witness. Similarly, the procedures may be just as necessary for the accused as for any other witness. The Commission therefore
proposes that the full range of procedures should be available to all witnesses on a
basis, not by membership of any particular group, avoiding arguments about whether or not a person falls within a particular category.
The disadvantage to be addressed by alternate ways of giving evidence is the distress or difficulty of giving evidence due to intimidation
by the atmosphere of the court room, the presence of the accused, or the nature of the proceedings. The judge (or magistrate) would
need to be addressed by both sides, about the need for particular special procedures and any alleged detriment to the accused, before
making such an order, and would have a discretion to refuse an application. Such an application would desirably be made at a pre-trial
hearing in order to limit the uncertainty for the witness and as a matter of convenience. This proposal does not overcome the problem,
identified by the ALRC and others, of the variation in application which arises by differing judicial attitudes to the level of disadvantage
necessary before making the procedures available, or the evidence necessary to establish this, but it is impossible to overcome this
problem using a needs-based rather than a category-based test. The Commission suggests that the current position in relation to warnings
be retained, that is that the judge must warn the jury not to draw any inference adverse to the accused. This proposal is set out
at the end of the chapter.
7.43 The special procedures for children are currently contained in the
(NSW) not, the
Evidence Act
(NSW). As discussed above, wide-ranging reforms of the whole area of evidence law are proposed under the exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW), including additional measures for witnesses with an intellectual disability. It is likely to be confusing to have issues
affecting the ways of giving evidence by vulnerable witnesses contained in two different pieces of legislation. The Commission’s
preference would be for any reforms for vulnerable witnesses to be introduced as a package in one piece of legislation to avoid additional
confusion in this area.
Videorecording before the hearing
7.44 Apart from CCTV, another possible application of audio-visual technology to vulnerable witnesses is videorecording their testimony
before the trial and showing this to the court instead of requiring a witness to give evidence in person. An important distinction
should be drawn between the use of videorecordings of
by witnesses (usually made in police interviews) and the admission of videorecordings of the witness’
(questions by lawyers from both sides in court). As with other alternative procedures for giving evidence, most discussion about
the use of video technology has been concerned with the experiences of children
and, as discussed, it should not be assumed that the same considerations apply for people with an intellectual disability. The Commission
proposed in the Policing Issues Discussion Paper
that police interviews be electronically recorded for all victims with an intellectual disability, and for other witnesses where
a detailed interview is necessary. The Commission referred to the limitations of such videorecorded interviews for court purposes
and stated that it would consider such issues further in this Discussion Paper.
Videorecorded police interviews with the witness
7.45 Videorecording of police interviews with the victim or witness preserves an account of the relevant events soon after the crime
has been reported. Many criminal trials take place long after the events in question, during which time the witness’ recollection
have been diminished or distorted by repeated questioning and, in some cases, by media reports of the case. Videorecording interviews
provides a means of capturing information when the events are still fresh in the witness’ mind. It may also provide more information
than a written statement, for example, recording the exact words used and by revealing tone of voice, hand gestures and facial expressions,
though the weight that can be placed on these is controversial. Videorecording may reduce the number (and length) of interviews involved
for many witnesses. The videorecorded interview could also provide a source of information for a variety of agencies after the conclusion
of one interview, though confidentiality and the conflict between therapeutic and evidentiary needs must be considered.
Repeated interviews with police, counsellors, medical personnel and social workers could lead to a loss of spontaneity in the evidence
by the time the witness recounts their experiences to the court, and could lead to claims that the testimony has been “contaminated”.
It has been stated, however, that “most research to date indicates positive or null effects of repeated interviewing on children’s
testimony”.
This finding is important “because of the belief, held by many in our legal system, that repeated interviewing of children
increases the likelihood of obtaining a false accusation due to increased suggestibility.”
The videotape may also assist the accused to determine whether the person’s story was obtained by improper questioning and
may reduce complaints of coaching and contamination.
7.46 The Policing Issues Discussion Paper
also referred to other possible benefits of electronic recording of the statements of victims with an intellectual disability. A
person with low literacy skills may be able to use their video statement, rather than a written statement, to refresh their memory
prior to the court appearance. The use of such a videotape to refresh memory appears to be permissible under the exposure draft of
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW), as the definition of “document” in the Bill’s “Dictionary” is broad enough to include a
videotape. Such a use may, however, cause practical difficulties. For example, cl 35 of the Bill
enables a court, at the request of a party, to direct the production of notes used by a witness for another party to revive his or
her memory out of court. It may be difficult, but not impossible, for a witness to revive their memory in court - see cl 33.
It has also been questioned whether using a tape in this way would actually
the witness’s memory, though the same concerns could be raised about the effects of prior written statements. It was commented
that the effects of using videotapes in this way are untested and should be treated with caution.
Additionally, though police videorecording equipment is designed to minimise the risk of tampering, the possibility that tapes by
police or by other interviewers may be altered should not be ignored and any extension of videorecording will need to consider security
Admissibility in court.
Generally, videorecorded interviews are inadmissible, because of the rule against hearsay evidence.
Such interviews can, in certain circumstances, be raised in cross-examination as a previous inconsistent statement to discredit the
testimony of the witness.
Even if admissible under an exception to the general rule, videorecorded statements, under present law, cannot be a substitute for
the witness’s testimony. This reflects the difference between a statement to police, which may include irrelevancies and material
which would be inadmissible, and the witness’ evidence in answer to the prosecution’s questions at a much later stage
of the investigation with the presence (hopefully) of the accused’s lawyer to protect the accused’s interests. To admit
such an interview instead of the direct testimony of the witness may be more prejudicial than probative. It also contradicts the
traditional emphasis in the common law trial (that all material facts are inferred from the oral testimony of witnesses, which is
“tested” through the process of cross examination). A police officer may be less likely than a crown prosecutor to be
skilled in obtaining an account from the witness in a way which is admissible in court. In the context of people from a non-English
speaking background, it has been commented:
[w]e should be circumspect about the benefits of video-taping of police questioning. There is some evidence to suggest that, in an
adversarial system, technological tools are deployed strategically. Video-tapes can confer an advantage on prosecution or defence,
depending on the impression that [a defendant from a non-English speaking background] makes on tape. It may be difficult for the
judge, magistrate or jury to distinguish their assessment of the defendant during a court proceedings from the images conveyed by
the earlier taped questioning. In the absence of empirical research, it is still too early to predict the impact [of] technology
on criminal proceedings.
Other jurisdictions.
Following the recommendations of the WALRC, children’s prior statements (written or electronic) in sexual and domestic violence
offences are admissible if the child victim is also called as a witness and the accused is provided with details of the statement
and time to prepare.
The prior statement of a child under the age of 12 years is also admissible in Queensland and South Australia subject to certain
conditions.
The position in England is discussed below. The Commission is not aware of any such provisions for witnesses with an intellectual
disability.
Videorecorded witness testimony
7.49 In considering the prior videorecording of a witness’
, a distinction should be drawn between the witness’ examination in chief and the cross-examination of the witness by the other
side. This distinction is important because, even amongst those who approve of the use of videorecorded testimony, there is disagreement
between those who would restrict its use to examination in chief, and those who would also make the procedure available for the purpose
of cross-examination.
Other jurisdictions.
The use of pre-recorded examination in chief has been proposed and, in some cases, introduced in other jurisdictions. In Western Australia,
children’s evidence in chief may be presented to the court by a videorecording of oral evidence previously given by the child.
Alternatively, the child’s entire evidence (including cross-examination and re-examination) may be given at a pre-trial hearing,
presided over by the judge and videorecorded to be played at the later trial.
The Western Australian legislation also allows “special witnesses”, which may include a person with a “mental disability”
to give videorecorded evidence at a pre-trial hearing, but does not provide for just their statement or evidence in chief to be admitted
in this way.
These new procedures have only been recently introduced and their effectiveness has not been tested. In Queensland the court may
order that a videotape be made of the evidence (or any part of it) of a “special witness” “under such conditions
as are specified in the order and that the videotaped evidence be viewed and heard in the proceeding instead of the direct testimony
of the special witness”.
Presumably such an order would include provision for cross-examination.
7.51 In Victoria, the
Evidence Act
was amended in 1991
to allow recorded examination in chief to be given in proceedings for sexual offences or indictable offences involving an assault,
injury or threat of injury to any person.
It allows the examination in chief of a prosecution witness, who is under the age of 18 or who has impaired mental functioning, to
be given in the form of an audio or visual recording of the witness answering questions. The defendant must be provided with transcripts
of the recording, and be given an opportunity to view or listen to the recording.
Further, the witness must identify his or herself at the proceeding, attest to the truthfulness of the contents of the recording,
and be available for cross-examination and re-examination.
However, the relevant provisions are yet to be proclaimed, and are therefore not in force.
In England and Wales, a videorecording of a child’s statement may be admissible as examination in chief during proceedings for
certain sexual or violent offences, provided that the child is available for cross-examination at the trial and the court is satisfied
that videorecording would be in the interests of justice.
The report preceding the enactment of this legislation, the Pigot Report, also recommended that cross-examination be undertaken on
video, before a judge in chambers, as soon as possible after the recording of the videorecorded interview which was to be treated
as examination in chief, so the child would not generally be required to attend the court to give evidence at all. The proposal concerning
cross-examination, however, was never enacted.
Advantages and disadvantages of videorecorded testimony.
It is unclear (and probably impossible to determine) what the effect of videorecorded evidence is upon a jury. Proponents of videorecording
have primarily focused on the benefit to the witness, usually a child. The Pigot Report’s preference for video-recording was
based on the belief, at para 2.12, that “a majority of children are adversely affected by giving evidence at trials for serious
offences under existing circumstances”. Such children:
ought never to be required to appear in public as witnesses in the Crown Court
, whether in open court or protected by screens or closed circuit television, unless they wish to do so. This principle, we believe,
is not only absolutely necessary for their welfare, but is also essential in overcoming the reluctance of children and their parents
to assist the authorities.
[emphasis added]
The Pigot Report also supported the extension, at a later stage, of its proposals to “other vulnerable witnesses”.
7.54 Under the Pigot proposals, as cross-examination would also occur before the trial, videorecording would (in the absence of supplementary
questions) avoid the trauma of the court appearance and allow all the evidence to be given while the events are fresh in the victim’s
mind. It could also have an important therapeutic aspect, in allowing the victim to put the incident behind him or her at an earlier
point of time and to perhaps seek forms of counselling or treatment which could be otherwise seen as likely to contaminate the evidence,
such as group therapy involving a number of alleged victims of the same sexual offender. These later benefits would not arise if
only the examination in chief occurred prior to court and it could also be argued that there is a possible grave injustice in separating
the examination and the cross-examination in this way. If, as seems likely, a significant gap in time occurs, the witness’
memory is likely to be much fresher in the examination than the cross-examination, which could act to the detriment of either the
accused or the prosecution. The defence is likely, however, to argue that requiring cross-examination at this early stage of the
proceedings may be inappropriate as they may not be aware, at this stage, of all the aspects of the accused’s case. There are
likely to be matters which only arise within the course of the trial about which the defence may wish to cross-examine. There would
also have to be an allowance for supplementary questions.
7.55 The possible advantages of using pre-recorded video evidence to replace examination in chief alone are the reduction of time
spent in court by the witness and the freshness of that part of the testimony, as the examination can occur as soon as possible after
the alleged offence. It has also been suggested that presenting the defendant with the victim’s evidence on video leads to
an increase in guilty pleas, thus sparing the child from cross-examination in court.
The South Australian Task Force on Child Sexual Abuse considered that the disadvantage of the child being immediately confronted
with cross-examination in court outweighed the advantages that would result from the introduction of the child’s videorecorded
examination in chief, namely reducing time spent by the child in court and providing a valuable additional source of information
to the jury.
7.56 The New South Wales Bar Association also commented strongly about the general disadvantages of the use of videorecorded evidence
of witnesses:
There are good reasons why our system of criminal justice has as its fulcrum the assessment of evidence given in the witness box.
In assessing that evidence, the tribunal of fact considers the demeanour of the witness. ... It is absolutely fundamental to our
system of justice that the accuser give his or her evidence in the presence of the accused, and those who will adjudicate. This is
a most important safeguard not just for the accused but for public confidence in the criminal justice system.
Provisional views: videorecording
7.57 The Commission’s provisional view, based on the material considered to date, is that there should be no change to the general
existing rules in relation to the use of videorecorded police
with witnesses with an intellectual disability in court, other than those proposed by the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW).
In particular it believes that an interview with a police officer should not be used as a substitute for the witness’ testimony.
In relation to videorecorded
it also believes that the disadvantages outweigh the advantages of the use of both pre-trial videorecorded evidence in chief alone
or pre-trial videorecorded evidence in chief with cross-examination. The Commission believes that it would be particularly unjust
for the examination in chief to be separated in time from the cross-examination. It believes that the key advantages of freshness
of evidence and reducing trauma can be realised through other means, such as through the expedition of cases involving vulnerable
witnesses and the use of procedures such as screens and CCTV. The Commission, however, seeks further submissions in this area.
Unsworn (“Dock”) statements
7.58 In considering the issue of giving evidence, this chapter has so far focussed on the position of all people giving evidence,
whether as the accused, the victim or any other witness. There are, however, obvious differences between these different types of
witness. The accused, not the victim, is on trial, and faces the sanction of the court. Therefore different treatment of the accused
person can be justified in some areas to ensure a fair trial.
7.59 In court, accused persons have the right to remain silent and may choose not to give evidence at all. Alternatively they may
give evidence on oath and be cross-examined. Until recently, they also could give evidence by way of a “Dock” statement
- an unsworn statement by the accused, the reliability of which could not be tested under cross-examination. The Commission recommended
in its 1985 Report that the right to make an unsworn statement at trial be retained by an accused in New South Wales, though it also
recommended certain changes, for instance that the judge should be entitled to inform the jury of an accused person’s options
in giving evidence and of the legal characteristics of each option.
The unsworn statement in New South Wales was abolished, after extensive debate, by the
Crimes Legislation (Unsworn Evidence) Amendment Act
1994 (NSW), which commenced on 10 June 1994, but which only applies to people charged after that date. Many of the arguments in favour
of the abolition of the unsworn statement, for example, the exploitation of the right by the “clever accused”, and the
danger of excessively long and complicated statements, have little relevance for the accused with an intellectual disability. Even
supporters of the abolition of the unsworn statement recognised that there were concerns about the impact of its abolition for such
The Commission does not propose to enter into the general debate about unsworn statements. The Commission does, in light of the abolition
of the unsworn statement, propose to raise concerns which have been expressed about the present position of the accused with an intellectual
disability, namely:
the particular disadvantage faced by the accused with an intellectual disability in cross-examination; and
the likely relevance to his or her defence of expert evidence about his or her level of intellectual functioning, for instance to
establish the defences of diminished responsibility and mental illness, and the difficulties involved in using expert evidence if
the accused does not give evidence.
The Commission therefore proposes to consider whether any other provision should replace the unsworn statement to overcome the disadvantages
faced by the accused with an intellectual disability in court. There may be other groups disadvantaged by the abolition of the unsworn
statement, but the Commission confines its comments to the accused with an intellectual disability.
7.60 As discussed at paras 7.14-7.19, people with an intellectual disability are likely to be severely disadvantaged under cross-examination.
Chapter 8 also refers to the absence of provisions to enable expert evidence about any witness’ intellectual disability to
be admitted in examination in chief to explain to the jury, where relevant, the link between the way the person gave their evidence
and their disability. Such expert evidence is seen as bolstering the witness’ credibility and is therefore inadmissible (see
paras 8.2-8.4). Lawyers may therefore advise clients who are likely to perform poorly in the witness box, in the absence of a statement
not subject to cross examination, not to give evidence at all. A failure to testify, however, may suggest to the jury that the person
has something to hide, and will also deny the defence the opportunity of leading expert evidence on his or her intellectual disability
and history.
According to Mark Ierace, a Public Defender, remaining silent:
will impede their option of relying on the expert evidence of psychologists and psychiatrists, which may be relevant to issues such
as whether questions asked by an interrogating police officer could have been understood by the accused, whether the accused had
the intellectual capacity to understand the right to silence and whether the accused’s disability makes available various defences,
such as the [defence of mental illness].
To the extent that such evidence is based on the history gathering, skilled questioning and the administration of tests by the expert
in conference with the accused, it is necessary for the accused to formally state to the court that what has been said to the expert
is the truth. At present [that is, before the abolition of the unsworn statement] this can be done either during a statement from
the dock or during the course of sworn evidence. Without that verification, the expert’s evidence would be withheld from the
jury, because the history would be inadmissible hearsay and the opinion would thus be of no weight.
So if the accused cannot make a dock statement and does not enter the witness box, he or she is effectively abandoning the defence,
or challenge to the confessional evidence, even though it is in fact unreliable.
There are several possible alternative measures to redress this potential unfairness.
Option 1: Greater control over cross-examination
. The accused with an intellectual disability who is otherwise fit to be tried could be protected to some extent at trial by greater
judicial control over the cross-examination process. Some protections are found in the provisions of the exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW), see paras 7.15-7.16. This Bill is yet to be introduced into Parliament, and, even if passed, its utility is yet to be
tested. Such procedures have limits. They cannot, for instance, overcome the risk of a question being totally misunderstood, or an
accused simply answering “yes” to questions if he or she does not know the answer or if the questions are asked by a
person perceived as an authority figure. Similarly, as suggested above, many questions which would be found difficult by a person
with an intellectual disability, such as those containing abstract concepts, would not necessarily be able to be objected to under
the proposed provisions. The risk of putting such an accused in the witness box may still be seen by the defence as too great.
Option 2: Reintroduce the unsworn statement for people with an intellectual disability as part of a prescribed group of vulnerable
. This would raise the difficulty of deciding the basis for inclusion within the group. To base inclusion on “vulnerability”
alone would allow many accused persons to assert that they fall within the exception. The resulting strain on the criminal justice
process may be unacceptable. It would not overcome some of the difficulties associated with the unsworn statement.
Option 3: Allow people with an intellectual disability to make a statement to the court not subject to cross-examination.
The definition of “intellectual disability” for the purposes of this proposal would be that proposed in Chapter 2. Thus,
by definition, the accused would have an intellectual capacity
significantly
below the norm. Unlike the “vulnerable accused” option, this option has the advantage that an expert can simply testify
of the statement.
Provisional views and further issues for consideration
7.64 The Commission proposes that the accused with an intellectual disability (as defined in Chapter 2 and established by expert evidence)
should have the right to make a statement which is not subject to cross examination (Option 3 above). Such a statement may be as
simple as “What I said to the doctors is true”, to enable weight to be given to the relevant expert evidence about the
accused’s intellectual functioning and level of understanding where that is relevant to the case. Such a procedure, though
likely to be seen as giving an advantage to the accused with an intellectual disability which is not available to other accused persons,
should rather be seen as a means of addressing the severe disadvantage such an accused faces compared to other accused persons in
the criminal justice system. The accused’s disability and disadvantage when subject to cross-examination cannot be completely
addressed by the proposals discussed above, such as controls over cross-examination, the use of interpreters, giving evidence by
CCTV or even by greater understanding of the legal process.
7.65 The question remains whether such a statement should be unsworn or be sworn/affirmed. If the statement is given on oath or affirmation,
the accused, if he or she lied, could be prosecuted for perjury. If a person is not competent to swear or affirm then presumably,
as discussed in Chapter 4, the accused is unlikely to be fit to be tried in any event. (The appropriate procedure for an accused
who has been found unfit to be tried, and is giving evidence in the context of a special hearing, should also be considered further.)
If the statement is sworn, however, then it would have to be given more weight than an unsworn statement. This would be reflected
in the comment that could be made by the judge and the prosecutor about the statement, in comparing the accused’s evidence
against other evidence in the trial. This additional weight could be seen as inappropriate and unfair, considering that the statement
is not subject to cross examination. There are obviously arguments on both sides and the Commission invites further submissions on
this issue. There are other unresolved issues in this area, for instance the comments which can be made about such a statement by
lawyers and the judge and the need for other safeguards such as provision for attacks by the accused on a prosecution witness. These
issues should also be a matter of further discussion.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR VULNERABLE WITNESSES
7.66 The Commission proposes that, rather than amending the provisions of the
(NSW) which provide for the use of such measures as screens and closed-circuit television by children to other witnesses, that a
range of measures for “vulnerable” witnesses be introduced into the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW). There seems no reason to limit such provisions to criminal proceedings alone. As discussed in paras 7.42-7.43, generally
such measures should not be available simply because of a person’s membership of a particular group, for example the fact that
a person has an intellectual disability or comes from a non-English speaking background, but should be
needs-based,
that is, that a person would be disadvantaged as a witness without such procedures. The Commission believes that such an approach
is more appropriate than a membership or category-based approach. The Commission believes that a wide range of measures should be
available, including the presence of a support person, the use of screens and CCTV. The Commission’s proposal allows the judge
to control which procedures should be available, and when, after submissions from the parties in the absence of the jury. Parties
should also be able to make submissions about the warnings and directions to the jury which should accompany the use of such measures
(see Proposal 29).
7.67 The Commission, however, does not currently believe that the procedures suggested in para 7.66 will be sufficient to overcome
the disadvantage faced by the accused person with an intellectual disability in presenting his or her story to the court. It therefore
suggests, as discussed in paras 7.64-7.65, that an additional procedure should be available for an accused with an intellectual disability,
namely that there be a limited right to make a statement to the court which is not subject to cross-examination (see Proposal 30).
As discussed in para 7.65, a number of issues in this area require further consideration.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
29. That the following provisions in relation to vulnerable witnesses (where “witness” is defined to include the accused)
be inserted into the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW):
(a) If by reason of intellectual disability, age or any other factor the Court is satisfied that a witness may be unfairly subjected
to embarrassment or distress in giving evidence in the ordinary way or may be so intimidated by the atmosphere of the court room
and the nature of the proceedings as to be severely disadvantaged as a witness it may order that special arrangements be made for
the taking of evidence of that witness.
(b) Special arrangements include, but are not limited to:
(i) the use of closed-circuit television;
(ii) screens; or
(iii) the presence of a support person.
(c) Without limiting the judge’s right to give any other warning, in any criminal proceedings in which the evidence of a witness
is given by special arrangements, the judge must warn the jury not to draw any inference adverse to the accused person or give the
evidence any greater or lesser weight because of the use of those arrangements.
30. Where the court is satisfied, on expert evidence, that the accused has an intellectual disability, the accused shall have the
right to make a statement not subject to cross examination.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. For example, the New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 4-5.
. Policy No 51, Policy Statement: Prosecution Services, Intellectually Disabled, 1991, cited in J Philpott
Towards Normalisation: People with Intellectual Disability Involved in the South Australian Criminal Justice System
(Court Services Department, South Australia, 1991), Appendix E.
. South Australia Police Department
(14 April 1992) at 2.
. Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, New South Wales
Annual Report
1992-93 at 12.
. Mr R O Blanch QC
(9 December 1993).
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 14-15.
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 39-40.
. For a description of the “Redfern model” of court support for women victims of domestic violence see L Blazejowska “Court
Support Schemes - Improving Women’s Access to the Legal System” in
Criminal Law Issues
, papers presented for the Continuing Legal Education Department of The College of Law on 14 May 1994. This model uses paid support
workers and solicitors rather than volunteers.
. For example, the Witness Watch Scheme coordinated by Maitland Police and attached to courts in the area. On each court day two
volunteers are rostered to greet witnesses and answer their queries. See
Police Service Weekly
(6 September 1993) at 14. The New South Wales Department of Courts Administration is currently finalising a survey of such services.
. The Court Support Scheme is primarily funded by the Legal Aid Commission through its Community Legal Centre Funding Scheme.
. Mr T Katsigiannis, Coordinator, Court Support Service
Personal Communication
(9 February 1994).
. The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia (“WALRC”)
Report on Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses
(Project 87, Report, 1991), Recommendation 18.
. Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992).
(NSW) s 77A.
. WALRC Report 87, Recommendation 22. The WALRC also recommended that formal court dress not be used where children were required
to give evidence: Recommendation 23.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 7. Similar comments were made by the New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 5.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 5.
. Mr P Hutten
(6 January 1992) at 8, 19-20. See also
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 20-24.
Justices Act
(NSW) s 48EA, which commenced on 29 March 1992.
. See, for example, K Laster and V L Taylor
Interpreters and the Legal System
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1994); Australia. Law Reform Commission
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992); and Australia. Attorney General’s Department
Access to Interpreters in the Australian Legal System
(AGPS, Canberra, April 1991).
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 6.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 5.
. A distinction needs to be made between communication boards used in this manner and the more controversial “facilitated communication”,
which involves the “facilitator” actually holding the arm of the person using the board.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 10.
. The Roeher Institute
No More Victims: A Manual to Guide the Legal Community in Addressing the Sexual Abuse of People with a Mental Handicap
(The Roeher Institute, Ontario, 1992) at 26.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 10.
Dairy Farmers Co-operative Milk Co Ltd v Acquilina
[1963] HCA 59
(1963) 109 CLR 458.
For factors to be considered in determining whether to allow an interpreter to be used and to adjourn proceedings for that purpose,
Adamopoulos v Olympic Airways SA
(1991) 25 NSWLR 75.
Johnson v R
(1986) 25 A Crim R 433.
R v Roberts
(1907) 24 WN (NSW) 55.
Gradidge v Grace Bros Pty Ltd
(1988) 93 FLR 414
at 414-415.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
(Report 38, 1987) and New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Report 56, 1988).
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 30-31.
. ALRC Report 57 at para 3.29. See also Australia. Attorney General’s Department
Access to Interpreters in the Australian Legal System
(AGPS, Canberra, April 1991) at para 6.16.1.
. ALRC Report 57 at 3.36.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 97. See also ACT Council on Intellectual Disability
(20 July 1993) at 3.
Evidence Act
1898 (NSW) s 56-58.
. Many of these provisions merely set out, in statutory form, powers which the courts would consider to be within their inherent jurisdiction
in any event.
. H Dent “The effects of age and intelligence on eyewitnessing ability” in H Dent and R Flin (eds)
Children as Witnesses
(John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1992) at 7. According to Dent, all three groups of subjects in her research (children with learning
difficulties, other children and adults): “gave equally accurate reports in response to Free recall and General questions.
When Specific questions were asked, the accuracy of the children’s reports decreased to a level significantly lower than that
of the adult’s reports”, except in one particular area of questioning. She noted, however, that this increased accuracy
may be at the expense of completeness, particularly for both groups of children.
The Right to be Heard: Obtaining Evidence from Intellectually Disabled People
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, Discussion Paper, 1988) at para 4.65.
. For example, Mr M Brennan, School of Education, Charles Sturt University
(13 July 1992) at 1; the New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 5.
. Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 4.
. Mr M Brennan, School of Education, Charles Sturt University
(10 August 1992).
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 32-34.
. See, for example J Cashmore “The use of video technology for child witnesses”
[1990] MonashULawRw 13
Monash University Law Review
; WALRC Report 87; and the English Home Office
Report of the Advisory Group on Video Evidence
(Home Office, London, 1989) (“the Pigot Report”).
. Letter from the then Attorney General, the Hon P E J Collins QC MP, to the then Chairman of the Commission, the Hon Mr Justice Hope
AC CMG, dated 19 November 1991.
. See, for example,
O’Brien v McAuley
(1920) 14 QJPR 100
, referred to in the above letter from the Attorney General.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 10; Queensland Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 4; Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 6; the NSW Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 5; and
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 19.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 6.
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 4 April 1990 at 1682, per the Hon J Dowd QC MP, Attorney General.
(NSW) s 405H.
Evidence Act
(Vic) s 37C(2)(a).
Evidence Act
(Vic) s 37C(3).
Evidence Act
. “Special-care witness options ignored: Wells”
The Courier Mail
(9 December 1993) at 25. See also comments about these provisions in
[1992] 1 Qd R 227.
Evidence (Vulnerable Witnesses) Amendment Act
Evidence Amendment Act (No 2)
Acts Amendment (Evidence of Children and Others) Act
. “Move to ease stress of sex trials”
The Hobart Mercury
(7 February 1994).
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 10.
Evidence Act
(Vic) s 37C(3)(c).
Evidence Act
s 21A(2)(d).
Evidence Act
s 13(2)(c).
Evidence Act
1939 (NT) s 21A(2)(c).
Evidence Act
s 106R(4)(a).
. ACT Council on Intellectual Disability
(20 July 1993) at 3.
McKenzie v McKenzie
[1971] P 33.
[1985] HCA 62
(1985) 159 CLR 532.
Schagen v R
(1993) 8 WAR 410.
In that case it was stated (at 412, per Malcolm CJ) that: “it is within the inherent jurisdiction of the court to determine
to what extent a “McKenzie friend” may take part in the proceedings. It would be a rare and exceptional case, however,
in which a person other than a duly qualified legal practitioner would be permitted to address the court or otherwise take an active
part in proceedings. The court was prepared to go further in the present case because the court reporting service had found the
appellant virtually incomprehensible and this difficulty of understanding was compounded because he also had a severe hearing problem.”
. For concerns about the issue of discussions between the support person and the witness see the English case of
(Court of Appeal, Criminal Division, 21 December 1993, cited in
Criminal Law Review
where it was held that “it is the judge’s task to order a procedure which reduces the strain on child witnesses without
prejudicing the interests of the defendant. It is important that anyone providing comfort and support to a child witness should
not talk to the complainant while she is giving evidence, and this should be made clear publicly. If a social worker talks or whispers
more than a consoling word or two, the suspicion may be aroused that something is being said about the evidence. Anyone fulfilling
that role should say as little as possible, preferably nothing, to the witness.”
(NSW) s 405F(1). Section 405F(5) defines “personal assault offence” to be any offence under
(“Offences Against the Person”) of the
, or under s 25 of the
Children (Care and Protection) Act
ustralian Attorney-General’s Department
White Paper on the Courtroom Environment and Vulnerable Witnesses
(November 1992) (the “SA White Paper”) at 11.
. SA White Paper at 11-12.
. The use of CCTV in ACT courts was introduced by the
Evidence (Closed Circuit Television)
Act 1989, which came into operation on 28 June 1989. An initial trial period, later extended, was included in the original legislation,
but the Act has now been made permanent, and is now known as the
Evidence (Closed-Circuit Television) Act
1991 (ACT). Further amendments to this Act, as a result of the ALRC Report (see paras 7.36-7.37) were passed on 18 May 1994. For the
availability of CCTV in other States see the legislation referred to in para 7.23. CCTV is also available in England:
Criminal Justice Act
1988 (UK) s 32.
. SA White Paper at 15-16.
. The interpretation section of the
, lists all the offences which are considered “prescribed sexual offences”:
(NSW) s 405D(1).
(NSW) s 405D(3).
(NSW) s 405D(2A).
. New South Wales. Department of Courts Administration
Annual Report 1992/93
. Mr B Marden, Department of Courts Administration, New South Wales
Personal Communication
(7 July 1994).
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 4 April 1990 at 1686, per the Hon J Dowd QC MP, Attorney General.
. Mr I Jordan, Department of Courts Administration, New South Wales
Personal Communication
(18 February 1993).
. There is also a British study: G Davies and E Noon
An Evaluation of the Live Link For Child Witnesses
(Home Office, England, 1991).
. Western Australia Department of Community Services
Closed Circuit Television in the Perth Children’s Court
. J Cashmore
The Use of Closed-Circuit Television for Child Witnesses in the ACT
(Children’s Evidence Research Paper 1, Australian Law Reform Commission, 1992) (“ALRC RP 1”) at Table 2.1.
. ALRC RP 1 at paras 7.15-7.23.
. ALRC RP 1 at para 7.24.
. ALRC RP 1 at para 7.31.
. ALRC RP 1 at para 7.49.
. ALRC RP 1 at para 7.40.
. ALRC RP 1 at para 7.49.
. See, for example, the comments in A Fenbury “Video Witnesses” (April 1994) 21 (3)
The Law Society of Western Australia: Brief
Children’s Evidence: Closed Circuit TV
(Report 63, 1992) at para 13.
. ALRC RP 1 at para 7.49.
. ALRC RP 1 at paras 7.59-7.62.
. The Pigot Report at para 2.13.
. G Davies and H Westcott “Videotechnology and the child witness” in Dent and Flin 211 at 216-217.
. By telephone and through the Commission’s consultation with representatives of the DPP, Police Prosecutors, Legal Aid Commission
of NSW, The Law Society of New South Wales, Public Defenders, Aboriginal Legal Service and the Judicial Commission on 1 March 1994.
. See, for example, the comments made to Legislative Council Social Issues Committee Inquiry into Sexual Violence by Ms M Latham:
L Morris “Evidence by TV less effective, inquiry told”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(25 May 1994) at 7. Ms Latham expressed a preference for the use of screens. See also M Knox “Video evidence ‘last
resort’ in sex cases”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(23 July 1994) at 6, referring to evidence given by Mr P Conlon, Crown Prosecutor to a State Parliamentary inquiry into sexual violence.
However, other Crown Prosecutors have referred to the usefulness of CCTV: Ms A Seeto
Oral Submission
(25 July 1994).
. New South Wales Child Protection Council
Position Paper on the Use of Closed-Circuit Television for Child Witnesses
(March 1994) Recommendations 4.1, 5.1-5.3.
. An evaluation of this proposal is to be undertaken by the Department of Courts Administration: see the Hon K Chikarovski MP, Minister
for the Status of Women “Government measures to assist victims of sexual assault”
Media Release
(31 August 1993).
. ALRC Report 63 at paras 20-24.
. ALRC Report 63 at paras 27-29.
. ALRC Report 63 at paras 30-33.
. ALRC Report 63 at para 25.
Evidence (Closed-Circuit Television) (Amendment) Act
1994 (ACT), which commenced operation on 31 May 1994.
. For the types of proceedings covered see
Evidence (Closed-Circuit Television) Act
1991 (ACT) s 4.
Evidence (Closed-Circuit Television) Act
1991 (ACT) s 4A.
. ALRC RP 1 at para 7.75.
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Final Report, 1990), Recommendation 6.5.
. WALRC Report 87, Recommendations 25 and 26.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992);
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 19; and The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 10.
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 18-19.
. Consultation with the DPP, Police Prosecutors, Legal Aid Commission of NSW, The Law Society of New South Wales, Public Defenders,
Aboriginal Legal Service and the Judicial Commission on 1 March 1994.
. ALRC RP 1 at para 7.1.
Children’s Evidence by Video Link
(Discussion Paper 40, 1989) at para 18.
. See, for example, Cashmore at 234-250 and the New South Wales Child Protection Council
Out-of-court Videotaping of the Statements of Children who are the Alleged Victims of Child Sexual Assault in New South Wales
(Discussion Paper, July 1992).
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
(Discussion Paper 29, 1993), ch 9.
. See Davies and Westcott in Dent and Flin 211 at 218-225 for some of the difficulties in this regard.
. Cashmore at 238.
. G S Goodman and B M Schwartz-Kenney “Why knowing a child’s age is not enough: Influences of cognitive, social, and
emotional factors on children’s testimony”, in Dent and Flin 15 at 19. Goodman and Schwartz-Kenney’s own research,
at 21, also came to this conclusion.
. Goodman and Schwartz-Kenney at 21.
. NSWLRC DP 29, ch 9.
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 34.
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 32.
. Consultation with Mr G Craddock, Barrister on 11 March 1994.
. See, for example, T Pitter “In video veritas?”
New Law Journal
. Note that general changes are proposed to the hearsay rule in Part 3.2 of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) which are likely to impact on the law in this area. In particular, cl 65 and cl 66 provide an exception to the hearsay
rule in criminal proceedings where the maker of the statement is, respectively, unavailable or available. Where the maker of the
statement is available, though there is a broad exception allowing certain representations which were made while fresh in the memory
of the maker, that exception does not apply to evidence adduced by the prosecutor of representations “made for the purpose
of indicating the evidence that the person who made it would be able to give in [proceedings] ... unless the representation concerns
the identity of a person, place of thing.” The broad terms of this provision are likely to exclude many police interviews.
. See, for example, A Ligertwood
Australian Evidence
(2nd ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1993) at paras 7.58-7.77, which sets out a number of exceptions where a previous statement may be
. Laster and Taylor at 160. See also K Warner “Child witnesses: Evidentiary reforms” in J Vernon (ed)
Children as Witnesses
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Conference Proceedings 8, Canberra, 1991) 168 at 174-177, in relation to the advantages and
disadvantages of videorecorded interviews for child witnesses.
Evidence Act
; WALRC Report 87, Recommendation 9 at para 3.33.
Evidence Act
Evidence Act
The South Australian provision applies to a child
under 12 years. For a commentary on the Queensland provisions see A West “Admissibility of statements by children” (1994)
The Queensland Lawyer
Evidence Act
-M. See also WALRC Report 87 at paras 4.21-4.48.
Evidence Act
See also WALRC Report 87, Recommendations 25 and 26. The WALRC also recommended, at para 4.44, that a Code of Practice for the
use of videotapes in judicial proceedings be developed and that, at para 4.47, an edited or altered version of the videotaped statement
only be admitted if these changes were directed by the presiding judicial officer at a pre-trial hearing.
Evidence Act
s 21A(2)(e).
Crimes (Sexual Offences) Act
Evidence Act
(Vic) s 37B(1).
Evidence Act
(Vic) s 37B(3)(a), (b).
Evidence Act
(Vic) s 37B(3)(c)(i), (ii).
Criminal Justice Act
1988 (UK) s 32A, inserted by s 54 of the
Criminal Justice Act
1991 (UK). The cut off age for a child varies depending on the particular offence: s 32A(7). See also P Smith and A Wilson “Children
as witnesses: the Criminal Justice Bill and the Pigot proposals” [1991]
. J R Spencer “Reforming the law on children’s evidence in England: The Pigot Committee and after”, in Dent and
Flin 113 at 119-129.
. For a more detailed discussion in relation to children, see Cashmore at 234-236.
. The Pigot Report at para 2.26.
. The Pigot Report at ch 3, Recommendation 11.
. See Smith and Wilson at 324, referring to American material.
. SA White Paper at 17.
. The New South Wales Bar Association
(12 January 1994) at 8.
. See also the recommendations of the Law Reform Commissioner of Tasmania
Child Witnesses
(Report 62, 1989) at 26-28.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Unsworn Statements of Accused Persons
(Report 45, 1985).
. For example: the Hon Mr B Hazzard MP (New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 3 May 1994 at 1806-1807); and the Rev Hon F J Nile MLC (New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 19 April 1994 at 1353). See also the editorial “The death of Jasmin Lodge”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(23 March 1994) at 14: “From the perspective of preventing clever accused from using unsworn statements to plant false doubts
in a jury’s mind the change is welcome and long overdue. From the perspective of allowing accused with an intellectual disability
to put a simple statement in his or her defence, the change is controversial. Moves to broaden the protection of intellectually
disabled accused in other ways as a result can be expected.”
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
at 648-649, referred to in
R v Bassett
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 20 May 1994, Hunt CJ at CL, 70082/93, at 14.
. Letter from Mr M Ierace to the Hon J Hannaford MLC, Attorney General dated 13 April 1994. The letter was co-signed by the Redfern
Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service and The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability. This letter was
quoted at length during the debate in the New South Wales Parliament about the abolition of the unsworn statement.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
8. Reliability of Evidence
History of this Reference (Digest)
8.1 A major issue at a criminal trial which affects both the accused and the witness with an intellectual disability is the perceived
reliability of their evidence. Even if a witness is found competent to give evidence or an accused is found fit to be tried, questions
may still be raised (justly or unjustly) about the reliability of his or her evidence, including evidence originating outside the
trial, particularly confessions. It is important that juries do not either dismiss the evidence of people with an intellectual disability
as inherently unreliable, or accept it because of alternative misconceptions, for instance that such witnesses are incapable of lying.
This chapter considers safeguards to ensure, as much as possible, the avoidance of convictions on unreliable evidence. The issues
discussed include:
the use of expert evidence to inform the jury of the intellectual disability of a witness or the accused, and how that disability
impacts upon the giving and quality of evidence (an issue separate from fitness to be tried and criminal responsibility, which are
dealt with in Chapters 4, 5 and 10); and
whether any special measures, such as a warning by the judge, are required where the witness or accused has an intellectual disability.
EXPERT EVIDENCE ABOUT RELIABILITY
8.2 Intellectual disability does not necessarily render a person’s evidence unreliable. However, there are attributes of some
people with an intellectual disability which may
unreliability to a finder of fact, whether judge or jury. For example, a witness or accused with an intellectual disability may:
have limited communication skills, reduced attention span and memory recall; and/or
be intimidated by the courtroom environment and by cross-examination, and so appear evasive, nervous, hesitant, or frustrated and
A jury which is not informed about the effects intellectual disability may have on the giving and quality of evidence may view the
evidence of a witness with an intellectual disability with unjustified scepticism. On the other hand, according to Hayes and Craddock,
the person with an intellectual disability:
who performs badly in the witness box may be considered, erroneously, by the jury as too impaired to lie.
This raises the question of whether evidence about intellectual disability, and how that disability affects the capacity of a witness,
should be placed before the jury to disabuse them of any assumptions and preconceptions which may impair their capacity to weigh
evidence objectively. Such evidence may be necessary even if the witness’ alleged unreliability has not been specifically raised
by the other side.
8.3 The reliance on demeanour itself has been criticised:
[d]ecisions made by judges and juries are based in part on the manner and speech (“demeanour”) of parties and witnesses
in legal proceedings. The enormous variation in communication styles, however, makes demeanour an unreliable basis for decision-making.
It is a poor indicator of the honesty of the witness or the value of his or her evidence. ... At its most uncritical, reliance on
demeanour condones pseudo-psychology, cultural ethnocentricism, gender bias and even racism as valid bases for decision-making.
Such concerns have added weight when the witness has an intellectual disability. It has been argued that:
[a] party who calls an intellectually disabled witness may be concerned that, unless the jury is advised of the witness’ intellectual
disability and its relevant consequences, his or her evidence may be inappropriately disregarded. For instance, the prosecution calling
an intellectually disabled victim of a sexual assault, or the defence calling an intellectually disabled accused, may desire the
jury to know the characteristics of the disability, in particular that unlike some mental illnesses, delusions are not a characteristic,
so that the evidence is not unwittingly susceptible for that reason; or perhaps that the witness’ “nerves” should
not unduly be mistaken for an indication of lying. In view of the general community ignorance of the nature of intellectual disability,
this is a reasonable concern.
8.4 Currently, however, apart from evidence of a very general nature, such as information on employment and marital status, a party
may not lead evidence in chief to “bolster the credibility” of its own witness, because the law presumes that a party
tenders a witness as capable of being believed.
This rule was recently applied in England in circumstances relevant to this discussion.
The Court held that the prosecution could not call a witness (in this case a girl aged 15 with an intellectual disability, who was
also the alleged victim) and then, without more, call a psychologist or psychiatrist to give reasons why the jury should regard that
witness as reliable. In that case the prosecution had sought to call evidence from an educational psychologist as to whether or not
the girl was suggestible or likely to fantasise. Such evidence was seen as “oath-helping” and was therefore inadmissible.
Thus evidence cannot generally be led to alert the jury to the existence, and effect on the witness’s demeanour, of an intellectual
disability. This restriction is limited to evidence-in-chief: expert evidence may be led in some circumstances to counter a case
put in cross-examination that a witness was unreliable.
8.5 Evidence may be led to discredit
party’s witness, for instance to show that a witness is unreliable, to diminish the value of their evidence. Such evidence
may relate to mental disorder:
[m]edical evidence is admissible to show that a witness suffers from some disease or defect or abnormality of mind that affects the
reliability of his evidence. Such evidence is not confined to a general opinion of the unreliability of the witness, but may give
all the matters necessary to show not only the foundation of and reasons for the diagnosis but also the extent to which the credibility
of the witness is affected.
It also seems clear that expert evidence may be led to challenge the reliability of a confession by an accused with an intellectual
or other disability
and that a judge may, in certain circumstances, warn the jury that to convict on the evidence of a witness with an intellectual disability
may be dangerous (see paras 8.9-8.15). There is no corresponding opportunity, however, for the jury to be informed of matters relevant
to the evidence of a witness with an intellectual disability, unless the credibility of that witness has been challenged in cross-examination.
8.6 The use of expert evidence to overcome such problems and to assist the court was suggested in various submissions to the Commission.
The Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service, for example, pointed to the need for expert evidence to explain
the particular abilities and limitations of a witness with an intellectual disability:
[t]his can go in some way to counter possible confusion and inadequacies in testimony which may be revealed in the course of the trial.
Without such evidence, the witness may be perceived as unreliable or deceitful.
The Kingsford Legal Centre also stated:
[w]e strongly support the use of evidence as to a disability in Court, or at any earlier time if it would then be useful. ... It is
naive and inappropriate for judges and magistrates to consider that their life experience properly equips them to assess accurately
the extent, effects, and implications of an intellectual disability.
The Evidence Bill
8.7 The credibility of witnesses is referred to in Part 3.7 of the exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW). Similar provisions are found in the
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth), which has already been introduced into the Commonwealth Parliament, but has not been passed.
Evidence which is relevant only to a witness’ credibility is not admissible,
except on cross-examination where the evidence has substantial probative value,
and on re-examination in order to re-establish credibility damaged in cross-examination.
The accused in a criminal trial who gives sworn evidence may be cross-examined on matters relevant solely to credibility with the
leave of the court only, unless the evidence relates to bias, a motive to be untruthful, recollection, or prior inconsistent statements.
Other exceptions relate to evidence given by one witness of another witness’ credibility, and to the credibility of the maker
of a hearsay statement admitted under other provisions in the Bill.
The Bill, if passed, will also abolish a number of rules relating to opinion evidence, including the “ultimate issue”
rule (which prevents a witness from expressing an opinion on an issue to be decided by the court) and the “common knowledge”
rule (which prohibits witnesses from giving evidence of opinion about matters of common knowledge).
The Bill will not, however, overcome the difficulty in relation to evidence in chief about the witness’ intellectual disability
discussed above.
The Commission’s proposal
8.8 The Commission proposes that a party should, with the leave of the court, be able to bring expert evidence about the intellectual
disability of that party’s witness (including the accused where he or she gives evidence):
(a) where expert evidence is needed to clarify that witness’ manner of giving of evidence; and
(b) where expert evidence is needed to understand how the witness’ degree of disability is important to the circumstances of
the offence or, if the witness is not the accused, to explain/provide evidence about the way the person behaved.
Such evidence may be necessary to satisfy the interests of justice by lessening the chance of the judge and jury being misled by the
witness’ presentation in the witness box. The evidence should not be seen as simply suggesting to the jury that they should
believe the witness, but rather as necessary evidence about the character/responses/behaviour of a special type of person. The normal
requirements for giving expert evidence would still apply. The requirement that the court’s leave be first obtained should
ensure that the provision is not used in inappropriate cases. The contrary argument is that it is inappropriate that matters which
go to the credit of a witness be raised in evidence in chief, or be raised at all unless specifically put by the opposing party.
It may also be argued that such issues affect every trial and that there should not be special rules for the witness with an intellectual
disability. However, intellectual disability is clearly an area in which there is a general lack of knowledge and about which judges
and juries therefore may lack understanding, and a court should receive assistance in its assessment of such a witness. It must be
in the interests of justice that relevant matters about, for instance, the way a person’s disability affects his or her manner
of giving evidence, are put before the court.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
31. A party in a criminal trial should be able, with the leave of the court, to call expert evidence in chief about a witness’s
intellectual disability, where there is a risk that in the absence of that evidence the trier of fact (judge or jury) will be unable
to give proper consideration to the reliability of the witness’ evidence. This evidence should be admitted to inform the trier
of fact of the manner in which the intellectual disability may affect the cognitive, communication, and memory skills of the witness
in relation to the giving of evidence, and to explain the behaviour of the person.
CORROBORATION AND OTHER JUDICIAL WARNINGS
Warnings about confessions
8.9 As discussed above, expert evidence is also likely to be relevant in considering the reliability of confessions by the accused
with an intellectual disability. The treatment by the courts of confessions in general is a controversial issue, and merits a far
more detailed study than is possible within the confines of this reference. However, the manner in which the law on confessions impacts
upon people with an intellectual disability is important, particularly in relation to voluntariness, the discretions to exclude confessions
and police conduct. Such issues were considered in the Policing Issues Discussion Paper. In that Paper the Commission also made a
large number of proposals (for instance, in relation to the presence of a lawyer and support person, and Codes of Practice) to provide
safeguards for the questioning of a suspect in police custody. It was proposed that evidence obtained in breach of those safeguards
may lead to inadmissibility of the evidence. This Paper will not repeat that discussion, except for the area of judicial warnings
A judge can give a warning to a jury in his or her summing up if there is doubt about the reliability of a confession.
the High Court set down a rule of practice that where the prosecution case rests solely or primarily upon a disputed confession allegedly
made by an accused held in police custody, and the
of that confession is not corroborated by other reliable evidence, the judge must warn the jury of the danger of convicting. According
to Ligertwood, the need for a warning in these circumstances was based not only on the possible unreliability of the confession,
but also on the grounds of public policy, to encourage the use by police of electronic recording facilities in police questioning.
The so-called “McKinney” warning provides a useful but limited protection for the accused, but does not overcome the
difficulty where there is no allegation of police misconduct (and in fact the confession may have been electronically recorded in
the presence of a lawyer) but the defence argues that the accused’s evidence may be unreliable, for example that the person
is a compulsive confessor.
8.11 As discussed further below, where a witness (including the accused) has a “mental disability” which may affect his
or her capacity to give reliable evidence, it has also been held that a trial judge should give a warning in summing up about the
possible danger of basing a conviction on that testimony without confirmation by other evidence.
Such a warning is not limited to confessions. The Policing Issues Discussion Paper proposed further that there should be a statutory
a warning to the jury on the danger of convicting on the basis of the confession of a person with an intellectual disability alone.
With further consideration, and in light of submissions,
the Commission has decided to revise its proposal (which effectively amounted to a mandatory corroboration warning), as such a proposal
could imply that the evidence of any witness with an intellectual disability must be unreliable, which is not necessarily the case.
The Commission therefore suggests that, apart from the existing special protections for the accused, the position for any witness
(including the accused) should be the same. Thus a judge, if requested by a party to give a reliability warning, should give such
a warning, unless he or she believes there are good reasons not to do so. Presumably evidence must be presented to suggest why the
evidence may be unreliable. The terms of such a warning should be a matter for the judge. This proposal, set out at Proposal 32 below,
substantially reflects the position in the exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW).
Warnings for all witnesses
8.12 It has also been suggested that a mandatory or discretionary jury warning about the danger of convicting on
uncorroborated
evidence may also be appropriate for any witness with an intellectual disability (not just the accused), because of the possibility
of unreliability. The appropriateness of a warning may depend upon the level of disability, expert evidence as to the effect of the
disability on memory recall or suggestibility, and any other relevant matter.
8.13 Some brief consideration of the rules relating to corroboration is necessary at this point. In general terms, corroboration is
independent evidence which supports what a witness says about the facts in issue. The law of corroboration, however:
consists of a series of limited and technical rules that, in the main, govern the way in which judges must direct juries about certain
specific categories of prosecution evidence.
While the rules regarding what is or is not corroborative evidence are complex, in general:
it “confirms”, “supports” or strengthens” other evidence in the sense that it “renders [that]
other evidence more probable” ... It must do that by connecting or tending to connect the accused with the crime charged ...
At common law (except in perjury cases) the evidence of a single uncorroborated witness is sufficient to convict.
Specific legislation has, however, required corroboration for some offences or for the evidence of various classes of witness, such
as the unsworn evidence of children, or has required the judge to give a warning that it is unsafe to convict on the evidence of
some classes of witness.
8.14 Apart from legislation, the common law also provided, in certain circumstances, for a warning to the jury against acting on possibly
unreliable evidence where that evidence is uncorroborated. The jury is, however, left to decide how to act on the evidence; and so
, rather than
corroboration
, which is required.
Although there is some disagreement as to which classes of witness
a warning, accomplices, children, and the victims of sexual assault have (at times) fallen into this category. Ligertwood suggests
that in Australia it is doubtful whether the warning is now
for any of these categories,
though warnings are usually given. People with an intellectual disability or a mental illness have not been seen as an additional
category of witness where there is a requirement to give a “full corroboration warning”.
To a large degree the mandatory corroboration rules (whether statutory or common law) have been, or are in the process of being,
removed, for instance see the provisions of the exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW), discussed below.
8.15 The courts, however, also have a “general discretion to warn which has developed outside corroboration law”,
“which arises whenever there is a danger of convicting on potentially unreliable evidence.”
Ligertwood refers to this as a “residual category of unreliable witnesses”.
The most relevant case for the evidence of witnesses with an intellectual disability or mental illness in Australia in this area
where a majority of the High Court considered the general requirement for a judge to warn about unreliable evidence and stated:
If it appears that a witness whose evidence is important has some mental disability which may affect his or her capacity to give reliable
evidence, common sense clearly dictates that the jury should be given a warning, appropriate to the circumstances of the case, of
the possible danger of basing a conviction on the testimony of that witness unless it is confirmed by other evidence. ... There is
no particular formula that must be used; the words used must depend on the circumstances of the case.
This case has been cited in a number of recent New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal judgments.
Concerns still remain about the appropriateness and effectiveness of judicial warnings, rather than the exclusion of unreliable evidence.
The Evidence Bill
8.16 The exposure draft of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) and the
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) abolish corroboration requirements, except for the offence of perjury or a similar or related offence; and provide that
the giving of a judicial warnings on the danger of acting on uncorroborated evidence, and judicial directions relating to the absence
of corroboration, are discretionary.
In relation to warnings about
evidence (which is not necessarily
uncorroborated
evidence), they provide that when requested by a party, the judge is obliged, unless there are good reasons for not doing so, to:
(a) warn the jury that the evidence may be unreliable; and
(b) inform the jury of matters that may cause if to be unreliable; and
(c) warn the jury of the need for caution in deciding whether to accept the evidence and the weight to be given to it.
The judge also may give a warning or direction to the jury at his or her own discretion.
(See Appendix C for the full text of the New South Wales provisions.)
8.17 Both Bills set out the categories of evidence to which the section applies: that is, evidence “of a kind which may be unreliable”.
No distinction is drawn between the evidence of an accused and that of any other witness. One of these categories is “evidence
the reliability of which may be affected by age, ill health (whether physical or mental), injury or the like”.
It could be argued that, since intellectual disability is not an illness, nor “like” an illness, the warning provisions
within the respective Bills do not apply to evidence of witnesses with an intellectual disability.
8.18 The Commission suggests that “intellectual disability” should be specifically referred to as a possible category
of unreliability, to avoid confusion in this area. The danger of such an inclusion is that though there is nothing inherently unreliable
be unreliable” would appear to assume that this is the case. However, the clause does not purport to be exhaustive and it does
not otherwise extend or diminish the existing judicial discretion to warn or direct in appropriate cases. Thus the Commission does
not propose a mandatory warning about convictions based on the uncorroborated evidence of a witness with an intellectual disability,
but rather proposes that cl 164 of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) which provides a general discretion to warn where evidence may be unreliable (whether or not it is corroborated) be amended
to specifically include a reference to intellectual disability. Again, expert evidence and judicial awareness of intellectual disability
issues will be important in this area.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
32. That cl 164 of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) be amended to provide that the evidence of people with an intellectual disability is a category of evidence which may
be unreliable, and which may attract a judicial warning upon the judge being requested by a party to give such a warning to the jury.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 183.
. K Laster and V L Taylor
Interpreters and the Legal System
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1994) at 162 [footnote references omitted]. See also M Frank “Assessing deception”, paper
presented at the conference
Psychology and the Legal Process
(University of Sydney, 29 March 1994).
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 118.
[1975] 1 All ER 70 at 75, distinguishing
[1973] 3 All ER 662 on its facts; D Byrne and J D Heydon (eds)
Cross on Evidence
(Loose leaf edition, Butterworths, Sydney) (“Cross”) at para 19005.
R v Robinson
[1993] TLR 595.
. Cross at para 19175.
Toohey v Metropolitan Police Commissioner
[1965] 1 All ER 506 at 512, per Lord Pearce.
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94.
See also the English cases of
R v Ragship
(unreported, 5 December 1991) and
[1993] 2 All ER 577 cited in
R v Robinson
[1993] TLR 595.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 5; The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 10; Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 4; Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 4-5;
Confidential Submission
(4 September 1992) at 29-35; and Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 6.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 6.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 4-5.
. The background to the Evidence Bills was discussed in para 7.11.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 102;
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 102.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 103;
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 103.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 107;
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 108.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 104;
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 104.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 105, 106;
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 106, 107.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 79;
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 80.
. See also J Hunter “Unreliable memoirs and the accused: Bending and stretching hearsay - Part One”
Criminal Law Journal
McKinney v R
[1991] HCA 6
(1991) 171 CLR 468.
. A Ligertwood
Australian Evidence
(2nd ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1993) at para 4.12.
Bromley v R
[1986] HCA 49
(1986) 161 CLR 315.
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal summarised the principles relevant to the treatment of confessions by people with an
intellectual disability, and referred to the possible need for a
(1990) 19 NSWLR 177
at 183-184, per Gleeson CJ.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability in the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
(Discussion Paper 29, 1993) Proposal 29.
. For example the New South Wales Bar Association
(12 January 1994) at 5; and Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, New South Wales
(7 February 1994) at 1-2.
. Ierace at 110.
. England and Wales. The Law Commission
Corroboration of Evidence in Criminal Trials
(Report 202, 1991) at 1.
[1990] HCA 51
(1990) 171 CLR 207
[references
. Cross at paras 15001, 15010.
. Ligertwood at para 4.03.
. Ligertwood at para 4.11.
. In the English cases of
R v Spencer
the prosecution witnesses were psychiatric patients who had been convicted of serious offences. On appeal, the House of Lords said
that where the evidence for the Crown is solely that of a witness who is not in one of the accepted categories of witnesses for whom
a “full warning” as to the necessity of corroboration is required (that is, accomplices, children giving evidence under
oath and the alleged victims of sexual assault), but who, by reason of his particular mental condition and criminal connection, fulfilled
“analogous criteria”, the judge must warn the jury that it is dangerous to convict on his uncorroborated evidence:
[1987] UKHL 2
[1987] AC 128
at 142. The use of the words “danger” or “dangerous”, however, was not an essential part of the warning:
was considered in
Bromley v R
[1986] HCA 49
(1986) 161 CLR 315.
. In New South Wales, there is no longer a requirement (although there is a discretion) to warn that it is unsafe to convict on the
uncorroborated evidence of a child, whether the evidence is given on oath or otherwise:
Evidence Act
1898 (NSW) s 42A. New South Wales has also abolished mandatory warnings about the evidence of victims of sexual assault:
(NSW) s 405C.
. Hunter at 23, citing
Bromley v R
[1986] HCA 49
(1986) 161 CLR 315
Longman v R
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79.
Hunter states, at 24, that a judicial warning is clearly required in three specific circumstances: identification evidence;
confessions and prison informers.
. Hunter at 25.
. Ligertwood at para 4.36.
Bromley v R
[1986] HCA 49
(1986) 161 CLR 315
at 319 per Gibbs CJ. (Compare the minority judgment of Brennan J.)
. See, for example
(1992) 28 NSWLR 396
at 404-405, per Hunt CJ at CL;
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 1 September 1993, CCA 60386/92, per Grove J at 3-4 (Gleeson C J and Sully
J concurring).
. Hunter at 25-26.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 163;
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 164.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 164(2), (3);
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 165(3), (4).
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 164(5);
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 165(6).
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 164(1);
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 165(1).
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) cl 164(1)(c);
Evidence Bill
1993 (Cth) cl 165(1)(c).
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
9. Victims: Sexual Offences and Victim Compensation
History of this Reference (Digest)
9.1 As discussed in the previous three chapters, once any matter comes before the courts, the difficulties faced by victims (and witnesses
in general) with an intellectual disability include:
delays in bringing the matter to trial, which may affect their recollection of the event;
lack of understanding of court procedures;
challenges to their competence to give evidence and then, if allowed to give evidence, to the reliability of that testimony (this
is a particular difficulty in sexual assault matters as there may be no other witnesses);
being unable to make themselves understood when giving evidence and experiencing difficulties in cross-examination;
being affected by intimidation (real or otherwise) from the accused so as to be unduly fearful of giving evidence in court; and
the lack of a support person in court.
This chapter considers two further areas of particular concern to the victim with an intellectual disability: sexual offences, in
particular the specific sexual offences against people with an intellectual disability found in the
(NSW), and the issue of victim compensation.
SEXUAL OFFENCES AGAINST PEOPLE WITH AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
General issues
9.2 As discussed in Chapter 1, the particular vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability to sexual exploitation or assault
was the subject of a 1990 report by the NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit.
Submissions to the Commission have repeated many of the concerns raised in that report and stressed the continuing importance of
this issue.
Following that report a set of interdepartmental procedures were prepared “to assist and better co-ordinate the responses,
support and follow up of reports of a person with an intellectual disability having been sexually assaulted.”
The difficulties faced by victims and witnesses at the investigation stage, including issues such as lack of understanding of their
rights, the non-reporting of assaults against people with an intellectual disability and difficulties having their story understood
and accepted by the police, have already been discussed in the Commission’s Policing Issues Discussion Paper.
The New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee has commented that much of the focus and efforts of organisations has been on the hurdle
of getting cases involving the sexual assault of people with an intellectual disability
the courts.
There has been less attention paid to the particular problems at the court level as so few cases reach a hearing.
9.3 There are specific sexual offences relating to people with an intellectual disability found in
(NSW), which is concerned with sexual exploitation. The appropriateness of such offences is discussed in this chapter. Before considering
these specific offences, however, this chapter will briefly refer to some issues which arise under the general sexual assault provisions,
as the general offences also apply to victims with an intellectual disability. For example, intellectual disability can be a “circumstance
of aggravation” under the aggravated sexual assault offences.
The difficulties faced by all victims under the general sexual assault provisions have been the subject of much consideration, and
it is beyond the scope of this reference to consider this area in detail. The Commission, however, seeks submissions about the areas
discussed briefly below, and about any areas of the general sexual assault law which operate unfairly upon people with an intellectual
disability.
9.4 It has been suggested that it is more appropriate to consider how the general sexual offences may be reformed than to create special
sexual offences, such as those considered below. One possibility is to reconsider the issue of consent. In New South Wales the general
offence of sexual assault prohibits a person from having sexual intercourse with another person without the
of the other person and who
that the other person does not consent (or is reckless about the consent) to the sexual intercourse.
There are also a variety of other sexual offences of greater and lesser severity. Though consent is no defence for some sexual offences,
the issue of capacity to consent and actual consent raises particular difficulties for victims with an intellectual disability. Capacity
to consent to a sexual act involves having sufficient knowledge or understanding to comprehend the physical nature of the sexual
act by the accused and to appreciate the difference between that act and an act of a different character, such as a medical examination.
The majority of people with an intellectual disability would have the capacity to consent,
though people with a more severe level of intellectual disability would lack this capacity. If lack of capacity is established then
the intercourse is in fact without consent
and the Crown then needs to establish that the accused knew of (or was reckless about) that lack of capacity. If the person has the
capacity to consent, the denial of consent must be established, or the circumstances that vitiated consent.
9.5 In relation to people with an intellectual disability, the Victorian Law Reform Commission (“VLRC”) recommended (for
all sexual offences) that the present position for capacity to consent (see above) should be retained. The VLRC rejected a broader
test, that such a person lacks the capacity to consent if he or she was incapable of appreciating the nature and significance of
sexual intercourse, as unduly restricting peoples’ sexual rights.
Alternatively, a report prepared by a number of disability interest groups recommended that the level of understanding required for
sexual intercourse be reduced so that “a person is capable of consenting to sexual intercourse provided that he or she understands
the physical act of intercourse, without necessarily understanding the nature and consequences of sexual intercourse.
The Commission does not presently support changes to the law of capacity to consent, but seeks submissions on this issue.
Aggravated sexual offences
(NSW) provides for “aggravated” sexual offences.
If an aggravated offence is proved, the legislation provides for substantially heavier maximum gaol sentences than otherwise, for
example sexual assault has a maximum penalty of 14 years, but an aggravated sexual assault has a maximum of 20 years. The consequences
of proving a circumstance of aggravation are therefore potentially very significant for the offender. “Circumstances of aggravation”,
are varied but include the “serious intellectual disability” of the victim or the victim is “under the authority
of the alleged offender”.
This latter category may also include people with an intellectual disability. The Attorney General stated, when introducing this
legislation:
[t]he new offence does not conflict with or replace
section 66F.
It will arise only where there is an issue of lack of consent to the act of sexual intercourse. Thus, the new laws are not intended
to infringe upon the rights of the intellectually or physically disabled to have sexual relations.
9.7 Aggravated offences (in their present form) were introduced in 1989. The new provisions were designed to simplify and extend the
pre-existing aggravating categories. There has been limited judicial comment on the provisions. The policy behind aggravated sexual
offences appears to be that there should be a higher sentence for certain factors in crimes which the community sees as especially
abhorrent, such as when the victim is particularly vulnerable. According to the Second Reading Speech:
[t]he two categories dealing with serious intellectual or physical disability are also important reforms. They highlight the increased
vulnerability of people who are disabled.
If so, it is questionable why a few categories of vulnerable victim should be singled out, such as a victim with a serious intellectual
disability, rather than a general category of vulnerable victims. It may also be argued that circumstances of aggravation should
be a matter for sentencing rather than an element of the offence, and that aggravated offences should be abolished. The Commission
has not received any submissions to date recommending the repeal of the aggravated sexual offences. There are obviously arguments
on both sides, for example the Second Reading Speech stated that the “two-tiered” penalty structure, consisting of a
basic offence and an aggravated version, “will greatly simplify the application of the law.”
Because of the major implications of such a change for sexual assault laws in general, and as the law in this area was changed less
than five years ago, the Commission prefers to seek further submissions rather than making a proposal at this stage.
9.8 Leaving aside the issue of the desirability and scope of aggravated offences in general, it is difficult to ascertain how often
(if at all) these offences have been used in relation to people with an intellectual disability. Currently available data from the
New South Wales Bureau of Crimes Statistics and Research does not indicate the particular “circumstance of aggravation”
relied upon for an aggravated sexual offence.
Indeed, the Commission is unaware whether intellectual disability as a circumstance of aggravation has ever been successfully argued.
No submission or person at any consultation has referred to such a case and enquiries of the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
and the Crown Prosecutors have been unfruitful. Apart from the issue of appropriateness, there are a number of practical difficulties
with the sections. Two particular areas have been suggested as requiring re-drafting: first, the reference to a “serious”
intellectual disability should be defined or omitted and secondly, knowledge of the person’s intellectual disability should
be clearly stated to be part of the offence to avoid any confusion.
Definitions.
As discussed in Chapter 2, there has been criticism of the lack of definition of intellectual disability for the purposes of these
sections. The difficulty with the use of the qualifying word “serious” has already been discussed in Chapter 2, para
2.13. “Serious” cannot be equated with either mild, moderate, severe or profound levels of intellectual disability, and
it could be argued that any intellectual disability is “serious” in that it means, by definition, a significantly below
average level of general intellectual functioning. If it is argued that “serious” cannot include a mild level of intellectual
disability, then, as the majority of people with an intellectual disability have such a level of intellectual disability, this section
will have limited application. It has also been commented that people with a “serious intellectual disability” will probably
not, under the current law in relation to competence be able to give evidence and “without evidence from the victim, a conviction
is most unlikely.”
The Commission is not aware of any report proceeding this amendment which could be taken into account under the
Interpretation Act
(NSW) to ascertain what was envisaged to be covered by a “serious”
intellectual disability. As it is unclear what level of intellectual disability is anticipated, and there is no case law on the point,
a clarifying amendment would be of assistance if the provisions are to be retained. The NSW Women’s Coordination Unit Report
recommended that the Attorney General (through the Criminal Law Review Division) take advice from disability organisations and the
Department of Community Services and develop a clear definition of this term.
Knowledge by the accused of the existence of the victim’s disability (and that the disability was “serious”) is
not stated to be an element of the offence. It has been queried whether knowledge could be assumed to be necessary, particularly
as the requirement for knowledge is clearly spelt out in s 66F.
CHP9_24" href="#fnDP35CHP9_24">
Some of the “circumstances of aggravation” relating to the victim would be necessarily within the knowledge of the offender,
for example whether the victim was under the offender’s authority, and whether the victim had a serious physical disability.
But a person’s intellectual disability may not necessarily be obvious to the general community. It might be argued that the
word “serious” is meant to imply “obvious”, but this would be a difficult argument to sustain. It can probably
be assumed, despite the absence of case law on this issue, that knowledge is required for the operation of the section. If so, is
the accused required to have the same understanding as a psychologist of a victim’s intellectual disability and that it was
a “serious” one? The community in general does not have a very sophisticated understanding about intellectual disability.
What if, for example, the accused stated “I knew she was a bit slow, but I didn’t know she had an intellectual disability”,
or “I knew he worked at a sheltered workshop but I didn’t think he had a serious intellectual disability - he wasn’t
in a wheelchair?” In the absence of a guilty plea it may be almost impossible for the prosecution to overcome the difficulties
referred to above.
Specific sexual offences
Desirability of specific offences
9.11 It has been recognised that the general sexual assault offences, which are “designed to protect freedom of choice in sexual
connections” may not provide sufficient protection where the victim is “not capable of making a mature and rational choice
of this kind.”
This concern has led to specific offences involving sexual intercourse with people below certain ages and people with an intellectual
disability. For such offences consent is generally not a defence because of, for example, the victim’s lower “capacity
to evaluate sexual persuasion”.
Whether or not specific offences for people with an intellectual disability are appropriate is a matter of some controversy, however.
The VLRC commented:
The law must balance two competing interests - protecting people with impaired mental functioning from sexual exploitation, and giving
maximum recognition to their sexual rights. The difficulty for the legal system in striking an appropriate balance between these
interests is compounded by the considerable diversity of people with mental impairment in terms of extent of impairment, living circumstances,
and sexual interest and knowledge.
9.12 The arguments against specific offences for people with an intellectual disability include:
there is sufficient protection provided by the general law, for example if the person lacks capacity to consent, then the intercourse
is without consent;
specific offences limit the sexual freedoms of people with an intellectual disability; and
people with an intellectual disability should not be singled out in this way from, for instance, people with some other form of impaired
mental functioning.
9.13 Arguments in favour of such offences refer to the particular vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability to sexual
exploitation by, for example, their carers. It is also argued that the general provisions are difficult to prosecute successfully,
particularly in the area of proving lack of consent, and are therefore insufficient to protect people with an intellectual disability.
Other arguments against permitting a relationship between a person with some form of impaired mental functioning (including intellectual
disability) and their carer put to the VLRC included:
people with an intellectual disability might not want the sexual relationship, but find it difficult to refuse; and
a sexual relationship can exploit a person with an intellectual disability, even if he or she freely wants the relationship.
9.14 After considering such arguments, the majority of the VLRC recommended that a specific sexual offence against people with “impaired
mental functioning” be retained prohibiting “a person who is employed in a facility providing services [residential or
non-residential] for mentally ill or intellectually disabled people” from taking part in any sexual act with “a person
receiving services at that facility.” The VLRC also recommended that there be no statutory requirement of corroboration and
that consent was to be a defence only where the accused was married to, or in a de facto relationship with, the alleged victim.
Their reasons were to protect such people from unwanted sexual relationships and to protect such people from exploitation, in a broad
sense of the term.
However, the VLRC, while accepting the need for a “carer’s offence”, specifically rejected a general “exploitation
offence” as currently exists in New South Wales (see below), on the grounds that:
[t]here is too great a risk that an offence of that type would unduly restrict expression of the sexual rights of people ... The offence
should be confined ... to specified situations in which people ... are particularly dependent - and therefore particularly vulnerable.
It should be targeted at specified caregivers, as it is reasonable to impose a special prohibition on those people who are responsible
for the care and welfare of others.
9.15 Following that Report, in 1991, the
(Vic) was amended to prohibit sexual/indecent acts between people who provide medical or therapeutic services to people with impaired
mental functioning or workers at residential facilities and their clients.
New South Wales: s 66F
Section 66F
(NSW) was designed to prevent the sexual exploitation of people with an intellectual disability, not just by their carers, but by
other people who have knowledge of the person’s intellectual disability and the intention to take advantage of their vulnerability
to sexual exploitation. It has only been used, since its introduction in 1987, in a handful of cases.
Rather than focusing on the issue of consent, it prohibits certain consensual and exploitative sexual relationships. The section
replaced the offence of “carnal knowledge of an “idiot” or “imbecile”, which prohibited sexual relations
outside marriage.
It has been commented that “[s]uch laws were discriminatory and obviously restricted the rights of people with an intellectual
disability to have normal relationships.”
Section 66F
states that:
(1) In this section:
“intellectual disability” means an appreciably below average general intellectual function that results in the person
requiring supervision or social habilitation in connection with daily life activities.
(2) Any person who has sexual intercourse with another person who:
(a) has an intellectual disability; and
(b) is (whether generally or at the time of the sexual intercourse only)
under the authority of
the person in connection with any facility or programme providing services to persons who have intellectual disabilities,
shall be liable to penal servitude for 10 years. [“the carer’s offence”]
(3) Any person who has sexual intercourse with another person who has an intellectual disability,
with the intention of taking advantage of the other person’s vulnerability to sexual exploitation,
shall be liable to penal servitude for 8 years. [“the exploitation offence”]
(4) Any person who attempts to commit an offence under this section upon another person who has an intellectual disability shall be
liable to the penalty provided for the commission of the offence.
(5) A person does not commit an offence under this section unless the person
knows that the person concerned has an intellectual disability.
(6) No prosecution for an offence against this section shall be commenced without the approval of the Attorney General. [emphasis
Section 66F
prohibits sexual intercourse in two situations, despite the consent
of the person with an intellectual disability: first, sexual intercourse between a person with an intellectual disability and a person
who has authority over the person “in connection with any facility or programme providing services to persons who have intellectual
disabilities” is prohibited (“the carer’s offence”). Secondly, sexual intercourse between
person and a person with an intellectual disability is prohibited if the person has “the intention of taking advantage of the
other person’s vulnerability to sexual exploitation” (“the exploitation offence”). The latter offence is
not concerned with whether the victim
actually exploited, rather, the focus is on the
of the accused. Such an intention may be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to prove and may make the section unworkable. Little
judicial guidance about the section is available. The cases found by the Commission to date have only involved the exploitation offence,
not the carer’s offence, and the only case which appears to have reached the Court of Criminal Appeal involved a guilty plea.
In that case the Court commented on the difficulties involved in setting an appropriate sentence, even when the defendant pleaded
It has to be observed that the terms of the count to which the applicant pleaded guilty included a concession on his part that he
had an intention of taking advantage of the complainant’s vulnerability to sexual exploitation. One matter that must have been
of immense difficulty for the sentencing Judge was that he had before him the two versions of the offence ... [the victim’s
and the defendant’s], neither of which casts any real light upon the basis upon which this concession of an ingredient of the
offence was made. ...
The matter that must have been of great difficulty for his Honour to assess was the scaling, if I may so put it, of the responsibility
for the applicant in relation to his intent to take advantage of the vulnerability of the complainant. ...
Level of intellectual disability required.
The prohibition, however, is limited by the definition of intellectual disability used, which would probably not include many people
with a mild level of intellectual disability. The intention that the section would not apply to all people with an intellectual disability
seems clear from the Second Reading Speech:
[i]ntellectual disability is carefully defined to attract the protections afforded by the legislation to those people whose level
of disability requires such protection ... The intent of these reforms is to provide protection from sexual exploitation and assault
to people with a
significant
intellectual disability.
[emphasis added]
It may be suggested, however, that some protection is already provided for people with a significant level of intellectual disability
under the capacity to consent test referred to above. It was also suggested by prosecution lawyers in consultations with the Commission
that there have been cases where
was appropriate but where it was impossible to obtain sufficient evidence, due to the severity of the victim’s disability.
Thus limiting the victims to those with a more severe level of intellectual disability, may make the section unworkable, in the absence
of a guilty plea.
The requirements of knowledge and consent of the Attorney General.
For both offences two limitations are placed on the section: first, the alleged offender must
that the person has an intellectual disability; and secondly, no prosecution can be brought without the consent of the Attorney General.
Both these limitations raise concerns; for example, the difficulty, particularly for the exploitation offence, where there is no
necessary pre-existing relationship, in proving that the person
the person had an intellectual disability.
Should recklessness about whether or not the person had an intellectual disability be sufficient, and, if so, how should recklessness
be defined? The NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit Report recommended that the requirement of the permission of the Attorney General
be removed, as “[t]his appears to be an unnecessary restriction which is only applied to a limited number of other sexual assault
It has also been suggested that the need for this requirement to avoid inappropriate prosecutions is no longer necessary, since the
establishment of the position of the Director of Public Prosecutions (“DPP”), whose role includes consideration of the
appropriateness of prosecutions. This power to consent has in fact been delegated from the Attorney General to the DPP himself/herself.
The VLRC also considered, but rejected, the need for a requirement that the approval of the Director of Public Prosecutions be obtained
before a case could be prosecuted, “particularly in view of the general power of the DPP to determine whether specific prosecution
should continue, having regard to evidentiary and other considerations.”
The Commission does not presently see any overwhelming need to remove this requirement, particularly as some submissions (see below)
have been concerned that inappropriate charges may be being brought, even with the additional safeguard of the Attorney General’s
Other difficulties with
The New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee, for example, has criticised this section, stating:
advice from solicitors in the DPP as well as defence lawyers is that
... is badly worded. Inappropriate prosecutions are occurring. The DPP apparently prosecutes under the usual sections of the
rather than
if they can.
It has also been suggested that the carer’s offence, that is the prohibition against sexual intercourse between a person with
an intellectual disability and a person who is in authority over them “in connection with
any facility or programme
providing services to persons who have intellectual disabilities”, could include inappropriate people. This will depend upon
how wide an interpretation is given to “in connection with” and to whether the person with an intellectual disability
is “under the authority of” such a person. The question has been asked is with whom then can a person with an intellectual
disability who resides in an institution have a sexual relationship?
9.22 An alternative which has been suggested is the limiting of this offence to people with custody and control (whether permanent
or temporary) over the person with an intellectual disability. Another alternative was suggested by a working party drawn from three
groups representing the interests of people with an intellectual disability (the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights
Service, the New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability and the Australian Society for the Study of Intellectual Disability)
which supported, in 1987, the introduction of a “carer’s offence”, where consent was no defence.
The provisions proposed by those organisations contained a definition of intellectual disability and a broad definition of “facility”
and stated:
(a) whosoever being the proprietor of or an employee in a facility and who has sexual intercourse with a person with an intellectual
disability who, to the knowledge of the proprietor or employee, is receiving accommodation, care, treatment, education or training
in or from that facility shall be guilty of an offence;
(b) whosoever being a person who provides care, treatment, education or training to a person or people with an intellectual disability
at a facility where or from which a person with an intellectual disability is receiving accommodation, care, treatment, education
or training and who has sexual intercourse with such person, shall be guilty of an offence.
The provision was designed to cover volunteers as well as paid workers, but not situations where both people involved have an intellectual
disability or are otherwise both clients of the facility. A carer would not however be caught by the provision if he or she changed
jobs before commencing a sexual relationship; the working party stated that it “certainly did not wish to prohibit the development
of genuine relationships between workers and people with an intellectual disability.”
The Commission seeks submissions about the appropriateness of this alternative.
Conclusions:
Despite concerns that the sexual freedom of people with an intellectual disability is impeded by this provision, the Commission has
not received any submissions recommending that
be repealed. Rather, comments have focussed on difficulties with the current drafting. The NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit Report
also did not recommend its abolition. The provision is an obvious improvement over the former general prohibition against sexual
intercourse with a person with an intellectual disability (except in the context of marriage). It appears from submissions and consultations
to date that there is a need to protect people with an intellectual disability against exploitation, particularly by their carers
through such a provision, but that the present provision needs re-drafting. However, it is difficult to know how re-drafting will
overcome some of the fundamental difficulties set out above, particularly in relation to the exploitation offence. The Commission
also believes that the question whether such offences should be retained at all needs further consideration. The Commission seeks
further submissions in this regard.
Sexual offences
9.24 In this difficult area, and in light of the absence of submissions and information about some issues, the Commission has decided
to ask a number of questions, rather than to make specific proposals for reform at this stage.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
1. (a) Should the existing test for capacity to consent be retained?
(b) If not, how could it be altered to operate more fairly for the person with an intellectual disability?
Aggravated sexual offences
2. (a) Should the aggravated sexual offences be retained?
(i) should the phrase “serious intellectual disability” be defined or replaced by a general category of vulnerable victims?
(ii) should knowledge be specified as an element of the offence?
General sexual assault provisions
3. Are there any other areas of the general law of sexual assault which particularly disadvantage people with an intellectual disability?
Specific sexual offences:
4. (a) Should the specific sexual offences found in
be retained or repealed? What is the purpose of the offences and are they meeting it?
is retained:
(i) should the definition of intellectual disability set out in Proposal 1 apply to this section?
(ii) should the section include both a carer’s offence and an exploitation offence?
(iii) if a carer’s offence is retained, should it be amended to prohibit sexual relations between a person with custody and
control over the person with an intellectual disability, rather than a person connected with a facility or program?
(iv) if the exploitation offence is retained, how can the difficulties of proving the “intention of taking advantage of the
other person’s vulnerability” be overcome, in the absence of an admission or guilty plea?
(v) should recklessness about whether or not the person had an intellectual disability or not be sufficient to establish the knowledge
requirement?
(vi) should the Attorney General’s consent be required to commence a prosecution under this section?
COMPENSATION FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME
9.25 The Victims Compensation Tribunal was established on 15 February 1988 under the
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW) to provide compensation for victims of “acts of violence” (defined by the legislation) and to recover compensation
from offenders and fraudulent claimants. Part 6 of the
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW) also allows for compensation to be awarded by a court. The award does not prevent the victim or other “aggrieved
person” from seeking civil compensation from the Tribunal. As the Tribunal operates on a civil, not a criminal, standard of
proof, acquittals and the failure of a prosecution for any other reason are not conclusive in the determination of whether compensation
should be granted to the victim.
A person may thus apply for compensation even if the alleged offender was acquitted or if the matter was “no-billed”,
that is the Director of Public Prosecutions decided not to proceed with the charges. This may be important for a person with an intellectual
disability, as “the Tribunal also receives claims by applicants in which the authorities have not prosecuted because of their
assessment of the victim’s evidence.”
The Victims Compensation Tribunal does not hold any statistics about the numbers of complainants who have an intellectual disability.
9.26 Few submissions have addressed the area of victim compensation in detail. At consultations it was commented that people with
an intellectual disability have particular difficulties in this area, for instance they may have trouble showing psychological damage.
It was also stated that it was hard for people with more severe disabilities to get compensation, as they are reliant on statements
from people around them, and the payouts have generally been low.
The Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service commented in this regard that:
obstacles may arise in determining the amount of damages to be awarded to a person who has high support needs and whose verbal skills
are very limited as they will have great difficulty describing the extent of their physical and emotional suffering.
Concerns have also been raised about people with an intellectual disability receiving an award in a lump sum without a guardian or
any financial management assistance, where there are questions about their capability to handle the money. In one matter the Tribunal
directed that the person’s solicitor make an application for guardianship.
If the person is under the age of 18, however, the payment of the sum is supervised by the Public Trustee.
9.27 If an order for compensation is made, the Victims Compensation Tribunal may, in certain circumstances, seek to recover the sum
paid from a person who has been convicted of an offence arising from substantially the same facts as those which led to the order
for compensation (“the defendant”).
Restitution proceedings are commenced by serving a notice on the defendant, and the onus is then on him or her to respond or show
cause why such an order should not be made. If such restitution is sought, the amount to be paid is fixed with regard to such matters
as the financial means of the defendant and the Tribunal assessment of his or her culpability.
These restitution proceedings may also create difficulties for a defendant with an intellectual disability - it has been commented
that one concern is:
the difficulty some defendants have in understanding the difference between these proceedings and the criminal proceedings. This issue
is of further relevance when considering that one of the rationales behind restitution proceedings is that persons should be liable
for the consequences to the victims of their actions.
9.28 The Commission’s Policing Issues Discussion Paper (see Chapter 9) also included a brief discussion of victim compensation
issues in the context of police procedures, for example the relevance of delay in reporting a matter to the police, and commented
that this issue, including the role of the Tribunal and the difficulties faced by people with an intellectual disability, would be
discussed more fully in this Discussion Paper. The Policing Issues Discussion Paper noted that the
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW) was recently reviewed by the Attorney General’s Department and a report was prepared by Mr C Brahe, Deputy Chief
Magistrate and a former Chairperson of the Victims Compensation Tribunal (the “Brahe Report”).
As discussed in the Policing Issues Discussion Paper, the Brahe Report made a number of recommendations relevant to the victim with
an intellectual disability.
9.29 To implement some of the recommendations of the Brahe Report a
Victims Compensation (Amendment) Bill
1994 (NSW) was introduced into Parliament earlier this year, including such amendments as the re-definition of the “act of violence”
which may lead to compensation, and the insertion of a new category of injury (psychological trauma) for sexual assault victims.
When Parliament rose the Bill had not yet been passed. The Brahe Report recommended that applications for compensation should be
lodged within a period of two years from the act of violence but that the Tribunal should have a discretion to accept claims outside
that period in exceptional circumstances, including the victim’s intellectual disability.
This provision is contained within the Bill.
The Brahe Report also recommended that failure to report the crime to a police officer within a “reasonable time”, or
to assist the prosecution, could be excused on grounds including the victim’s intellectual disability.
In the Bill there is now provision that “in determining whether a matter relating to a victim of an act of violence was reported
to a police officer within a reasonable time, the Tribunal may have regard to ... any physical, intellectual or psychiatric disability
to which the victim is subject”.
Other proposed amendments may also assist victims with an intellectual disability. However it is difficult to assess the impact of
the proposed amendments until they become law. At this stage, the Commission does not intend to make any proposals in relation to
victim compensation issues, but rather to seek submissions about whether the proposed amendments, if enacted will assist people with
an intellectual disability and whether there are any other concerns about victim compensation as it impacts on people with an intellectual
disability. This area will then be the subject of recommendations in the Commission’s final Report.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Final Report, 1990). This Report found that people with an intellectual disability report a higher than average proportion of sexual
assault cases. In this study the Department of Health noted disability as a specific data collection item. In the first six months
of collection, 55 out of 855 (6.4%) adults referred to the Sexual Assault Service had an intellectual disability. The Report referred,
at 11, to a number of overseas studies in this area. Other overseas studies are cited in B McCormack “Sexual Abuse and Learning
Difficulties” (1991) 303
British Medical Journal
143 and in D Tharinger, C Burrows-Horton and S Millea “Sexual Abuse and Exploitation of Children and Adults with Mental Retardation
and Other Handicaps” (1990) 14
Child Abuse and Neglect
301. See also the following studies:
K Johnson, R Andrew and V Topp
Silent Victims: A Study of People with Intellectual Disabilities as Victims of Crime
(Office of the Public Advocate, Melbourne, 1988) at Appendix 4; and
The Incidence of Crime Victimization Among Intellectually Disabled Adults: Final Report
(National Police Research Unit, South Australia, 1990).
. For example New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(4 June 1993).
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 12 December 1991, at 6568, per the Hon V Chadwick MLC, Minister for School Education and Youth Affairs.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People With An Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
(Discussion Paper 29, 1993), ch 9.
. Consultation with the New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee Intellectual Disability Sub-Committee on 23 September 1993.
. R v Morgan
[1970] VicRp 43
[1970] VR 337
at 341-342 per Winneke CJ (with whom Little and Starke JJ agreed); K Rosser “Sexual assault” (1989) 3 (4/5)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
23. See also
R v Beserick
(1993) 30 NSWLR 510
at 531, per Hunt CJ at CL (with whom Finlay and Levine JJ agreed).
. Rosser (1989) at 23.
R v Barratt
(1873) LR 2 CCR 81.
(NSW) s 61R.
. Law Reform Commission of Victoria
Sexual Offences Against People with Impaired Mental Functioning
(Report 15, 1988) Recommendation 1 and paras 33-40.
. J Simpson
Sexual Assault Laws and People with an Intellectual Disability
(Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service, unpublished paper, 6 July 1987) at 2.
Sections 61J
(aggravated sexual assault), 61M (aggravated indecent assault) and 61O (aggravated act of indecency).
. According to
(NSW): “For the purposes of
sections 61H
, a person is under the authority of another person if the person is in the care, or under the supervision or authority, of the other
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 28 November 1989 at 13571, per the Hon J Dowd QC MP.
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 28 November 1989 at 13570, per the Hon J Dowd QC MP.
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 28 November 1989 at 13571, per the Hon J Dowd QC MP.
. New South Wales. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research
Personal Communication
(28 October 1993).
. K Rosser “A particular vulnerability”
Legal Service Bulletin
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit, Recommendation 5.2.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 8.
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1990) at 189.
. Fisse at 190.
. VLRC Report 15 at 3. As its title suggests, the Report refers to a broader group of people than people with an intellectual disability;
it also included people with mental or psychiatric illness, brain damage or dementia.
. VLRC Report 15 at para 51.
. VLRC Report 15, Recommendations 3-7.
. VLRC Report 15 at paras 62-64.
. VLRC Report 15 at para 64.
. Consent is not a defence to either charge unless the accused believed on reasonable grounds that he or she was the spouse or de
facto spouse of the other person.
. According to the Judicial Commission’s Sentencing Information System, for the period January 1990-December 1993, there were
only four cases under s 66F(3) (the exploitation offence) and no cases under s 66F(2) (the carers offence). In each case listed
the defendant pleaded guilty and, in three of the four cases, received a custodial sentence. According to the New South Wales Bureau
of Crime Statistics and Research, there were no s 66F charges during the period January 1988-December 1989:
(4 November 1993). Anecdotal reports, however, suggest that there may have been other cases than the four identified - the Commission
would appreciate receiving copies of relevant unreported judgments.
. See s 72A (“carnal knowledge of idiot or imbecile”) and s 78M (“homosexual intercourse with idiot or imbecile”)
(NSW), both of which were repealed by the
Crimes (Personal and Family Violence) Amendment Act
1987 (NSW), assented to on 4 December 1987.
. Rosser (1989) at 23.
R v Parsons
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 17 December 1990, CCA 60014/90.
R v Parsons
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 17 December 1990, CCA 60014/90, at 3-5 (per Grove J, the other judges agreeing).
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 29 October 1987 at 15466, per the then Premier, Mr B Unsworth MP.
. Consultation with representatives of the DPP, Police Prosecutors, Legal Aid Commission of NSW, Law Society of New South Wales, Public
Defenders, Aboriginal Legal Service and the Judicial Commission on 1 March 1994.
. According to R Watson and H Purnell
Criminal Law in New South Wales: Indictable Offences
(Loose leaf Service, Vol 1, Law Book Co) at 125: “It has been said that the knowledge of the accused may be established by
admissions, by proof of long standing acquaintance, or by the fact that the victim’s appearance made it obvious that he or
she was intellectually disabled: the victim’s appearance is a proper matter for the jury to observe and consider”, referring
[1959] SR (NSW) 96
[1966] 1 QB 448;
[1964] Tas SR 184.
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit, Recommendation 5.1, at 21-22. (The requirement of the consent of the Attorney General to
prosecute also exists for incest and certain homosexual intercourse offences, see
. New South Wales Government Gazette (23 September 1988).
. VLRC Report 15 at para 88.
. See New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 1.
. Simpson at 6-7.
. Simpson at 2.
. Victims Compensation Tribunal, New South Wales (Registry)
(16 March 1994) at 1.
. Victims Compensation Tribunal, New South Wales (Registry)
(16 March 1994) at 2.
. Consultations with representatives of the Victims Compensation Tribunal and the Victims Advisory Council on 16 March 1994.
. Consultations with representatives of Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service, The New South Wales Council for
Intellectual Disability, Disability Council of NSW, New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee and the Brain Injury Association on
10 March 1994.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 13.
. Consultations with representatives of the Victims Compensation Tribunal and the Victims Advisory Council on 16 March 1994.
. Consultations with representatives of the Victims Compensation Tribunal and the Victims Advisory Council on 16 March 1994.
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW) Part 5.
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW) s 47.
. Victims Compensation Tribunal, New South Wales (Registry)
(16 March 1994) at 2-3.
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Review of the Victims Compensation Act
(Victims Compensation Tribunal, Attorney General’s Department, March 1993) (the “Brahe Report”). Also in 1993 the
New South Wales Bureau of Crimes Statistics and Research prepared an empirical study
Criminal Victim Compensation: A Profile of Claims, Claimants and Awards
(Legislative Evaluation Series, New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research, 1993)
. The Brahe Report, Recommendation 1(c).
Victims Compensation (Amendment) Bill
1994 (NSW) Schedule 1; proposed amendment to s 17 of the
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW).
. The Brahe Report, Recommendation 11(a).
Victims Compensation (Amendment) Bill
1994 (NSW) Schedule 1; proposed amendment to s 20 of the
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW).
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
10. Criminal Defences
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
10.1 “Criminal defences” is a broad term used here to describe excuses or justifications which exculpate an accused person.
If the relevant legal test is satisfied, the defence removes or reduces criminal responsibility, resulting respectively in an acquittal
or a finding of guilt on a lesser charge.
This chapter considers the operation of criminal defences in the context of people with an intellectual disability, in particular
the defence of mental illness. The defence of diminished responsibility is also particularly relevant, but not discussed in this
Paper due to the fact that the Commission has a separate reference to the partial defences to murder, namely provocation, diminished
responsibility and infanticide.
Any concerns about the operation of the defence of diminished responsibility in relation to people with an intellectual disability
should be forwarded to the Commission as a submission to that reference. This chapter also briefly discusses the difficulties which
arise for people with an intellectual disability under other criminal defences, see paras 10.3-10.7.
10.2 Apart from criminal defences, if an offence requires proof of a particular state of mind, evidence of a mental impairment may
support a denial that the accused had that state of mind, and lead to an acquittal. Such an argument is not strictly a defence, but
rather a challenge to one element of the offence, each element of which must be established by the prosecution.
Such an approach has been resisted in England, where the leading of evidence of abnormality without raising the insanity defence
gives rise to a right of the prosecution to show that a defendant is insane in law. According to Glanville Williams, this rule prevents
the release of insane persons who have committed serious crimes.
The common law on this subject in Australia, though previously unclear, appears now to have been settled by the High Court in
However the
Criminal Code Bill
1994 (Cth), cl 7.3(6), provides that a person cannot rely on a mental impairment to deny voluntariness
or the existence of a fault element but rather can rely on the defence of mental impairment to deny criminal responsibility. This
provision is inconsistent with
in relation to denial of a fault element and is controversial.
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY AND CRIMINAL DEFENCES OR EXCUSES
10.3 Many defences in the criminal law are subject to a “reasonable person” or “reasonable grounds” test.
An objective requirement of this kind can represent a difficult or insurmountable obstacle to an accused with an intellectual disability.
It is questionable whether such an obstacle should exist.
10.4 Self defence requires that the accused believed on reasonable grounds that it was necessary to do what he or she did in response
to an attack or threatened violence.
Another example is the
Proudman v Dayman
defence of reasonable mistake of fact which requires not only a genuine mistake but also a belief or perception based on reasonable
grounds. An accused with an intellectual disability may be able to point to a genuinely innocent state of mind but that in itself
is insufficient to found the defences instanced unless there was also an objectively reasonable basis for the accused’s belief.
The orthodox view is that an intellectual disability is to be taken into account when assessing the accused’s subjective state
of mind but that a test based on “reasonable grounds” or the “reasonable person” relates to the reactions,
beliefs, or risk assessment of a person in the position of the accused but who is not suffering from an intellectual disability or
any other “abnormal” condition.
Similar considerations apply in the context of provocation, where an accused’s intellectual disability is relevant to the
gravity of the provocation offered but not to the test whether an ordinary person might have been induced to lose self control.
Duress is also subject to an objective limitation, namely the “ordinary firmness” test in relation to whether the duress
should have been resisted.
10.5 The extent to which criminal responsibility should be governed by objective tests is a notorious issue, both in relation to the
elements of an offence and in respect of the elements of a defence. Despite centuries of case law and statutory development, little
headway has been made in devising objective tests which can screen out false or spurious attempts at exculpation while also recognising
the particular capacities and degree of blameworthiness of the individual accused. Objective tests in the criminal law result in
the punishment and stigmatisation of an accused for not being a different person, namely someone else who is blessed with “normal”
capacities of reasoning or self control. As currently formulated and applied, objective tests fail to assess whether the accused,
given his or her intellectual disability, failed to live up to a reasonably expected standard and, if so, whether the failure was
a sufficiently gross departure from that standard to warrant the imposition of liability for an offence. These questionable basic
features of objective tests are of particular concern where an accused is charged with a serious offence such as murder or sexual
assault but the issue of principle is also relevant to criminal responsibility generally.
10.6 The Commission is currently of the view that the problems created by objective tests of criminal responsibility need to be addressed
with reference to their impact across the whole range of potential accused persons rather than in the particular setting of accused
persons with an intellectual disability. Although the Commission is attracted to the possibility of applying a subjective test where
an accused with an intellectual disability pleads a defence or excuse, that approach could hardly be recommended in isolation - it
would require a far-reaching re-examination of the elements of defences which are now defined partly in terms of an objective test.
Timely as such a re-examination would be, it is beyond the scope of the present reference.
10.7 The Commission proposes in this reference to confine its attention to the defence of mental illness or “mental impairment”
as it would be re-titled under the re-formulation proposed by the Commission. The defences of diminished responsibility and provocation
are, as discussed above, currently being examined in the reference on partial defences to murder. Other defences, including duress
Proudman v Dayman
defence of reasonable mistake of fact, warrant further consideration elsewhere.
THE DEFENCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS
10.8 The defence of mental illness is available for all crimes, although as a matter of practice it tends to be raised only for serious
offences. The defence is derived from the rules laid down in
M’Naghten’s Case
(hence it is often referred to as the “M’Naghten defence”) and is usually expressed by the following test:
to establish a defence on the ground of insanity, it must be clearly proved that, at the time of the committing of the act, the party
accused was labouring under such a
defect of reason, from disease of the mind
, as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing; or, if he did know it, that he did not know he was doing what was
[emphasis added]
The common law test applies in New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria, and the Commonwealth.
In Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory the defence is set out in legislation (“Codes”).
The proposed national Criminal Code contains a general defence of “mental impairment” (see para 10.17), based partly
on the M’Naghten defence.
10.9 In New South Wales, the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) (“the MHCP Act”) regulates the application of the M’Naghten defence. A “special verdict”
of not guilty by reason of mental illness is returned where the person is found to have done an act or made an omission, but at the
time was mentally ill so as not to be responsible according to law. “Mental illness”, for the purposes of this defence,
is not defined by the MHCP Act or by any of the similar legislative provisions which preceded it.
There appears to be only one case in which a definition is stated; but the definition of “mentally ill” - “so
insane as to establish the defence of insanity to the offence charged” - is circular and adds nothing to the common law.
The defence of mental illness regulated under the MHCP Act (not responsible “according to law”
) is therefore the M’Naghten defence. The consequences of such a verdict are discussed at paras 10.19-10.20.
10.10 A person who has been found unfit to be tried may also be found “not guilty on the ground of mental illness”,
which is equivalent to a finding of “not guilty by reason of mental illness” at a normal trial,
and has the same consequences.
It is to be noted that the MHCP Act refers to the verdicts of mental illness in the normal trial and fitness proceedings respectively
as “not guilty by reason of mental illness”,
and “not guilty on the ground of mental illness”.
It has been suggested that the terminology used throughout the Act should be uniform.
Can a person with an intellectual disability be found not guilty on the ground of “mental illness”?
10.11 As discussed in Chapter 2, intellectual disability differs from mental illness, and is not an illness itself. It has been suggested
that because intellectual disability was regarded medically as a form of insanity (or at least could not be differentiated from it)
at the time the M’Naghten defence was formulated, it was intended to be included within the legal definition of insanity, and
that this anomaly has been perpetuated by the failure of the law to keep pace with the recognition of the distinct nature of intellectual
disability.
10.12 The M’Naghten defence is concerned with a “defect of reason, from disease of the mind”. Does a “disease
of the mind” include intellectual disability for the purposes of the defence? “Disease of the mind” is a legal
rather than a medical term.
it was stated that the requisite state of mind in legal insanity must be “one of disease, disorder or disturbance”:
That does not mean ... that there must be some physical deterioration of the cells of the brain, some actual change in the material,
physical constitution of the mind. ... It does mean that the functions of the understanding are through some cause, whether understandable
or not, thrown into derangement or disorder.
Similarly, in
Devlin J stated that:
[t]he law is not concerned with the brain but with the mind, in the sense that “mind” is ordinarily used, the mental faculties
of reason, memory and understanding ... In my judgment the condition of the brain is irrelevant and so is the question of whether
the condition of the mind is curable or incurable, transitory or permanent.
10.13 Ierace argues that the psychological effect of an intellectual disability may amount to “a defect of reason” and
that intellectual disability may be regarded as a “disease of the mind”.
He stated that the authorities, which “emphasise the ramifications of the mental condition for the accused’s faculties
of reason, memory and understanding”, do not exclude such a conclusion.
Hence, although the cause of intellectual disability often is unknown, the focus upon understanding rather than physical attributes
means that intellectual disability could be classified as “a disease of the mind” for the purposes of the M’Naghten
defence. Another legal commentator has stated that:
there is no reason why a person who is born, and remains, mentally deficient should not be within the M’Naghten Rules if the
degree of his mental incapacity otherwise amounts to insanity. The point is put beyond question by the codes, each of which expressly
includes “natural mental infirmity” or “natural imbecility” within the definition of insanity. There is no
warrant for introducing a difference between the common law and the codes here, and no reason for supposing that the High Court would
10.14 Noting the difference between the State Code provisions and the M’Naghten defence, other commentators have taken a contrary
the Codes recognise natural mental infirmity (Tasmanian Code - natural imbecility) as a possible ground upon which to ground a plea
of insanity. Mental deficiency arising from arrested or incomplete mental development would probably be held to fall outside the
scope of the phrase “disease of the mind” in the
Rules. There is a dearth of case law, probably because most mental defectives would be found unfit to plead.
Several submissions to the Commission considered that the inclusion of intellectual disability within the defence of mental illness
is inappropriate for reasons discussed further below.
10.15 Assuming that the M’Naghten defence does encompass intellectual disability, there remains a terminology problem:
[i]t is inappropriate and confusing to maintain that, under the law, insanity includes intellectual disability ...
... the law needs to be reformed so that intellectual disability does not continue to be defined as an illness for the purpose of
defences to criminal charges. Quite apart from the questions of principle involved, it is ludicrous that during a trial the jury
will hear from the experts that intellectual disability is not an illness and be then directed by the trial judge that they must
consider it as such for the purpose of determining whether to return a special verdict of not guilty by reason of mental illness.
Intellectual disability is a permanent condition which is rarely amenable to treatment, and so the use of the term “illness”
is unsuitable and misleading. One submission argued that:
[t]he term “mental illness” is a vague generalisation which leaves an implication of prognostic improvement. It is archaic,
derogatory and unspecific.
10.16 There are fundamental problems beyond those of terminology when intellectual disability is treated as a sub-set of mental illness.
Hayes and Craddock state that because the criminal law has failed to keep up with community/professional awareness of intellectual
disability and improvements in habilitation programs, its continuing categorisation of people with an intellectual disability as
insane or mentally ill is leading it to fail in its own aims of deterrence, punishment and rehabilitation in relation to them.
The channelling of people with an intellectual disability from the criminal justice system into the mental health system (which
occurs when the mental illness defence is made out) may not reflect or adequately address their needs in terms of supervision and
care - however, this is not to say that the criminal justice system itself is capable of doing so.
10.17 The Victorian Law Reform Commission (“VLRC”) has recommended that:
the law relating to disease of the mind should not be altered. However, the outmoded and inappropriate term ‘disease of the
mind’ should be replaced with the term ‘mental impairment’. This should be statutorily defined to
mental illness, intellectual disability, senility, brain damage and personality disorder. These conditions are already covered by
the concept ‘disease of the mind’ but, for the sake of clarity, it is desirable to give this legislative form.
A similar proposal is that put forward under the proposed national Criminal Code,
which has recently been introduced as a Bill in the Commonwealth Parliament, for federal offences. This Bill includes the following
redefinition of the defence:
7.3(1) A person is not criminally responsible for an offence if, at the time of carrying out the conduct constituting the offence,
the person was suffering from a mental impairment that had the effect that:
(a) the person did not know the nature and quality of the conduct; or
(b) the person did not know that the conduct was wrong (that is, the person could not reason with a moderate degree of sense and
composure about whether the conduct, as perceived by reasonable people, was wrong); or
(c) the person was unable to control the conduct.
Under the Bill, cl 7.3(8), “mental impairment” includes senility, intellectual disability, mental illness, brain damage
and severe personality disorder. Mental illness, but not intellectual disability, is defined in the Bill. The Explanatory Memorandum
introducing the Bill commented that “[a] broad definition of mental impairment allows the jury to hear psychiatric testimony
based on the latest expertise while properly leaving the ultimate question of responsibility to the jury”, noting that the
Gibbs Committee and the VLRC had reached similar conclusions.
The Bill also expands the M’Naghten defence to include the inability to control conduct.
10.18 Despite the possible problems caused by the overlap between intellectual disability and mental illness, it is important that
there be an appropriate defence for people with an intellectual disability whose understanding is affected to the extent anticipated
by the M’Naghten defence. Rather than proposing a separate defence on the grounds of intellectual disability, the Commission
provisionally supports the inclusion of people with an intellectual disability under a single defence, as proposed in the national
Criminal Code, changing the name to the “defence of mental impairment” to avoid the confusion caused by the reference
to “mental illness”.
The proposed national Criminal Code has resulted from an Australia-wide reform initiative and there are obvious advantages in recommending
uniformity in this area. The Commission, however, has suggested changes to the consequences of a successful defence (see below) to
overcome some of the difficulties which arise for people with an intellectual disability. To avoid confusion, however, the Commission
will continue to refer to the defence of mental illness in the remainder of this chapter.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
33. That New South Wales adopt the proposed Commonwealth statutory version of the defence of mental impairment. Accordingly, all references
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) to the defence/verdict of “not guilty by reason of mental illness” or “not guilty on the ground of mental
illness” should be amended to “the verdict of not guilty because of mental impairment”. (Proposals below, however,
will continue to refer to the defence of “mental illness” to avoid confusion.)
The consequences of the defence of mental illness
10.19 Currently, the issue of mental illness can be raised by either the accused or the prosecution, with the burden of proof (on
the balance of probabilities) falling on the party who raises it.
If the issue is raised, the Court must explain to the jury: the findings which it can make; the legal and practical consequences
of those findings; the existence, composition, and function of the Mental Health Review Tribunal (“the Tribunal”); and
the requirement that before releasing a person detained under the MHCP Act, the Tribunal must be satisfied that that person does
not pose a danger to themselves or the public.
If the jury returns a verdict of not guilty by reason of mental illness: “the Court must order that the person be detained
in strict custody in such place and in such manner as the Court thinks fit until released by due process of law”.
The person is held in prison or hospital as a “forensic patient”.
10.20 As soon as practicable after a person has been detained as a forensic patient, the Tribunal must review that person’s
case and make a recommendation to the Minister for Health
This recommendation
be implemented by the “prescribed authority”, which (in relation to the mental illness defence) is the Governor.
If there is no recommendation for release made after this initial review, the Tribunal may at any time, but must at least every
six months, similarly review the person’s case and make an appropriate recommendation (the “subsequent review”).
This process is outlined in Table 1 of Appendix B. A recommendation for release at any stage is made only if the Tribunal is satisfied
that “the safety of the person or any member of the public will not be seriously endangered by the person’s release”.
Where a recommendation for release is made upon a subsequent review, the Minister is required
to notify the Attorney General of that recommendation, and to provide a copy of that notification to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
The Attorney General then has 30 days to object on the following grounds:
(a) the person has served insufficient time in custody or under detention; or
(b) the Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions intends to proceed with criminal charges against the person ...
If an objection is made, the Governor may not order the person’s release,
otherwise, the Governor
order the person’s release.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE DEFENCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS
10.21 When a jury returns a verdict of “not guilty by reason of mental illness” under the MHCP Act, it is not making
a determination as to guilt or innocence in the ordinary sense, but a finding on the mental responsibility of the offender at the
time of the offence. The jury is called upon to make a legal determination based on clinical evidence. The complexity of psychiatric
and psychological evidence may test the understanding of lay jurors. However, given that the quality of evidence should not be diminished
by such concerns, this problem may only be overcome by careful judicial direction. Similarly, it is important that the jurors clearly
understand the implications of a finding of mental illness and, as discussed, the MHCP Act provides that these be explained to them
by the judge. Nevertheless the Commission has been provided with an example of a jury apparently misunderstanding such a defence
and believing that the verdict would mean that the person would be returned to his/her family or placed in appropriate care.
10.22 It is questionable whether such a finding should be termed a “defence” at all,
since it may be (in practice rarely) sought by the prosecution and resisted by the defence, and if successful, it results in mandatory
indeterminate detention with limited appeal rights. The Legal Aid Commission of NSW stated that while the defence of mental illness:
may well be effective in terms of avoiding a conviction, ... it is not appropriate and generally not in the intellectually disabled
client’s best interest to obtain such a verdict.
A successful mental illness defence may ... be the worst possible outcome for a person with an intellectual disability.
These concerns largely arise from the practical implications of the defence, which are discussed below.
Mandatory requirement for strict custody
10.23 Where a jury returns a special verdict of not guilty by reason of mental illness, the MHCP Act provides that the accused
be detained in “strict custody” until released by due process of law
- in other words,
indeterminate detention. There is no provision allowing immediate release by order of the court. It has been suggested that:
[o]ne can conceive of circumstances where, following the verdict, it would be inappropriate to deprive the person of his or her liberty,
particularly if the person has been held on remand pending the trial or special hearing; certainly to not submit them to an indeterminate
sentence. For instance, where the alleged offence is relatively trivial and the “mental illness” at law is a temporary
aberration which clearly has passed.
“Strict custody”
10.24 Not only is there no provision for release, but there is no provision for some other form of less restrictive conditions than
“strict custody”, even though the person may have been in a less restrictive environment prior to the handing down of
the verdict. The Mental Health Review Tribunal has commented:
It must be remembered that in most cases where a person found not guilty by reason of mental illness was charged with an offence,
it was obvious to all that he or she was mentally ill at the time, so that the person immediately begins to receive psychiatric treatment,
in particular, psychotropic medication. Such treatment will continue for the periods of up to three years which can ensue between
the date on which the person was charged, and the date on which a verdict of not guilty by reason of mental illness is ultimately
handed down by the court.
For example, a person may have been residing in special cottages in the grounds of a psychiatric hospital while waiting for the matter
to come to trial. An order for “strict custody” will require the person to be moved to a locked psychiatric ward, which
may not be satisfactory for the person’s continuing treatment.
Once detained as a forensic patient, a person’s release is subject to inevitable administrative delay: “[e]ven where
the Mental Health Review Tribunal recommends an immediate release and this recommendation is followed by the Minister for Health
and the Attorney General, the person in fact is not released for some weeks and perhaps months ...”.
However long, detention in prison or the locked ward of a psychiatric hospital may have a negative impact on a forensic patient
which is out of proportion to the seriousness of the alleged offence.
A judicial power to release?
10.25 Concerns about mandatory strict custody have particular force when the offence is one which would have attracted a non-custodial
sentence upon a finding of guilt, for instance the Legal Aid Commission of NSW noted that: “[t]he requirement for strict custody
can mean that someone who had been successfully residing in the community on bail for some time must be removed from that setting
even for relatively minor matters where the judge might otherwise have ordered a bond.”
The injustices which can arise from this requirement have been raised in consultations,
particularly where the person had an undiagnosed mental illness at the time of the offence and has, since that offence responded
well to medication over a period of some years, or has been on bail in the community and is settled into a helpful therapeutic environment.
Upon the verdict, such a person must be immediately removed from that environment, involving a disruption to their treatment. The
Commission acknowledges that such injustices are much more likely to arise when a person has a treatable mental illness. Judges have
also on occasion commented on this requirement, for example Blanch J, when he was required by the section to order that a person
be detained in a security ward of a psychiatric hospital, stated: “[t]he case is another illustration of the need for some
greater degree of flexibility in the sentencing procedures under [the Act].”
10.26 Two other examples of the need for a judicial power to release have been provided to the Commission. The cases concern people
with a mental illness, but nonetheless illustrate the difficulties involved. The first person (“A”) satisfied the M’Naghten
defence of insanity at the time of the alleged offence, but subsequent diagnosis and treatment had rendered him fit to stand trial.
For some time prior to the trial A was living at home and regularly attending a sheltered workshop. Had he been able to plead guilty
at trial, a bond would have been likely; but because he satisfied the M’Naghten defence at the time of the offence, the judge
had no alternative but to order that A be detained in strict custody. Thus, A was: “removed from an eminently satisfactory
and safe living and work situation, in the community and with his family, and instead placed in a closed [psychiatric] ward ... where
he will remain until the Tribunal’s recommendation for release is considered by the Minister for Health and [the Attorney General].”
The other person (“B”) was charged with making purchases made on credit cards without available funds. B had maintained
consistently that he was innocent; yet rather than plead not guilty by reason of mental illness, and be detained at Long Bay Gaol
prison hospital in lieu of an urgent Tribunal assessment, he preferred to plead guilty in the hope of receiving a bond.
10.27 The basis of mandatory detention provides further concern. A person detained upon a finding of mental illness can be released
only when the Tribunal considers that he or she poses no danger to themselves or any member of the public - in effect, when he or
she is found to be not dangerous. However, there is no requirement that a person be dangerous before detention is imposed. Indeed,
the alleged offence, for example, the credit-card fraud above, may involve no dangerous or violent behaviour. However, because an
offender’s dangerousness is assessed only
detention is imposed, the imposition of detention necessarily involves an
that mental illness/intellectual disability and dangerousness are related. In its Annual Report for 1992 the Tribunal pointed to
advantages of the present system, namely, the ability to assess a forensic patient within several environments (decreasing in their
level of restriction), coupled with access to external and internal expertise, which allow it to identify and assess dangerous behaviour
and facilitate the patient’s progressive release into the community, under appropriate conditions.
Such considerations will not apply to those persons who are not dangerous to begin with. Dangerousness is an uncertain basis for
detention (see Chapter 12); but assuming that it is an appropriate basis for detaining some offenders, its present indiscriminate
application to all persons found not guilty by reason of mental illness suggests that a judicial power of release is necessary.
10.28 Division 7 of the
(Cth) is significantly different on this point. The court
order the detention of a person acquitted because of mental illness;
(4) Despite subsection (1), the court may, if in the court’s opinion it is more appropriate to do so than to make an order under
subsection (1), order the person’s release from custody either absolutely or subject to conditions to apply for such period
as the court specifies in the order, not exceeding 3 years.
(5) The conditions may include:
(a) a condition that the person remain in the care of a responsible person nominated in the order; and
(b) a condition that the person attend upon a person nominated, or at a place specified, in the order for assessment of the person’s
mental illness, mental condition or intellectual disability and, where appropriate, for treatment.
Where a person has been granted conditional release, the person or the Director of Public Prosecutions may at any time apply to have
those conditions varied.
The recommendations of the Monitoring Committee
10.29 The New South Wales Department of Health
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee (“the Monitoring Committee”) has recommended in its Report that: “
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
should be amended to allow the court to continue bail or make such order as to custody as it sees fit pending review by the [Tribunal]”.
This recommendation was not implemented in the
Mental Health Amendment Act
1994 (NSW), which implemented some other recommendations of the Monitoring Committee, but further comments about the amendment of
this section will be sought in a Discussion Paper to be released shortly by the New South Wales Department of Health.
10.30 The difficulty is determining how s 39 should be amended, for example whether the Commonwealth approach should be adopted.
Whereas in a bail determination one of the release criteria is whether the person presents a danger to another person or the public,
the assessment of dangerousness in a release determination after a finding of not guilty by reason of mental illness (where the person
has not previously been released) may have a different character.
Conclusions: mandatory strict custody
10.31 The Commission supports the inclusion in the MHCP Act of a judicial discretion to release, in appropriate cases, a person found
not guilty by reason of mental illness during the period between the finding and the Tribunal’s initial recommendation as to
detention/release (and the consideration by the government of that recommendation). Similar provisions to those in the Commonwealth
legislation could be used. Where the person has been on bail prior to trial, the same or similar conditions of release could apply
(however, release would not be by way of “bail”, as a charge would no longer lie against the person). Where the person
has been on remand, conditional release could be granted where the judge considers it appropriate (for example, where there has been
a substantial change in the circumstances in which bail was refused previously).
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
34. That s 39 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) be amended so that, following a verdict of not guilty by reason of mental illness, the judge has the power either to order
the detention of the accused, or in appropriate cases to allow for the person’s conditional release until the Mental Health
Review Tribunal has made its recommendations and the prescribed authority has responded to them. (Consequential amendments to this
proposal will need to be made if the role of the prescribed authority is changed, see Proposal 36 below.)
Indeterminate detention
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and its forerunner, the
Mental Health Act
1983 (NSW), were assumed by some to do away with the concept of detention at the “Governor’s pleasure”. Rather,
those Acts merely replaced the concept with a similarly unsatisfactory system of detention at the pleasure of the Minister, prescribed
authority, and/or Attorney General. Recognising this, the Office of Legal Aid and Family Services commented that:
[g]iven that the result of being found not guilty is indeterminate detention, using the defence only appears to be advantageous in
the most serious cases where the penalty for being found guilty is likely to be extremely severe. Legal representatives might, in
the best interests of their client, pursue other options knowing that detention for a shorter period is preferable. Traditionally,
people detained indeterminately have spent lengthy periods in custody, often far longer than those who receive definite sentences
for similar crimes.
Consultations have also referred to the difficult ethical issues which therefore arise for lawyers in this area, particularly if the
offence is a relatively minor one.
However, despite the perceived disadvantages of the insanity defence, any other alternative may in effect be inviting the client
to invent a story which does not amount to insanity, or as in the example above, to decide to plead guilty.
10.33 As discussed above, release is possible only where the Tribunal is satisfied that the detained person would pose no danger
to themselves or the public. The Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales noted that:
[a] person with a mental illness may satisfy the Tribunal that his/her release will not present a serious danger to the public and
may progress from the prison hospital to open wards of a public hospital, and may finally progress to leave, with appropriate treatment
conditions. ...
This path to freedom is not available to a person with an intellectual disability. By its nature, intellectual disability does not
resolve with treatment and it is therefore very much harder to persuade the Tribunal that the dangerous behaviour said to have arisen
from the intellectual disability will not recur in the future. Further, there are no “civilian” facilities in NSW providing
some level of security where a person with an intellectual disability may progressively prove that he/she is no longer a danger.
There are now specialist facilities for males at each level of security within the NSW prison system, but the rigidity of that system
does not provide the same level of opportunities available to those with a mental illness.
The lack of certainty of release ... can of itself, be a factor giving rise to anger and other behaviour likely to affect the decision
to recommend early release.
However, it has been argued that an alternative to indeterminate detention for such a finding is not obvious.
There are at least three possible options.
Option 1: Impose a term of detention
the maximum period of imprisonment for the offence.
It seems unjust that a person who has been found “not guilty” should serve longer than the maximum penalty for a guilty
verdict. If there are still concerns about the person’s dangerousness, civil commitment (or “scheduling”) is available.
The disadvantages of this approach include the absence of a maximum period of imprisonment for common law offences; and the injustice
of imposing the maximum penalty onto those found not guilty, when those convicted of serious offences often are dealt with more leniently.
More fundamentally, the imposition onto a person of a term of detention, however named, for their commission of an offence, is inconsistent
with the finding that the person is
of that offence. For these reasons, this option is rejected by the Commission.
Option 2: Impose a limiting term of detention
not exceeding
the maximum period of imprisonment for the offence.
This option is similar to the procedure contained in
(Cth), which provides that where a person charged with an indictable offence:
is acquitted because of mental illness at the time of the offence, the court must order that the person be detained in safe custody
in prison or in hospital for a period specified in the order, not exceeding the maximum period of imprisonment that could have been
imposed if the person had been convicted of the offence charged.
This procedure is similar to the imposition upon a person found unfit to be tried, of a limiting term after they have been found at
a special hearing, upon the limited evidence available, to have committed the offence charged.
The advantage of this option is that release would be automatic upon the expiry of the limiting term, and so not subject to the
uncertainty of the present release process. A disadvantage is that by linking release to the sentence imposed, rather than to dangerousness,
the release of a dangerous person may be seen as a failure by the criminal justice system to protect the public. However, the criminal
justice system is concerned with punishment commensurate to the criminal act - further detention is a civil matter, as discussed
for Option 1 above. A person who is found not guilty by reason of mental illness is by definition outside the reach of the criminal
justice system, and so the imposition of punishment by that system is inappropriate. Also, as with the first proposal above, this
option involves the imposition of detention, based upon the hypothetical finding of guilt of a person already found not guilty. For
these reasons, this option also is rejected by the Commission.
Option 3:Indeterminate detention subject to release on the recommendation of the Tribunal.
A third option has been suggested:
The person is subject to an indefinite period of detention as at present, but the risk of an undue period of detention being served
is ameliorated by eliminating a discretion on the part of the Minister to decline the Tribunal’s recommendations for release.
This option would have the advantage of allowing the immediate (that is, free from Ministerial discretion) implementation of Tribunal
recommendations for the release of people either detained or subject to an interim release order by the court; and retaining (the
absence of) dangerousness as the release criterion in those cases where it is appropriate.
10.37 The removal of Ministerial discretion has already been discussed in Chapter 4 (paras 4.46-4.56) and will not be repeated here.
The Commission repeats its proposal that such discretions should be abolished. The Commission currently supports the third option.
Conditions of release
10.38 Where release is recommended by the Tribunal, it may be unconditional or conditional.
The need for, and form of, conditions often affects the determination of whether a person will be dangerous upon release. However,
despite the significance of conditions, both the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and the Regulations are silent as to what they may be. In practice, it appears that the Tribunal formulates conditions as part
of a comprehensive recommendation to the Minister; and that the Minister may accept the recommendation in whole or in part, and return
a rejected recommendation for further assessment or clarification.
Hence, as part of the discretion over release decisions, the Minister appears to exercise a discretion over the number and type
of conditions imposed. Hayes and Craddock state that although in practice the Tribunal has overseen post-release programs: “[t]he
Act should specify that the Tribunal has power to recommend conditions of release, as the Tribunal is more likely to be able to fashion
appropriate conditions than the Minister”.
By way of contrast, the
(Cth) provides that the Commonwealth Attorney-General sets release conditions; and that Act contains various optional, but non-exhaustive,
which can be imposed for a period up to a specified maximum.
10.39 The Commission considers that the Tribunal is best placed to formulate appropriate conditions for release, as it is the body
charged with assessing the person’s dangerousness; and that political considerations are separate from this assessment and
should not impinge upon it. Hence, the Commission has proposed that the Tribunal be the final arbiter of release decisions, and that
this be achieved by removing any direct or indirect Ministerial discretion over Tribunal recommendations. It may be appropriate for
Mental Health Act
(NSW) to contain a non-exhaustive list of conditions appropriate to a majority of situations (if such a list can in fact be formulated),
which will have an educative role for the public, and, by making decisions more openly structured, balance the transfer of discretionary
power from elected representatives to the unrepresentative and largely anonymous Tribunal.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
35. That the provisions in the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) and the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) that a person found not guilty by reason of mental illness shall be detained (or released conditionally by the judge as proposed
in Proposal 34) on an indeterminate basis, until the Mental Health Review Tribunal is satisfied that the person is not dangerous,
be retained.
36. The Commission repeats Proposal 23 in relation to the abolition of the executive discretion in this area:
That the executive discretion be removed from all decisions regarding forensic patients (except as limited by Proposal 24) so that
all decisions as to their placement, security conditions and release are made by the Mental Health Review Tribunal. (This proposal
would require consequential amendments to the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) to enable the Tribunal to make orders rather than recommendations.)
37. That the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) and/or the Mental Health Regulation 1990 (NSW) be amended to include a non-exhaustive list of release conditions which may
be imposed by the Mental Health Review Tribunal.
The duty to give reasons and appeals
10.40 Presently, neither the Tribunal nor the Minister have to give reasons for a decision. Whether the Tribunal or the executive
government is the determinative body for decisions concerning forensic patients, it is suggested that the decision maker should be
required to supply reasons for decisions - to facilitate any proposed appeal process, and to ensure natural justice. The Commission
seeks submissions in this area.
10.41 There is little in the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) by way of appeal rights for forensic patients. There is a limited right of appeal to the Supreme Court against a
determination
of the Tribunal, or a failure/refusal of the Tribunal to make a determination.
determination
includes whether a person has become fit to be tried, and whether the person or anyone else will be endangered by the person’s
release; but the Court cannot review Tribunal recommendations, such as whether a person should be released.
Also, there may be an appeal from a Tribunal recommendation that a forensic patient’s detention in a hospital (rather than
a prison) should continue.
Although the Tribunal cannot recommend a person’s release unless it makes a determination as to dangerousness, a determination
that a person is not dangerous does not oblige the Tribunal to recommend release. Because Tribunal
determinations
do not include the decision on whether or not to recommend release, the Tribunal exercises an unappealable discretion on these decisions.
10.42 The decision by the Governor not to implement a Tribunal recommendation for release is not reviewable by a court of law.
As discussed in Chapter 4, the Monitoring Committee suggested that this may be in breach of Australia’s obligations under
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
If executive discretion over Tribunal decisions is to remain, it has been suggested that two consecutive rejections of Tribunal recommendations
to release should provide the person detained with a right of review to a single Supreme Court Judge (having regard to specific criteria),
with a further appeal (only in law) to the Court of Criminal Appeal.
If, as is presently the case, the implementation or rejection of release recommendations remains subject to unqualified and unspecified
Ministerial discretion, the grounds upon which an appeal against the exercise of that discretion could be based are not obvious.
The Commission seeks submissions in this regard.
10.43 If, as proposed, the Tribunal becomes the ultimate authority, the question arises whether broader appeal rights are appropriate
or whether such rights could make the existing (relatively informal) decision-making process unnecessarily legalistic and virtually
unworkable. Presumably such an appeal could be available to a single judge of the Supreme Court on questions of law; but not on the
merits, as a judge would not have the same level of expertise as an expert Tribunal about the facts of the person’s mental
condition. Appeal rights could lead to additional complications, for instance, the Tribunal has to review forensic patients every
six months, and the time taken to hear an appeal means there could easily be an overlap between the appeal and the next required
Tribunal hearing, at which the recommendations made may well change and the issue involved at the appeal disappear. Other practical
issues would include the difficulties involved in the person detained (which includes people found unfit to be tried and people found
not guilty on the grounds of mental illness) giving instructions to a solicitor about seeking an appeal. Such appeal rights could
dramatically increase the workload of the Supreme Court. Though it is generally desirable to provide for some form of review, the
Commission believes the area of appeal rights raises significant issues about which it should seek further information and submissions
(particularly from the Tribunal and practitioners in this area) before making any further proposals. The Commission therefore seeks
answers to the following questions:
POINTS FOR FURTHER DISCUSSION
1. If the executive discretion over Tribunal recommendations is abolished, what additional appeal rights would be appropriate?
2. To where should an appeal lie?
3. Should such an appeal be on questions of law alone, or should an appeal be available on the merits of the decision?
4. Would the availability of such rights require changes to the nature of Tribunal hearings and in what ways?
5. What such changes be beneficial or not to the interests of all the parties involved?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. Several defences are known as partial defences, and apply only to murder. Where successfully pleaded, they act to reduce murder
to manslaughter.
. See New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Provocation, Diminished Responsibility and Infanticide
(Discussion Paper 31, 1993). The Commission is currently preparing its Report for this reference.
. D Brown, D Farrier, D Neal and D Weisbrot
Criminal Laws: Materials and Commentary on Criminal Law and Process in New South Wales
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1990) at 665.
. G Williams
Textbook of Criminal Law
(2nd ed, Stevens and Sons, London, 1983) at 646-647.
Hawkins v R
[1994] HCA 28
(1994) 68 ALJR 572.
. Reflecting
R v Falconer
[1990] HCA 49
(1990) 171 CLR 30.
Zecevic v DPP
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR 645.
Proudman v Dayman
[1941] HCA 28
(1941) 67 CLR 536.
R v Vangelder
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 28 February 1994, CCA 60107/93. Compare
(1993) 69 A Crim R 92
in relation to intoxication and self-defence.
Stingel v R
[1990] HCA 61
(1990) 171 CLR 312.
R v Abusafiah
(1991) 24 NSWLR 531
; 56 A Crim R 121.
. The approach taken in the
Criminal Code Bill
1994 (Cth) is not necessarily the last word and does not appear to have proceeded in the basis of a review fully alert to the position
of, for example, people with an intellectual disability, or indeed to the problems occasioned generally by adherence to the objective
test retained under the principle of criminal responsibility defined under the Bill.
M’Naghten’s Case
(1843) 10 Cl & F 200 at 210; 8 ER 718 at 722, cited in B Fisse
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1990) at 447-448.
. See Fisse at 448 for the principal differences between the common law and the Codes.
. Part 4 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) (the “MHCP Act”) replaced, and is almost identical to, Part XIB (s 428Z - 428ZB) of the
(NSW); which replaced s 23 of the
Mental Health Act
1958 (NSW) and s 439 of the
[1979] 2 NSWLR 1
at 39, per O’Brien J (Street CJ and Slattery J agreeing): interpreting s 23 of the
(NSW), which stated that “‘mentally ill’ means, in relation to any person charged as aforesaid, so insane as not
to be responsible, according to law, for the act or omission the subject of the charge.”
. MHCP Act s 38.
. MHCP Act s 22(1)(b).
. MHCP Act s 22(2).
. MHCP Act s 25.
. MHCP Act s 39.
. MHCP Act s 22(1)(b).
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 7.
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 140-141; G Williams
Criminal Law: The General Part
(2nd ed, Stevens & Sons, London, 1961) at 447. See also J H McClemens and J M Bennett “Historical notes on the law of mental
illness in New South Wales”
[1962] SydLawRw 4
(1962-1964) 4
Sydney Law Review
. D O’Connor and P A Fairall
Criminal Defences
(2nd ed, Butterworths, 1988) at 237.
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
at 188-189 per Dixon J.
[1957] 1 QB 399 at 407 per Devlin J.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 128-129.
. Ierace at 128-129, citing
Stapleton v R
[1952] HCA 56
(1952) 86 CLR 358
[1933] HCA 1
(1933) 55 CLR 182
[1957] 1 QB 399.
. Fisse at 453 [footnotes references omitted].
. O’Connor and Fairall at 249 [footnotes references omitted].
. For example, Queensland. Office of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 4. See also Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 5-6; Commonwealth. Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 5.
. Hayes and Craddock at 140-141.
. Mrs V Breheny
(14 July 1992) at 1.
. Hayes and Cradock at 141.
. Law Reform Commission of Victoria
Mental Malfunction and Criminal Responsibility
(Report 34, 1990) at para 51.
. Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General [now known as the Model Criminal Code Officers Committee]
Model Criminal Code: Chapter 2 - General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
(Final Report, AGPS, Canberra, December 1992) (“Model Criminal Code Report”) cl 302.
Criminal Code Bill
1994 (Cth) cl 7.3.
. Explanatory Memorandum to the
Criminal Code Bill
1994 (Cth) at 18: Gibbs Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
(Interim Report, July 1990) at paras 9.39-9.40; VLRC Report 34 at paras 45, 48-51.
. Note that this is one area where the umbrella definition of “impaired intellectual functioning” proposed in Chapter
2, which is not intended to include mental illness, would be inappropriate.
[1984] 2 NSWLR 511
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal (per Street CJ at 515, Slattery J agreeing) held that “irrespective of whether
or not the accused raises or disclaims such a defence, a trial judge, if he sees it as fairly open, may well have a positive duty
to put the defence himself.” Street CJ continued “there is only one onus of proof to be applied in a criminal trial
when an issue arises whether the accused should be found not guilty on the ground of mental illness. Whether that contention be advanced
by the accused, by the Crown or put by the judge of his own motion to the jury, the onus in each case is one of proof on the balance
of probabilities.”
. MHCP Act s 37.
. MHCP Act s 39.
Mental Health Act
(NSW) Chapter 5
), and Schedule 1. Note that the definition of “forensic patient” has been amended by the
Mental Health Amendment Act
1994 (NSW), though this Act is not yet proclaimed.
. According to Hayes and Craddock, in relation to the fitness provisions: “This follows from the scheme of the Act which is
administered by the Department of Health. The ‘Director-General’ where referred to in the Act is defined as the Director-General
of the Department of Health by the ‘Dictionary of Terms Used in the Act’ which is Schedule 1 to the Act. ‘Minister’
is not defined, but logically means the Minister for Health”, at 116, footnote 94.
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Regulations
1990 (NSW) reg 20(1)(a).
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
. Mrs V Breheny
(14 July 1992) at 3-4.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 7-8.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 5-6.
. MHCP Act s 39.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 4.
. Mental Health Review Tribunal
Annual Report 1992
R v Phuong Cam Su
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 6 June 1994, Blanch J, 70073/93.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 4.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 5.
. For example, consultations with the DPP, Police Prosecutors, Legal Aid Commission of NSW, Law Society of New South Wales, Public
Defenders, Aboriginal Legal Service and the Judicial Commission on 1 March 1994, with Mr P Berman, Crown Prosecutor on 9 March 1994,
and with solicitors from the Legal Aid Commission of NSW on 17 March 1994.
R v Phuong Cam Su
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 6 June 1994, Blanch J, 70073/93, at 5.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991).
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991): following further representations this matter was ultimately no-billed.
. New South Wales. Mental Health Review Tribunal
Annual Report 1992
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee (NSW)
Report to the Honourable R A Phillips Minister for Health on the NSW
Mental Health Act 1990
(New South Wales Parliamentary Paper 275, August 1992) Recommendation 6 at 35-36.
. New South Wales. Minister for Health
(5 July 1994).
1979 (NSW) s 32(1)(b1), 32(1)(c).
. Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 5.
. Consultation with representatives of the DPP, Police Prosecutors, Legal Aid Commission of NSW, Law Society of New South Wales, Public
Defenders, Aboriginal Legal Service and the Judicial Commission on 1 March 1994.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1993) at 5-6.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 5.
. MHCP Act s 23.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 6.
. Subject to the release requirements previously discussed, and the
Mental Health Regulation
1990 (NSW).
. Mr B Boerma, Registrar, Mental Health Review Tribunal
Personal Communication
(14 April 1994).
. Hayes and Craddock at 117, referring to the fitness provisions, though the same argument applies in relation to mental illness.
Suggested conditions include that the person reside at a specific address, undertake treatment and/or therapy, and undertake behavioural
and lifestyle modification programs.
The time for which conditions remain in force is limited to either the balance then remaining of the period of detention set by the
court (that is, the period imposed under
, or 5 years, whichever is the lesser.
Mental Health Act
. Hayes and Craddock at 120.
Mental Health Act
South Australia v O’Shea
[1987] HCA 39
[1987] 61 ALJR 477.
Mental Health Act
Implementation Monitoring Committee (NSW) at 31-32.
. Mr M Ierace
(16 December 1991) at 7.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
11. Sentencing Decisions and Options
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
11.1 Chapters 11-12 consider sentencing and release issues, including:
the relevance of principles such as deterrence for people with an intellectual disability and the effect of a person’s intellectual
disability on sentencing decisions;
the decision to give a custodial sentence to a person with an intellectual disability;
the role of Pre-sentence Reports (and whether they should be mandatory for the person with an intellectual disability);
the over-representation and vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability in gaol;
the advantages and disadvantages for prisoners with an intellectual disability of special custodial units, specialist programs within
the mainstream prison environment, or detention in a secure institution outside the correctional system;
the availability and appropriateness of existing non-custodial options for people with an intellectual disability, and whether additional
options should be considered;
the release from custody, including parole and post release services, and whether these options are less likely to be available for
people with an intellectual disability;
the release from custody of “dangerous” persons, including the use of the
Habitual Criminals Act
(NSW) or other preventive detention legislation, and the debate about the prediction of dangerousness; and
minimising recidivism, which appears to be disproportionately high for people with an intellectual disability, through (appropriately
resourced) specialist sentencing options and community corrections services.
11.2 This Chapter will consider sentencing options, including custodial and non-custodial options, while Chapter 12 will consider
issues relating to release from custody, including “dangerousness”, parole and post release services. The final Report
for this reference will take into account the results of the sentencing review currently being undertaken by the Attorney General’s
Department. In June 1994 an Issues Paper
was released as part of that review. That paper raises a number of sentencing issues for discussion but does not contain any final
recommendations. It is therefore not clear at this stage whether that review will affect the issues discussed in this chapter.
Intellectual disability as a sentencing factor
11.3 As stated in the Issues Paper, it is not within the scope of this reference to consider in detail the general principles and
objectives of sentencing. Briefly, the (somewhat contradictory) justifications for sentencing include: punishment or retribution,
rehabilitation of the offender, specific and general deterrence (that is, deterring both the particular offender and the general
community from committing further offences), and protection of the community. Some of these justifications will have less relevance
for the offender with an intellectual disability than for other offenders. For example, Hayes and Craddock have argued:
[r]etribution is morally doubtful when the offender may not fully comprehend the wrongness of their actions; and, further, it could
be argued that society is acting very unfairly in exacting retribution from intellectually disabled offenders when it has already
effectively pilloried that group through lack of provision of adequate services and resources.
11.4 Similarly, another submission commented that, bearing in mind the person’s disability and its effect, if any, on the commission
of the offence:
it may be valuable to think again of the purpose of a sentence. Is it retribution? Is it to discourage others? Or is it simply to
satisfy the community? Is it to prevent a recurrence? Which of these is important, and if it is the last mentioned, how can the
sentence ensure that guidance and treatment becomes the aim? Who has the knowledge, and who has the experience of intellectual disability
to give this treatment?
11.5 As with the sentencing of any offender, the court has to weigh up a number of competing factors, including features peculiar
to the offence and the offender, to decide the length and type of punishment. Apart from considering the objective facts of the particular
crime, the court also has to consider the matters which may reduce (mitigate) the sentence, including, in some cases, the offender’s
low intelligence or intellectual disability and its impact on his or her criminal responsibility.
The Judge is not bound, however to accept intellectual disability or low intelligence as a mitigating factor.
If the accused’s mental condition is such that he or she would be a danger to the community, the Judge may choose not to mitigate
the sentence, but the protection of the community cannot justify a sentence of preventive detention, due to the principle that sentences
cannot be extended beyond that which is proportionate to the seriousness of the crime.
In an extract from a recent speech entitled “Sentencing: The Law’s Communication Problem”, the Chief Justice of
New South Wales made the following comments.
It is apparent that many members of the public are perplexed by the attention which the sentencing process pays to the subjective
features of the offender. The law in this respect is clear. The object of sentencing is to impose a punishment which is appropriate
to the particular offence committed by the particular offender. To take a simple and not uncommon example, some offenders suffer
from mental infirmity, or psychological problems, which are capable of diminishing the culpability of their conduct. These cannot
be ignored by a system which aims to make the punishment fit both the crime and the criminal.
... Very few people would seriously suggest that a first offender who commits a particular crime should be given the same treatment
as a recidivist, or that intellectual disability is irrelevant. There is, however, a problem of communicating to the public the nature
of the principles of sentencing that are applied by courts, and this is an area in which judges and lawyers need to make a conscious
effort to explain themselves.
The difficulties of determining an appropriate sentence when the offender has an intellectual disability have been commented upon.
It is appropriate therefore for the Commission to consider the effect of intellectual disability on judicial sentencing decisions
in New South Wales.
11.6 A recent New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal decision has recognised that “whereas general deterrence is a relevant
consideration in every sentencing exercise, it is a consideration to which less weight should be given in the case of an offender
suffering from a mental disorder or severe intellectual handicap”.
The Court, referring to a number of Victorian cases, stated that general deterrence should be given less weight in such cases “because
such an offender is not an appropriate medium for making an example to others.”
Similar comments were made in two recent New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal cases,
R v Champion
R v Champion
Kirby J referred to the comments quoted above and added:
Because the constraints which may be demanded of a person with ordinary adult intellectual capacities may not operate, or operate
as effectively, in the case of a person with significant mental handicaps, the community (reflected by the judges) applies to such
people the principles of general deterrence in a way that is sensibly moderated to the particular circumstances of their case.
General deterrence still operates. ... It is in place for the protection of the community and the victims of offences which the community
rightly takes most seriously. But as that principle falls upon a person such as this applicant, it is necessarily a consideration
to which less weight can, and therefore should, be given.
[emphasis added]
The New South Wales cases did not require intellectual disability to be proved as a factor inducing the commission of the offence.
According to Hayes and Craddock, the South Australian Court of Criminal Appeal’s approach to the same issue is “possibly
more realistic” in recognising intellectual disability as a mitigating factor, but only if it reduced moral blameworthiness.
11.7 In relation to
deterrence, that is the deterrent effect on the particular offender, it has been argued:
Even if the moral culpability is significant, the point of a sentence which reflects specific deterrence will be lost if the offender
does not equate the punishment with the offence. If the sentence is to deter similar behaviour, the offender must have a reasonable
recollection of the events as well as some understanding of why the behaviour was objectionable. In New South Wales it may be many
months, even years, after the offence before an offender is convicted and sentenced. By then, depending upon the particular intellectually
disabled offender, he or she may have no useful recollection of the behaviour which caused him or her to be brought before the courts,
so that any proper application of the principle of specific deterrence is impossible.
Similar comments were made by the High Court in
it is perfectly useless for the law to attempt, by threatening punishment, to deter people from committing crimes if their mental
condition is such that they cannot be in the least influenced by the possibility or probability of subsequent punishment; if they
cannot understand what they are doing or cannot understand the ground upon which the law proceeds.
The New South Wales Court of Criminal, however, has recently held that, though general deterrence was of little or no weight by reason
of the offender’s intellectual disability, “individual deterrence and the question of outright punishment are both matters
entitled to weight”.
Rehabilitation
11.8 Though retribution and deterrence cannot be ignored, and will be more appropriate in some matters involving offenders with an
intellectual disability than others, it is argued that they are generally less appropriate aims for sentencing such an offender.
As most such offenders are not violent or dangerous, and therefore protection of the community is not the overwhelming concern, it
can be argued that rehabilitation becomes the most important aim or philosophy of punishment for the offender with an intellectual
disability.
(Rehabilitation and the protection if the community cannot, however, be completely separated.) There does not appear to be any case
authority in this regard.
Legislative recognition for intellectual disability as a sentencing factor
11.9 The above cases recognise that intellectual disability is a relevant sentencing factor. It has been suggested that this recognition
should be given legislative force.
This already occurs for federal offences under the
s 16A(2)(m).
The relevant section states:
Matters to which court to have regard when passing sentence etc
16A. (1) In determining the sentence to be passed, or the order to be made, in respect of any person for a federal offence, a court
must impose a sentence or make an order that is of a severity appropriate in all the circumstances of the offence.
(2) In addition to any other matters, the court must take into account such of the following matters as are relevant and known to
(m) the character, antecedents, age, means and physical or
mental condition
of the person; [emphasis added]
Unlike the Commonwealth sentencing legislation, the New South Wales legislation does not contain a list of factors that Judges and
Magistrates must have regard to when passing sentence. There are advantages and disadvantages of prescriptive provisions, and differing
views about whether or not the whole area is best left to judicial discretion.
A recommendation about whether or not New South Wales sentencing legislation should include such a provision is beyond the scope
of this reference. If, however, a decision is taken to introduce a provision, it seems clear that intellectual disability should
be included as a matter to which a court should have regard when passing sentence.
Intellectual disability as a “special circumstance”
11.10 As well as being a factor influencing the length of the sentence, a person’s intellectual disability can influence the
way a sentence is structured, through the use of minimum and additional terms.
Sentencing Act
(NSW) includes the following:
(1) When sentencing a person to imprisonment for an offence, a court is required:
(a) firstly, to set a
minimum term of imprisonment
that the person must serve for the offence; and
(b) secondly, to set an
additional term
during which the person may be released on parole.
additional term must not exceed one-third of the minimum term, unless the court decides there are special circumstances
. ... [emphasis added]
Thus for sentences over six months, a court must generally set a minimum term for imprisonment together with an additional term,
and unless “special circumstances” exist, the additional term must not exceed one-third of the minimum term (which operates
like a non-parole period). It seems clear that a person’s intellectual disability can operate as a “special circumstance”,
allowing the Judge to provide an appropriate sentence, for example, a longer than usual additional term and a shorter than usual
minimum term.
The decision to give a custodial sentence
11.11 It is argued that the offender’s intellectual disability should be considered not only in relation to the length and structure
of the sentence, but for the appropriate sentencing type, whether custodial or non-custodial. There is little New South Wales legislative
guidance about when to award a custodial sentence over a non-custodial sentence, where both are available for a particular offence.
For sentences given by Magistrates,
Justices Act
(NSW) provides that they “shall not sentence a person to full-time imprisonment unless satisfied, having considered all possible
alternatives, that no other course is appropriate”. Similarly, for federal offences,
(Cth) provides that a custodial sentence should be one of last resort. No such statutory guidance exists for adult offenders in the
New South Wales higher courts,
however the common law holds that imprisonment is only to be used when no other sentence is appropriate.
Vulnerability in gaol
11.12 The Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Intellectually Handicapped Offenders in New South Wales (“The Missing
Services Report”) commented that prisoners with an intellectual disability:
are subject to abuse and exploitation and are seen as being more susceptible to the negative influences of the prison environment,
thus having any criminal behaviours reinforced rather than reduced by their period of incarceration.
It has therefore been argued that gaol is even more inappropriate for the offender with an intellectual disability than for other
prisoners. The Kingsford Legal Centre commented:
We believe that people with an intellectual disability are especially vulnerable when detained in custody, and that detention in custody
imposes a greater hardship on such people than is usual. For many people with an intellectual disability, routine and patterns of
life are essential to their wellbeing; they require familiarity and continuity. In addition, they often have little concept of the
calculation of time or of the full extent of the criminal process. ... It is clear from our experience that the effect of custody
threatens to diminish the living skills of a intellectually disabled person, and that the impact of custody will also be more severe
than for an ordinary person.
Other submissions have generally accepted that people with an intellectual disability are particularly vulnerable in gaol,
for example to rape and other abuse. People with extensive experience in the correctional system have pointed to the impossibility,
due to staffing levels and resources, of providing 24 hour protection for all prisoners with an intellectual disability.
Gaol has also been seen as inappropriate because some of these offenders “tend to ‘copycat’ other deviants”.
11.13 The court can consider the impact of imprisonment on the particular offender and the “circumstances which make the incarceration
of the prisoner more burdensome upon him than would be the case of the ordinary gaol prisoner.” It has been stated that “[c]onsiderations
of health are in this category.”
Hayes and Craddock state that this decision makes it clear that the offender’s intellectual disability is relevant in sentencing,
not as a “health” issue, “but because the experience of imprisonment for the intellectually disabled individual
may be much worse than for other prisoners.”
Recently, the New South Wales Court of Appeal recognised that:
in the case where a prisoner suffers from some illness
or disability
of such nature as to make more onerous the sentences which he must serve, that is a matter which can be taken into account in mitigation.
[emphasis added]
11.14 A preference has also been expressed in submissions for non-custodial options for offenders with an intellectual disability,
as long as the safety of the offender, his or her victim and the community are considered, and as long as there are adequate support
services in the community.
But often such services do not exist, as argued by The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability:
It is worth noting that increasing resources are being made available in the prison system to better address the needs of individuals
with intellectual disability, (at a very high cost), while similar resources are so lacking in the community. It is becoming the
case that even though a legal argument may succeed in defending a person from conviction or a custodial sentence, there is an inclination
not to argue it as the person could obtain services in the prison system which he or she would otherwise not be able to gain in the
community. While some may consider this an extreme circumstance, Council can assure the Commission that this is not uncommon. Council
makes this comment not by way of criticising what is happening in prisons, ... but to show the current injustice, and how people
with an intellectual disability may end up in the criminal justice system.
11.15 Offenders with an intellectual disability are, however, sent to gaol and, it seems, in high numbers, as discussed at paras
11.45-11.47, partly because of the lack of a reasonable range of sentencing options and facilities.
Judges and Magistrates are said to be frustrated by being forced to place people in detention because no alternative is available.
There appears to be scope within the existing sentencing law to construct an appropriate non-custodial sentence for the offender
with an intellectual disability, see paras 11.57-11.66. The difficulty is finding services and facilities so that a more appropriate
sentence can be carried into effect.
PRE-SENTENCE REPORTS
11.16 Submissions have commented on the need for appropriate expert assistance for the Judge or Magistrate in deciding the most appropriate
placement for the offender with an intellectual disability.
Pre-sentence Reports, to assist the court, are prepared by the NSW Probation Service, following a conviction or a plea of guilty.
Pre-sentence Reports are only prepared when requested by a Magistrate or Judge. They are not mandatory for any particular offence
or class of offender. In 1992/1993 the Probation Service prepared 14,732 Pre-sentence Reports for the courts.
A Pre-sentence Report may sometimes be prepared by an independent professional, particularly if Probation Service officers do not
have the necessary expertise in the area.
A limited survey of judicial officers found that the majority interviewed were satisfied with the quality of Pre-sentence Reports
however, alternative views on this topic have also been expressed to the Commission. A matter can be adjourned for the purpose of
preparing a Pre-sentence Report, and the court can ask for specific information, such as the availability or suitability of particular
programs, to be included. A Pre-sentence Report usually contains background information about the offender, his or her education
and employment, the officer’s assessment and recommendations. Information can be included about relevant mitigating factors,
the appropriate length and place of detention, or the suitability of the offender for a non-custodial order.
11.17 Alternatively, a matter (usually Local Court) can be adjourned for a short period to allow a Probation Service “Court
Duty Officer” to interview the offender. That officer can then give information verbally in court and be questioned by the
Magistrate. According to the Probation Service, Court Duty Officers provide a court advice service to all metropolitan Local and
District Courts and to major country centres: some courts have a full time service and the remainder receive a part time or on-call
The Probation Service has estimated that court advice and Pre-sentence Reports occupy 40% of the Service’s resources.
11.18 If it is suspected that the offender has an intellectual disability, it has been suggested that his or her lawyer alert the
court that the following additional issues should be covered in a Pre-sentence Report:
whether the offender indeed has an intellectual disability, and if so, whether in the opinion of the probation ... officer the disability
is causally related (directly or indirectly) to the offence; and
what services (if any) are available for the disabled offender within a sentencing option.
... The court should be requested to order a psychological assessment if it has not already been done as part of the case.
The Australian Law Reform Commission, in its Report on Sentencing, added that Pre-sentence Reports “should be prepared by multi-disciplinary
teams and should cover the offender’s physical and mental health, cognitive abilities and social and adaptive skills. The family
and friends of the offender, and any psychiatrist, psychologist, social worker or welfare worker involved with the offender, should
be consulted.”
11.19 It has also been suggested that Pre-sentence Reports should be mandatory for a person with an intellectual disability, as is
currently the case for children pursuant to
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
Such a proposal has obvious resources implications, however, and will only be of assistance if the staff preparing the Pre-sentence
Reports have access to training and expertise and there are sufficient numbers of them to meet the likely increased workload. Without
appropriate knowledge and training of Probation personnel, the Pre-sentence Reports could disadvantage offenders with an intellectual
disability, as their disability could be wrongly identified as indicating, for instance, a lack of cooperation, with resulting implications
for their sentence. The Australian Law Reform Commission also stated that it:
has not recommended that pre-sentence reports be mandatory because of the delay and expense that would be involved. Where, however,
there are reasonable grounds to expect that it would assist in sentencing, courts should avail themselves of pre-sentence reports.
Reasonable grounds are particularly likely to exist where it appears that an offender may be suffering from an intellectual disability
Due to the possibly enormous increase in workload caused by such a proposal and the need to avoid inappropriate adjournments or delays
for minor offences, the Commission suggests that a mandatory Pre-sentence Report be limited to circumstances where a person is unrepresented
and a custodial sentence is a reasonable possibility, to ensure that a Pre-sentence Report is prepared for the more serious offences
in situations where the person may not have anyone to raise the need for such a Pre-sentence Report with the court. If a person with
an intellectual disability is in fact sentenced to a custodial sentence and no Pre-sentence Report was prepared, this could be grounds
for an appeal.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
38. Where an offender is unrepresented and has an intellectual disability, or one is suspected, and a custodial sentence is a reasonable
possibility, a Pre-sentence Report is mandatory.
11.20 Proposal 38 does not overcome the difficulties faced by people whose intellectual disability has not been identified. In the
Commission’s Research Report
Appearances Before Local Courts
Associate Professor Hayes referred to a variety of systems to increase identification of intellectual disability in the criminal
justice system, which would also have implications for the sentencing process.
One of these involved the presence in the court building of a “triage” (emergency admissions) nurse, with psychiatric
and intellectual disability training, so that the judiciary or lawyers could ask for immediate assessment if mental abnormality is
suspected. Under the proposal, the nurse would have telephone and computer access to mental health and intellectual disability services
and would be able to obtain information about previous assessments, placements and management programs. A similar model has been
used in Auckland, New Zealand, for persons with psychiatric illness.
Such a service has obvious advantages, not only for people with an intellectual disability. Some comments to the Commission since
the release of the Research Report have suggested that a triage nurse may not be best suited to such a role as intellectual disability
is not a medical condition, and that perhaps a psychologist would be preferable. Either choice would have considerable cost implications,
and would not overcome the difficulties caused by ignorance of the possible need for expert testing. Though assessments should preferably
be done earlier than the actual court appearance, at least such a system would provide a useful safeguard for the court.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
39. A pilot study should be undertaken of a court liaison position, for example in the Downing Centre. The liaison officer(s) should
provide immediate assessments or advice for the court, the police prosecutors, other prosecution lawyers, or defence counsel, and
should have appropriate psychiatric and psychological expertise.
Pre-sentence Review Panel
11.21 In 1994 in the Illawarra region of New South Wales, a pilot Pre-sentence Review Panel was established for offenders with an
intellectual disability, to meet concerns about the need for appropriate sentences for this group of people.
The Panel, established under the auspices of the Probation Service, has input from the Department of Community Services (Disability
Services), a psychologist from Wollongong University and an independent community representative (the parent of a person with a disability).
After a person with an intellectual disability (generally defined as those having an IQ of less than 70) has been found guilty, an
adjournment is sought to allow the Panel to meet the offender, assess his or her needs, and develop a realistic intervention proposal
for the person. The Panel members’ contacts and knowledge about existing options enable an appropriate sentencing alternative
to be devised. The Panel reports to the court within a period of approximately two months.
11.22 Guidelines have been established for the Panel, for example the offender must have been found guilty and must consent to the
program. As well, the necessity of psychological and other assessments must be first considered and the offender is allowed to have
a third person for support when interviewed by the Panel. Reparation to the victim can also be considered. The Panel proposes to
meet twice a month and to consider a maximum of two cases at a time. Their report, as for standard Pre-sentence Reports, is prepared
by the Probation Service and it is anticipated that the Panel’s proposal could, for instance, then become the special conditions
of a supervised bond, administered by the Probation Service but implemented by the service or agency identified in the proposal.
As with other bonds, a breach by the offender would bring the matter back before the court. An offender assessed in this way could
still be eligible for other non-custodial sentences, such as Community Service Orders or other programs supervised by the Probation
Service. In effect the Panel provides an extra pool of expertise for the Probation Service to draw upon when preparing a Pre-sentence
Report as part of standard court procedures. No discretion is taken away from the court. No information is currently available about
the Panel’s performance, but the Commission anticipates obtaining more information in time for its final report to the Attorney
General. The Commission seeks comments about the appropriateness of such a program as an alternative for offenders with an intellectual
disability.
CUSTODIAL OPTIONS
11.23 The overriding issue for prisoners with an intellectual disability is “the need for specialised programmes, services and
protection, without overbalancing towards segregation, discrimination and overprotection.”
There are three possible custodial options: detention in special units, which have specialist services and which exclude other prisoners;
detention in the mainstream of the prison population, but with the availability of specialist services; or transferring the person
out of prison into another secure institution in the community. The primary distinction between such an institution and a special
unit within a prison would be the more rehabilitation-oriented ethos of the former. Segregation of prisoners with an intellectual
disability may be detrimental, by emphasising the “difference” of the offender with an intellectual disability and perhaps
reducing the availability of services available to the rest of the prison community. A Western Australian study, for example, recommended
that, wherever possible, prisoners with an intellectual disability should be integrated into the mainstream prison population.
However, as stated in the Issues Paper, integration is difficult to achieve in reality, particularly considering the vulnerability
of people with an intellectual disability in gaol, discussed at para 11.12 above. Prisoners with an intellectual disability are likely
to be isolated from, or victimised by, other prisoners and are unlikely to be integrated in most work environments. Prison officers
and other criminal justice personnel have told the Commission of prisoners with an intellectual disability being “stood over”
by other prisoners, for example, being bashed, raped or having their property taken. The protection of prisoners with an intellectual
disability is therefore a relevant issue to consider.
New South Wales
11.24 The Department of Corrective Services, through the position of Project Officer for Disabled Prisoners, has set up, and oversees,
special units for some prisoners with an intellectual disability and services for others within the mainstream prison system. Although
the Department has special units, it is committed to the principle of integration where possible.
There are no secure units outside the prison system, other than the locked wards of psychiatric hospitals which are clearly inappropriate
for persons with an intellectual disability, unless they also have a psychiatric illness. Nor are there special services within the
Parole Service, which is part of the Department of Corrective Services, for prisoners with an intellectual disability.
Parole issues will be considered in Chapter 12.
Special units
Before the establishment of special units, the only options available for the accommodation of some prisoners with an intellectual
disability were the protection units in maximum security institutions. The difficult life of a “protection” prisoner
is well recognised.
The first specialist unit was opened in July 1989 at Parklea Correctional Centre. This was replaced by the Goulburn Development
Unit in October 1990, which caters for 12 prisoners with an intellectual disability in a maximum security environment. A medium security
unit was opened in May 1992 at the John Moroney Correctional Centre at Windsor to house 10 remand and sentenced prisoners. A unit
for 22 inmates (X Wing) was also opened in 1992 in the minimum security section of Goulburn Correctional Centre to provide work and
living skills development programs.
Approximately eight places in this new unit were reserved for prisoners who had completed programs in the Development Units at Goulburn
and Windsor. The remainder of places were occupied by prisoners who wished to increase their educational skills and by two inmates
who had offered to tutor other inmates. A special support program was established at Kirconnell, near Bathurst, in November 1993.
This program was designed to provide work, education and counselling activities for nine prisoners with an intellectual disability
who were capable of integrating with mainstream prisoners in a prison camp environment. The unit for six female prisoners in operation
at Mulawa was closed in October 1991, after about 18 months of operation, because it was considered by the Department of Corrective
Services that there was insufficient need to justify a separate unit.
Current situation.
According to the Department of Corrective Services, these special units are currently undergoing significant changes, mainly because
of changes in the security classification of areas containing the existing special units. Changes include:
Refurbishment of an area in the Reception/Industrial Centre at Long Bay is being undertaken to accommodate a special unit for inmates
with intellectual disabilities. It is anticipated that the unit will be operational in approximately four months [October 1994].
The unit will cater for both sentenced and unsentenced inmates of all security classifications. It will house 18 inmates including
up to 3 females.
A major function of the Long Bay Unit will be to provide a facility for the observation and assessment of newly received remand and
sentenced inmates who have or are suspected of having an intellectual disability. The unit will also house inmates who cannot be
placed in minimum security programs. A further important function of the unit will be to provide programs and accommodation for inmates
with intellectual disabilities who have to remain in the metropolitan area for court or medical purposes.
Female inmates with intellectual disabilities who cannot be integrated in mainstream programs are currently placed in the Therapeutic
Unit at Mulawa which provides inmates with enhanced levels of supervision and support.
The Development Unit at Windsor, which at present houses minimum security inmates, will close when the Long Bay Unit opens. The Development
Unit at Goulburn will continue to function as a minimum security program and retain the same (high) staff/inmate ratio it held as
a maximum security unit.
The two support programs - at [the Education Unit in] Goulburn and at Kirconnell will continue to operate.
One possible disadvantage of these changes is that there will be no medium security unit, which may prevent prisoners from progressing
through the classifications to release. The Department of Corrective Services believes that this will be overcome by moving prisoners
more quickly to minimum security.
Admission to the Units.
Admission to the New South Wales special units requires the prisoner to have either an IQ of less than 70, or an IQ between 70 and
80 together with severe adaptive deficits, to avoid the units becoming a “dumping ground” for “problem” prisoners.
The Department’s
Statement of Purpose and Objectives
for the specialist Unit at Goulburn prison states that:
[i]ntellectually disabled prisoners who cope appropriately in the prison mainstream are NOT to be admitted to the Unit on the
grounds of intellectual disability, as this would go against the principle of integration into the general gaol community for those
who are capable of it.
The courts may recommend that prisoners be placed in these special units, but the decision remains with Corrective Services. Prisoners
may also be referred to be assessed for placement in the program by an interested person such as a family member, a legal representative
or a member of the Department of Corrective Services staff.
Descriptions of the Units.
The Commission visited the Goulburn Units in April 1992. The Development Unit has capacity for 12 prisoners in 11 cells (two prisoners
in one cell). Each cell has a shower, cupboards and an enclosed concrete outdoor area. The prisoners are provided with a key so they
can lock their cells, though prison officer keys override these keys. There is a common dining room, indoor work area and concreted
outdoor area. There are two activity rooms, one containing three computers, in which development programs such as literacy and alcohol
education are undertaken. The prisoners have a structured program with an emphasis on living skills, including development programs
and paid prison work (assembling airline headsets). The Unit is supervised during the day by two prison officers and a Programs Nurse.
According to the Department the prisoners currently are locked in their cells from 7.00pm until 6.45am. The inmates have access to
the outdoors for sport, work and recreation purposes on most days, providing the weather permits.
11.29 Inmates are transferred to the minimum security Education Unit (located in X wing) on a recommendation from the Education Officer.
This wing is housed in a building which is older than the maximum security unit. The cells, all single bed cells, are open from 6.30am
until 7.30pm. Each prisoner has an individual education program, which is reviewed every four weeks. The prisoners’ days are
not as structured as in the Development Unit and there is more emphasis on literacy, rather than basic living skills. According
to the Department of Corrective Services, the majority of the inmates in this Unit now work during the morning and early afternoon
on the grounds maintenance gang, the demountables refurbishment gang or the spray shop and have education classes in the afternoon
and evening.
11.30 The Department of Corrective Service’s
Annual Report 1990/91
commented that the purpose of these special units “is to provide appropriate services which will improve their ability to cope
in gaol and to live in the general community as self-reliant, law abiding citizens”.
In relation to these units, Hayes and Craddock have commented:
Individual programme plans are developed covering areas including literacy and numeracy; work preparation, and work skills for employment
within the unit; personal care and hygiene; interpersonal skills including sexual relationships; relaxation training; sport and exercise;
domestic skills such as cooking and laundry; budgeting and financial management; coping skills especially for managing frustration
and violence; personal counselling; and group discussions about unit management and interpersonal interactions. Custodial officers
volunteer to be transferred to the units, and as far as possible staffing is constant so that inexperienced officers who may not
understand the inmates are not deployed. Motivation amongst officers is high, most reporting that their reason for requesting the
transfer is the opportunity to have a meaningful interaction with inmates and to see the results of programmes. Officers undergo
a training course followed up by in-service training, and many also undertake tertiary courses focused on intellectual disability.
Each officer is appointed case manager for certain inmates, and is responsible for establishing goals, monitoring progress with programme
plans, averting crises, and conveying relevant information to other members of the team.
Hayes and Craddock also commented on the limitations of these Units, namely the small number of places available, and the fact that
“[t]he degree of overcrowding in gaols places the existence of the units at risk, and they are also threatened with funding
and staff cutbacks.” As well, “[t]he full range of therapeutic programmes is not available, with severe restrictions
on resources such as speech pathology, sex offender programmes and physiotherapy, for example.”
11.31 Submissions and people consulted have generally been impressed by these units. The Mental Health Review Tribunal made the following
comments about three forensic patients with an intellectual disability under its supervision but detained at the John Moroney Correctional
Centre at Windsor:
the environment, programmes, and rehabilitative, training and educational goals of the expert and dedicated staff working with these
patients within the developmental unit of this prison, must be favourably remarked upon.
The Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service (“IDRS”), while generally preferring that people with
an intellectual disability should not be segregated, have supported the units, primarily because of the vulnerability of people with
an intellectual disability within the mainstream prison population.
However, there are also criticisms of the units:
there is little or no access to speech or other therapists, and no contact visits, and where there is no “care” being
exercised at all, only primitive conditioning at tremendous expense to the taxpayer ....
Special services
11.32 Segregation will not be suitable or necessary for many prisoners with an intellectual disability. Some prisoners may prefer
to be in the mainstream environment and may strongly resist the stigma attached to a special unit or being identified as having an
intellectual disability. Some organisations argue that prisoners with an intellectual disability should be detained as far as possible
in the mainstream prison population but with special services, such as increased supervision and a more structured program.
The Law Society of New South Wales, for instance, supported, on balance, the integration of people with an intellectual disability
into the mainstream prison population with the proviso that their special needs be recognised:
[i]f this means extra funding to provide special programmes and training for people with intellectual disabilities, then the Law Society
believes this is a price that has to be paid.
Certain assessments have to be carried out before people can be integrated to just ascertain the level of their disability and in
some circumstances, the Law Society sees good reasons why there should be segregation. However, the idea of integration for even
these people should never be lost sight of.
11.33 Special programs or services, such as drug and alcohol programs, are already provided in the mainstream prison population. Many
such programs will be unsuitable for prisoners with an intellectual disability due to their low communication and interpersonal skills.
Services will also not overcome concerns about the vulnerability of some prisoners in the mainstream prison environment. However,
services appropriate for people with an intellectual disability should be developed. Areas of special need include: drug and alcohol
counselling and sex offenders programs, together with programs which will provide them with work or practical living skills.
It must also be recognised that as many offenders have also been victims, and this victimisation is likely to continue in the gaol
system, appropriate counselling may be required.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
40. On the information obtained to date, the Commission supports the retention of special units in the prison system. The units, however,
should be regularly reviewed.
The Commission also supports the provision of funding for services for mainstream prisoners with an intellectual disability.
Custodial options in other States
In October 1993 the Commission wrote to each State’s Corrective Services (or equivalent) Department seeking information about,
amongst other things, the availability of specialist custodial units. It appears that, apart from New South Wales, only Victoria
has special units for offenders with an intellectual disability. Some States, for example Western Australia, have “protection”
facilities for some prisoners with an intellectual disability. These facilities are designed to provide a safe environment for “vulnerable
and disturbed” prisoners with some special education and other programs, but they do not have the full range of programs, services
and accommodation options offered throughout the prison system.
In South Australia offenders “who are considered unfit to plead or of having diminished responsibility, or being mentally ill,”
are detained in at James Nash House, which is managed by the South Australian Health Commission.
11.35 In 1990 a Corrections/Disability Services Taskforce was established in Victoria, which led to the development of a Policy and
Procedures Manual for prisoners and offenders with an intellectual disability, a special unit for prisoners with an intellectual
disability in the Metropolitan Reception Prison at Coburg and changes to the preparation of pre-sentence advice to the courts.
The special unit (Unit 6, K Division) has places for 22 prisoners, both sentenced and remand. Two non-disabled prisoners live in
the unit to provide support and act as role models for the disabled prisoners. The Victorian Department of Health and Community Services
employs a full time worker in the Unit for assessment and referral and arranges programs and training for the prisoners. Where a
prisoner was a client of the Department prior to incarceration, steps are taken to maintain this relationship; for example, the prison
program manager contacts the community case worker regularly about the client’s progress. There is also a special unit within
the minimum security section of the Loddon Prison, which consists of a four bedroom self-contained unit. A maximum of three prisoners
with an intellectual disability can be accommodated, with provision for one or two non-disabled prisoners “to act as role models
and support people”.
11.36 The Victorian Department of Health and Community Services also established a “Secure Services Unit” outside the
prison system in the grounds of the Kingsbury Training Centre, Melbourne, for approximately four to five prisoners with an intellectual
disability. The unit is a five bedroom house which has at least two staff on duty, 24 hours a day, and is within a high fence. The
inmates are primarily those who have been found unfit to plead and are being held at the Governor’s pleasure, but may also
include sentenced prisoners believed to be particularly vulnerable within the prison system, even within the special units discussed
above. The inmates are transferred out of the control of the Corrections Services by order of the Minister, pursuant to s 21 of the
Intellectually Disabled Persons Services’ Act
(Vic). The person becomes a “security resident” and receives a range of protections under that Act. A review of the Unit
in 1991 identified the key problem area as lack of programs for clients.
11.37 The Kingsbury Unit is now part of a system of supervised and supported accommodation run by the Statewide Forensic Program,
which provides services for offenders with dangerous or anti-social behaviour. The Program has psychologists and case workers in
both the prison system and the community and provides intervention programs to people with an intellectual disability in prison,
after their release from prison and also, in certain cases, before an offence has been committed, on referral from the mainstream
community services. The accommodation service is designed to enable clients to move to less restrictive levels of support and programs,
with the ultimate aim of living successfully within the community. The Kingsbury Unit is designated as “Level One” security.
There are also 24 hour supervised accommodation options with lower levels of security: “Level Two” in the grounds of
an institution and “Level Three” in the community.
As far as the Commission is aware, only Victoria provides supported accommodation to prisoners outside the prison system.
SECURE UNITS IN THE COMMUNITY
11.38 The establishment of the Kingsbury Unit outside the criminal justice system raises the issue of whether people with an intellectual
disability should be removed entirely from gaol, owing to their vulnerability to abuse, their lack of understanding, or need for
services. Some submissions, while accepting possible security concerns, have stated that they believe that prison is an inappropriate
environment for a person with an intellectual disability, for example:
I submit that custodial care is almost mandatory for any act of violence committed by an intellectually disabled person. ...
“Custodial care” and “imprisonment” are two very different concepts, belonging, again, to two different systems.
It is argued that offenders with an intellectual disability should either be sentenced to non-custodial options (see paras 11.57-11.66)
or, if a non-custodial sentence is inappropriate in the circumstances, diverted to an institution other than a prison. It has been
argued that people who have been found unfit to be tried or not guilty on the ground of mental illness (which can include intellectual
disability), in particular, should not be sentenced to prison.
It must, however, be recognised that another institution outside the criminal justice system will not necessarily provide better
treatment or services for the offender with an intellectual disability.
11.39 The contrary argument is that diversion from the criminal justice system is inconsistent with the principle of normalisation
and that, if found fit to be tried, the convicted person with an intellectual disability should be treated in as similar a way as
possible to any other offender and all sentencing options should be available to the courts.
The normalisation argument, however, in relation to prisons, has been rejected by other bodies, for example the Commonwealth Office
of Legal Aid and Family Services stated, in supporting segregation of prisoners with an intellectual disability:
We do not agree that placing these people amongst the mainstream prison population is in accordance with the principle of normalisation.
The prison environment is not a normal environment. ... While it may well be true that segregated specialist units are not as effective
as they might be in providing appropriate care for people with intellectual disabilities, mainstream prison is hardly likely to be
beneficial. Instead of returning the intellectually disabled to mainstream prison with all its disadvantages, efforts should be made
either to improve the quality of support in segregated units or ideally to establish regional secure units ... In an ideal prison
system, integration would be preferable. However, until such time as people with intellectual disabilities are not at risk of being
victimised and exploited, and of being negatively influenced by “hardcore” criminals within the prison system, they should
be held in segregated institutions which aim to educate and rehabilitate these people with specialist staff.
11.40 It has therefore been suggested that a secure unit (or secure group home) be established in New South Wales outside the correctional
system for people for whom gaol is considered inappropriate:
... a secure residence administered and operated by professional habilitation staff along the lines of the Victorian model provides
the most favourable environment in which to meet the special management and habilitation needs of offenders with intellectual disabilities,
in particular those whose needs cannot be met adequately in the prison system.
Concerns have, however, been expressed about the provision of services in the Kingsbury unit, for example by the Victorian Intellectual
Disability Review Panel.
11.41 The New South Wales Department of Corrective Services stated that it:
supports the principle of diverting offenders from prison who have serious intellectual disabilities. The punitive function of imprisonment
is meaningless and often counterproductive for those prisoners with an intellectual disability who have, at best, only vague memories
of the offences they commit and little or no insight into what motivates their criminal behaviour.
Consideration should be given to establishing a small facility outside of Corrective Services control to meet the special habilitation
requirements of offenders who have been found unfit to plead on account of their intellectual disability and who need to be housed
in secure accommodation. Such a facility might also cater for offenders who have an intellectual disability who are at present held
in remand gaols pending the resolution of their cases by the courts.
A special facility would promote the provision of appropriate living and social skills training to a higher degree than that possible
in the restrictive environment of prison. It would also overcome the problem of exploitation of inmates with an intellectual disability
by some of the more predatory types of inmates ubiquitous to typical prison populations.
11.42 Associate Professor Susan Hayes, while supporting the establishment of a small facility outside Corrective Services control,
has commented:
The principle of diverting from prison, offenders who have a serious intellectual disability is a vexed issue. The question arises
as to who should run the facility or secure unit to which the intellectually disabled offenders are diverted. The issue also becomes
one of which intellectually disabled offenders should be diverted, since not all have serious intellectual disabilities and some
can understand the punitive function of imprisonment, as well as the other functions which include deterrence and rehabilitation.
The State of Victoria has a diversionary procedure, and the fate of intellectually disabled offenders is often worse in the intellectual
disability institutions to which they are diverted. There is also continual tension between the two departments, Corrective Services
and Community Services, owing to the fact that in most instances such offenders have been sentenced. When they are diverted, the
question arises as to how they can be restrained in a secure unit, and what happens to them at the end of the sentence.
... In other jurisdictions, such as Britain, there has been a reluctance on the part of secure regional units to accept certain categories
of offenders, including those who have sentences. It has also been discovered that the secure units rapidly fill up and there is
no flow through, particularly if there is a preponderance of severe offenders who do not move through the system. The secure units
may well cater for offenders who are on remand, but the difficulty is that very often they are not identified as having an intellectual
disability until very close to their trial date, and so in the intervening time they receive no habilitative services in the corrective
services facilities.
There is no particular reason why a special secure unit would promote social and adaptive skills training in a way that would be impossible
in the restrictive environment of a prison. Indeed, the experience in other jurisdictions is that there are fewer educational, vocational
and habilitative programmes in the secure units than there are in the prison environments. The suggestion needs to be treated with
a great deal of caution because it is not always the case that prison is the most restrictive alternative. The issue of intellectually
disabled offenders being victimised in prison is, of course, an accepted fact, but it reflects more on overcrowding and lack of supervision
than it does upon the actual intellectual disability. There are many vulnerable offenders, and it cannot be argued that they should
all be moved out of the corrective services system simply because they are going to be victimised by other non-disabled prisoners.
11.43 IDRS has argued that any new facilities should be the joint responsibility of the Departments of Corrective and Community Services,
to ensure that the prisoners receive appropriate support and services.
For people found unfit to plead or not guilty on the ground of mental illness, they added that though a secure environment may be
appropriate:
[s]uch a secure environment should not be a prison but rather should be a place where they receive the education, support and training
they require to return to full participation in the community. We are very concerned that if such services are not designed properly
they may simply become a new use for old institutions and that they will become a dumping ground for people with challenging behaviours
or simply any person who does not have the resources to object to being confined in such a setting.
Safeguards need to be put into place to ensure that any specialist services created will maximise the potential for the person to
learn appropriate behaviour. In particular, any special services should:
service no more than a few clients in any one location;
not be isolated from the community;
have a sufficient staff - client ratio to ensure real support and assistance;
be staffed with qualified personnel; and
have regular review procedures.
Hayes and Craddock also argue that:
Intellectually disabled prisoners should not be transferred to mental health or intellectual disability facilities other than through
a formal commitment procedure in which the defendant is represented by legal counsel and reviewed regularly.
11.44 There is a difference of opinion about the most appropriate department to administer such a unit. The Queensland Department
of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs, for example, stated:
Caution should be exercised when setting up community-based alternatives to detention that the burden of supervision is not transferred
to ordinary carers.
Alternatives to detention should remain the responsibility of Corrective Services. Special alternatives for people with an intellectual
disability should not be set up in inappropriate structures, ie in services for people with an intellectual disability.
The New South Wales Department of Community Services is likely to see running such a Unit as inconsistent with the provision of (voluntary)
community services (see also paras 13.33-13.36). Though the Commission provisionally supports the idea of a secure unit outside the
prison system, such a unit must be able to offer conditions and programs which are better than those available in the prison system.
The Commission is concerned that such a unit should not be a prison by another name and should address the concerns outlined by Associate
Professor Hayes and IDRS above.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
41. The Victorian model of a secure unit (not within the grounds of a prison) for people with an intellectual disability who are either
unfit to be tried or not guilty on the grounds of mental illness, or other offenders with an intellectual disability for whom prison
is considered inappropriate, should be adapted for use in New South Wales. Appropriate safeguards and services should be provided
and the conditions for the transfer of such people from prison set out in legislation. The appropriate government department to run
the unit should be a matter for further discussion. The unit should be able to have more flexible leave and rehabilitation programs
than are available in prison, and there should be provision for decreasing levels of security to enable re-integration into the community,
as currently exists in the prison system.
OTHER CUSTODIAL ISSUES
Over-representation in prisons
11.45 Many research studies in Australia and other Western nations have reported that people with an intellectual disability are over-represented
in prison populations. There has been, however, considerable variation in the prevalence found, ranging from less than 1% of the
prison population to nearly 40%.
Some of these studies are summarised in the Commission’s Research Report -
Appearances Before Local Courts
The variation has been attributed to:
differences in prosecutorial and sentencing practices; or
the availability (or lack) of alternatives to gaol for people with an intellectual disability; or
differences in the way the research was undertaken, including the definition of intellectual disability used.
11.46 The most recent New South Wales study, conducted by Hayes and McIlwain in 1988, estimated that 12-13% of the New South Wales
prison population had an intellectual disability, using a definition of intellectual disability which included both the results of
intelligence tests and social and adaptive skills:
Using accepted definitions of intellectual disability which include both IQ
social/adaptive skills deficits, it is clear that in this study the majority of this sample who fall into the borderline or low average
categories on IQ measures alone, would actually be classified as intellectually disabled on the basis of severe deficits in social/adaptive
skills. Using data from a number of sources, it is apparent that the baseline figure for the prevalence of intellectual disability
is 12-13 percent, that is approximately four times that of the general population.
With approximately 6,500 prisoners in the New South Wales prison system,
these figures mean that there could be in the order of 800 inmates with at least a borderline level of intellectual disability. There
is some debate whether the numbers are as high as suggested by the Hayes and McIlwain study,
but there are no other recent New South Wales prison statistics against which to compare this figures. Other States
have lower figures, though, as suggested above, some variation can be explained by, for example, the definition of intellectual disability
used. Some anecdotal reports, however, suggest an even higher figure, for example
Dr Jenny Thompson, a psychiatrist who has worked for both the Mental Health Review Tribunal and the Prison Medical Service, stated
that in her experience about 20% of prisoners had an intellectual disability, the majority being in the mild or borderline ranges:
they fall into ‘revolving door’ patterns of imprisonment, freedom, sometimes hospitalisation, with escalating degrees
of offences. Many have dual diagnoses of intellectual disability and mental illness; brain damage and mental illness.
Why does this over-representation of people with an intellectual disability occur?
11.47 A number of possible explanations for this over-representation have been suggested:
The “Susceptibility Hypothesis”.
People with an intellectual disability
commit more crime
, because their impaired mental abilities have ramifications for their impulse control or frustration tolerance level.
The “Different Treatment Hypothesis”.
People with an intellectual disability are
treated differently
in the criminal justice system because of their disability and their poorly developed understanding of the criminal justice system,
for example, they are more likely to receive a custodial sentence.
People with an intellectual disability are often poor, unemployed and reliant on social services, or are employed in low-paying occupations.
socio-economic group
is generally over-represented in the prison population. Social factors apart from income are also likely to be relevant.
They may lack family support and a stable place of residence, and therefore may not be released on bail.
People with an intellectual disability are
caught more often
, because their crimes are easier to detect and/or less successfully concealed. Considering the possibility of unreliable confessions
or the chance of the person being used as the “fall guy” in a group offence, there is also the possibility that people
with an intellectual disability are sometimes gaoled for crimes they did not commit.
It has also been suggested that some people with an intellectual disability are gaoled because there is
nowhere else for them to go
. Other non custodial options such as community service orders or specialist programs have not worked or simply do not exist.
It is generally considered that there is no single satisfactory explanation as to why so many people with an intellectual disability
are in prison.
Implications for prisoner management
11.48 The Hayes and McIlwain study discussed above also considered the implications for prisoner management of this high prevalence:
The severe deficits in social and adaptive skills pose grave management problems. Prison staff are required to manage inmates who
are functioning at levels similar to pre-school children. Yet, as the findings demonstrate, some of these inmates have committed
violent and unpredictable crimes whilst others have committed relatively minor offences. Security classifications vary from maximum
to minimum.
A major area of deficit appears to be in communication skills - receptive, expressive and written - so that the [intellectually disabled]
inmates’ ability to comprehend the formal and informal gaol rules is significantly curtailed. ...
American literature has also pointed to the difficulties faced by people with an intellectual disability in adjusting to the prison
environment, for example in complying with prison rules.
11.49 The study also recommended a number of other measures within the prison system, for example, in relation to the difficulty of
comprehension of prison rules, the preparation of an appropriate video explaining prison rules and requirements was suggested.
The study’s major recommendations, apart from special units which have already been discussed, are set out below, together
with the Department of Corrective Services’ implementation to date.
Assessment and training are discussed further at paras 11.50 and 11.54-11.56 respectively below.
Hayes and McIlwain recommendation
A screening test on reception to prison for all prisoners, followed by, for those below a designated cut-off point, a full psychological
and/or medical (including psychiatric) assessment, including consideration of the services required by the prisoner.
Appoint a case coordinator for each prisoner with an intellectual disability to ensure reception of appropriate services.
Train all correctional staff, including health professionals, in identification and management of prisoners with an intellectual disability.
Ensure continuity of habilitative services when the prisoner is transferred or released.
Appropriate programs, resources and units to be made available across the spectrum of security classifications.
Corrective Services response
This will be undertaken with the establishment of a case management system, which is being progressively introduced into all correctional
institutions.
Some training is currently supplied to Governors, new recruits and to the staff of the special units.
This is currently limited to inmates released from special units.
No further special programs (apart from those discussed at paras 11.25-11.26 and 11.33 above) are planned at present.
Screening and assessment
11.50 As discussed above, screening and assessment for intellectual disability is a crucial issue at the sentencing stage. It is also
relevant on the entry into the prison system, whether the person is on remand or is sentenced. Unfortunately it is often assumed
that intellectual disability will be identified at the court stage, but this is not necessarily the case, particularly if the person
pleads guilty. This also does not help remand prisoners. The Department of Corrective Services is currently in the process of introducing
new assessment procedures.
Identification is made more difficult by the inadequate number of psychologists in the gaol system. Goulburn Gaol, for example, had
only two psychologists for approximately 700 prisoners in 1992.
Psychiatrists attended on occasion from Long Bay Prison hospital, on a session-based system. This lack of staff means that adequate
screening and treatment programs may be impossible (see also the discussion about the lack of services in Chapter 13). There also
needs to be adequate facilities for non-Corrective Services professionals to undertake assessments, particularly for remand prisoners.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
42. That the assessment and screening procedures in prisons be appropriately resourced and reviewed on a regular basis.
Transfer of information from the courts
11.51 Information provided to the court, primarily for the purposes of sentencing, is likely to be relevant for the appropriate (and
expeditious) placement and treatment of the person for both custodial or non-custodial options. It is important that relevant information
which may affect the decisions of the Department of Corrective Services or the NSW Probation Service is passed on from the courts.
The person’s intellectual disability, where relevant, could be noted on the remand or commitment warrant by the court. The
court can also make a recommendation that the person be held in protective custody, pending classification.
The Department of Corrective Services has commented:
In addition to Corrective Services improving its own procedures, there also appears to be a need to upgrade screening and assessment
processes for persons coming before the courts who are suspected of having an intellectual disability. Efficient lines of communication
should be established between those providing the assessments and Corrective Services so that the Department is alerted to the presence
of intellectual disability as soon as they enter the prison system. This will facilitate the early placement of inmates in programmes
which will most adequately meet their needs.
11.52 It may be necessary to institute a reporting system which encourages the courts or the person’s lawyer to notify the Department
of Corrective Services, after sentencing, of the person’s disability. Though a proposal about the transfer of relevant information
from the courts to Corrective Services and from the prison to the Parole Service and then onto the Probation Service does not overcome
the possibility of inaccurate information about the person being used in decisions about his or her future, it may assist in the
identification and appropriate treatment of prisoners with an intellectual disability. Confidentiality issues must also be considered.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
43. That procedures be instituted to ensure that relevant information about an offender’s intellectual disability is transferred
from the courts to the New South Wales Department of Corrective Services and the NSW Probation Service.
Short term prisoners
11.53 Many of the services currently available in the gaol system are of little assistance for the short term prisoner. It has been
suggested that there may be many people with an intellectual disability who have committed frequent minor offences and for whom a
non-custodial sentence is inappropriate. Such people are less likely to be placed in a special unit, to receive a psychological assessment
or to benefit from any programs and assistance available in gaols. Many are therefore unlikely even to have their disability identified.
The short term of their sentence does not, however, mean that such people are not vulnerable in gaol. For these prisoners notification
by the court may be crucial.
Training for correctional officers
11.54 A number of prison officers interviewed in Western Australia recognised the special needs and particular problems of prisoners
with an intellectual disability. One officer stated:
They are charged more often for prison violations as they don’t understand what is expected of them. Officers have to spend
a lot more time with this group, we have to reiterate daily tasks, check them constantly, protect them from exploitation.
Significantly only three of the 20 officers felt they were adequately supported in the prisons for dealing with offenders with an
intellectual disability and some referred to the lack of specialised training.
11.55 As for all criminal justice personnel, there is clearly a need for training about intellectual disability for prison officers
as “[t]he perception, attitudes, training and skill of prison officers can have an important effect upon the prison experience
of an intellectually disabled prisoner”.
One submission commented that “the ignorance of the penal system employees, with few exceptions remains appalling,”
and the need for training for prison officers has been commented upon in a number of submissions.
The Hayes and McIlwain study referred to above commented:
correctional staff require basic training in the identification and management of [prisoners with an intellectual disability] because
these issues pertain to the overall management and security of the prison. It should be recognised that even those professionals
who could be assumed to have expertise in the field (nursing staff, doctors, psychiatrists, psychologists) may in fact not have received
any relevant training since their undergraduate course many years previously. Therefore, expertise must be demonstrated rather than
assumed. Some correctional staff who may be deployed to special wings or units ... will naturally develop greater expertise than
those who deal with [prisoners with an intellectual disability] in the prison mainstream. In-service training courses must be available
to all staff at all levels.
11.56 The need for training has been referred to in relation to the police;
lawyers, including judicial officers;
and other criminal justice personnel and need not be repeated in great detail here, but again it is important that such training
not be limited to the staff of the special units. Similar issues arise for the staff of the NSW Probation Service.
The Commission believes that the detail of training programs is primarily an internal matter, based upon an organisation’s
particular systems and procedures and therefore repeats (with appropriate adaptations) its proposal for the police:
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
44. An audit of current New South Wales Department of Corrective Services and NSW Probation Service training in relation to intellectual
disability should be undertaken. Training about the special needs and vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability should
not be directed merely to the level of the new recruit, but should be included on a continuing basis for all staff who are likely
to come into contact with people with an intellectual disability.
NON-CUSTODIAL (OR SEMI-CUSTODIAL) OPTIONS
11.57 Non-custodial sentences are given to the majority of offenders for a variety of reasons. Some reasons include: the inappropriateness
of custodial sentences for relatively minor offences, the disadvantage of exposing young offenders to the gaol environment and the
likelihood of rehabilitation being more effective in the community than in gaol. Non-custodial options are also less expensive than
imprisonment: according to the NSW Probation Service, the cost of managing an offender in the community in 1992-93 was $3.23 per
day in comparison to the daily custodial cost of $120.47 per inmate in maximum security and $95.90 per inmate in minimum security.
Even where specialist units are available, it has been stated that prison may be inappropriate for many people with an intellectual
disability, as discussed above. Therefore, it is suggested, appropriate non-custodial options should be considered. Particular advantages
of each of the available options in New South Wales for offenders with an intellectual disability are considered below. Supervision
of offenders with non-custodial sentences is undertaken by the NSW Probation Service.
Options available in New South Wales
11.58 In New South Wales, apart from fines, there are a number of alternatives to imprisonment, which may be completely non-custodial,
as in the case of community service orders or bonds, or which may be semi-custodial, such as periodic detention or home detention.
Community Service Orders and Attendance Centres
11.59 A Community Service Order (“CSO”) requires the offender to perform a number of hours (not exceeding 500 hours) of
unpaid community work, such as gardening and maintenance. As part of a CSO the court may require the offender to attend for a nominated
number of hours (with a minimum of 20 hours) at an Attendance Centre.
At an Attendance Centre the offender is required to participate in development, educational or other programs under the supervision
of the Probation Service. In introducing the Attendance Centre provisions, it was anticipated that, where a person was unsuited to
work in the community, development programs at such a Centre may provide an alternative to gaol.
CSOs are only to be ordered “instead of imposing a penalty of imprisonment”,
and the offender must consent to a CSO.
A Pre-sentence Report is required stating that the offender is a suitable candidate for a CSO and that the relevant programs are
CSOs have been available in New South Wales for about 14 years, and as at 30 June 1993, the 4,760 offenders were on CSOs.
Most orders are for 50 to 200 hours work in the community, and all CSOs are supervised by the Probation Service. Breach of CSOs
means the offender is brought back before the court and may lead to imprisonment.
In a limited survey of judicial officers, the majority interviewed considered that CSOs made a positive contribution to the offender’s
rehabilitation or education.
Hayes and Craddock have pointed to the particular advantages of CSOs for offenders with an intellectual disability, namely:
the opportunity for maintenance or boosting of self esteem through the work undertaken;
the preservation of normal social skills rather than institutional skills and values;
the opportunity for “modelling upon typical members of the community rather than exposure to the anti-social, violent and criminal
behaviour occurring in gaols”;
a CSO is likely to be a more meaningful punishment to the offender with an intellectual disability than, for example, a fine paid
out of a bank account or trust fund: “[t]he work may take the form of restitution, if not to a specific individual or property,
then at least along similar lines - a basic form of ‘making the punishment fit the crime’, which in this situation means
also that the offender understands that the punishment is related to the crime.”
The survey of judicial officers referred to above, however, suggested that some Magistrates believe that physical or mental disabilities
make some offenders unsuitable for CSOs.
11.60 A “Griffiths remand” (or “common law bond”) involves the court adjourning the sentencing of an offender,
for instance to allow him or her to demonstrate rehabilitation. Other bonds (or “recognizances”) may be ordered by the
court in a variety of circumstances, requiring the offender to be of “good behaviour” for a period of time and, usually,
fixing an amount the offender will be liable to pay if the bond is breached.
Such bonds may impose other conditions, such as reporting to the Probation Service. Other alternatives include a bond known as a
“deferred sentence” where breach of the conditions of the bond also results in imprisonment.
A fine can be imposed in addition to a bond.
Many submissions have commented on the difficulties some people with an intellectual disability have in understanding and complying
with the conditions of bonds (see para 11.67 below).
Dismissal without conviction
11.61 Under s 556A of the
, any court may consider a charge proven but be of the opinion that:
having regard to the character, antecedents, age, health or
mental condition
of the person charged, or to the trivial nature of the offence, or to the extenuating circumstances under which the offence was committed,
or to any other matter which the court thinks it proper to consider, it is inexpedient to inflict any punishment, or any other than
a nominal punishment ...
[emphasis added]
In such circumstances the court dismisses the charge or discharge the person on a good behaviour bond without recording a conviction.
Periodic detention
11.62 Periodic detention, as its name suggests, requires the offender to spend time in prison, but that time is broken up, usually
as weekend detention, to allow the offender to continue living and working within the community.
Hayes and Craddock have pointed to the advantages of periodic detention for offenders with an intellectual disability as:
allowing them to maintain their place in residential facilities and sheltered workshops rather than go back to the bottom of a waiting
list after a term of imprisonment. The maintenance of family and other community support services is likewise even more crucial for
such offenders. Periodic detention gives the intellectually disabled offender a “taste” of imprisonment which maybe more
salutary than all the lectures from lawyers and caregivers. It avoids to some extent the perils of institutionalisation and possible
modelling on deviant prisoner behaviour, and reduces the risk to the vulnerable prisoner. The supervised work can be tailored to
fit the crime, again providing a concrete object lesson for these offenders. The major disadvantage is that the system appears to
be faltering in New South Wales, and over-worked staff may not have the time or expertise to supervise “difficult” cases,
nor find appropriate work projects for them.
11.63 A different view of periodic detention, however, was offered by the Law Society of New South Wales:
It would seem that for people with an intellectual disability and, in fact, offenders generally, there needs to be some sort of half-way
house between a non-custodial and a custodial sentence. The present system of periodic detention being spent in gaol is not appropriate
in many cases. Consequently, some thought should be given to the institution of periodic detention sentences being served in the
community so that the professed goal of rehabilitation can be seen to be something more than just words. The basic idea of locking
people up for weekends does not achieve anything at all and does not enhance the rehabilitative process.
In the Law Society’s view, there is an argument that people sentenced to periodic detention could be required to spend time
at a community based centre where they would be required to go one evening per week and weekends as under the existing periodic detention
arrangements. Alternatively, a combination of periodic detention and attendance at a community based centre should be available.
11.64 As discussed in the Issues Paper, one alternative suggested by the West Australian Authority for Intellectually Handicapped
Persons is “home based detention”, as it “does not expose the person with intellectual disability to the abuses
that frequently occur in prison and it ensures that any effort at habilitation occurs in the place where the person lives and works.”
In New South Wales, a pilot program of home-based detention, known as Intensive Community Supervision (“ICS”), was launched
in June 1992 and is continuing in 1994.
The program is designed to save money (costing approximately $8,000 per offender per year rather than $27,000 for a year in gaol)
and reduce recidivism. It is administered by four Magistrates sitting in Parramatta, Liverpool, Fairfield and Burwood Local Courts
and is available, if the offender and his or her spouse agrees, for such offences as minor fraud, drink driving, drug charges and
break, enter and steal. ICS is ordered as a condition of a deferred sentence under s 558 of the
(NSW). A non-removable wrist or ankle bracelet is attached to the person, which must be placed into a special device of the offender’s
the call verbally. If the person does not answer the phone his or her supervisor is contacted. Serious breaches of the program will
result in the person being brought back before the court with the possibility of spending the remainder of the sentence in gaol.
Offenders will also be visited and submitted to drug and alcohol testing.
The Attorney General’s Sentencing Review Issues Paper suggested that the program will be put on a legislative basis.
11.65 The general advantages and disadvantages of home detention have been discussed in detail elsewhere.
The procedures involved in such an option, however, for instance answering a telephone check call and the use of monitoring devices,
may be beyond the abilities of some people with an intellectual disability, who would therefore require constant support. This alternative
may thus impose an unfair burden on the offender’s family and may present problems of supervision. Similarly many residential
services may not accept such people, which would make it difficult to find them placements in the community. There is also the concern
that such procedures can be used to pass the cost of detention onto families and disability services.
The New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee stated that home based detention may not be appropriate for a person living in a residential
facility with others, and that it was possible that such an option would not be seen as “punishment” by a person with
an intellectual disability.
Program probation orders
11.66 For federal offences, “program probation orders”
are available, which have some similarities to Attendance Centre orders. If a person with an intellectual disability is convicted
of an offence and the court is satisfied that the disability contributed to the commission of the offence and an appropriate education
program or treatment is available, the court may, without passing sentence on the person, order that the person be released on condition
that he or she undertake the specified program. This presupposes the availability of appropriate programs. The Australian Law Reform
Commission, in recommending the availability of these orders for such offenders, noted that all submissions received by that Commission
had supported their introduction.
It stated that consultations and submissions:
indicate that many crimes committed by intellectually disabled offenders, even if done repeatedly, are of a minor nature and that
habilitation programs for such offenders have a real likelihood of success. The example often given is of intellectually disabled
offenders who shoplift because they do not know how to handle or understand money. The most appropriate and beneficial sanction in
these cases is something akin to a psychiatric probation order, requiring that the offender attend a program to be taught to handle
Program orders of this type will only be successful, however, if sufficient resources are devoted to creating and running the programs
[emphasis added]
Disadvantages of non-custodial options for people with an intellectual disability
11.67 Many non-custodial alternatives, however, are of limited assistance for people with an intellectual disability “who may
not understand them and lack the resources and capacity to comply with them.”
For example, people with an intellectual disability may have difficulty telling the time to keep appointments or they may need assistance
(such as travel training) to reach the police station or Probation office. The factors which may lessen their chances for bail and
parole, such as poverty, lack of employment options or family and community support, and unstable living conditions, will also decrease
the likelihood of receiving such sentences, with a corresponding increase in custodial sentences. There is also a lack of guidelines
or policy about what conditions or, in the case of CSOs, what work may be suitable. IDRS commented that many non-custodial alternatives
relied upon a person’s ability to comply with the conditions imposed on them and “[i]f appropriate services are not available
the effect can be to simply set people up to fail.”
The danger exists that, if an inappropriate non custodial option is chosen or if it is not explained effectively to the person, the
person may soon find themselves breaching the order and returned to the court and perhaps to gaol.
11.68 Fines may also disadvantage the offender with an intellectual disability. For instance, although the means of the offender are
taken into account by a court in setting a fine, difficulties remain for the offender with an intellectual disability who is dependent
on some sort of benefit or pension, particularly if assistance is required in managing his or her financial affairs. The New South
Wales Sexual Assault Committee commented that “[f]ines are generally not appropriate, not only as most people with an intellectual
disability could not afford them, but because they are often not educated as to the value of money.”
11.69 There are no specialised options within the NSW Probation Service for people with an intellectual disability, therefore general
community services are relied upon. The Service believes that people with an intellectual disability form only a small number of
their clients as a 1987 survey by Probation officers only identified 1.38% of the Service’s caseload as having an intellectual
disability,
though in the absence of psychological testing, this number is likely to be an underestimate. Examples have been provided to the
Commission of Probation officers not identifying a person’s intellectual disability. Consultations with Probation officers
have referred to the difficulties faced in dealing with these clients, including: the failure to recognise a person’s disability,
particularly if the person’s disability is masked by other factors such as alcoholism; the expense and difficulty of obtaining
assessments; problems with transfer of information from the courts and the gaols; and the lack of services (especially accommodation),
policy and training in this area. Similar concerns were expressed for people with brain damage.
11.70 There are a large number of offenders being supervised in the community by the Probation Service, for example, at 30 June 1993,
9,159 people were on supervised probation; 4,760 were on CSOs; 1,679 were on post-release orders and 2,615 were on fine substitution
The Probation Service stated that the average ratio of active supervision cases to field staff was 45 offenders per officer.
Therefore, identification and supervision of the offender with an intellectual disability may be difficult, as it is generally recognised
that supervision of a person with an intellectual disability is time consuming:
The extraordinary burdens on the [Probation] Service in NSW mean that supervision will often amount to no more than a weekly or even
monthly request to attend at the Service’s office for an interview. Many officers have little or no training in intellectual
disability and the additional time demands of dealing with such offenders sometimes leads to frustration on the part of both offender
and supervisor. Involvement of another specialist service which is willing to provide oversight of the offender whilst on a bond
might be a better way of meeting the needs of the intellectually disabled offender.
The need for training of all Probation staff was discussed at paras 11.54-11.56 above. The lack of existing programs and special supervision
may mean that a Probation Service officer who is preparing a Pre-sentence Report informs the court that the offender is unsuitable
for a non-custodial sentence. Thus the offender with an intellectual disability may be gaoled by default.
Justice Plans
11.71 In Victoria, if a court finds a person with an intellectual disability guilty of an offence and is considering ordering either
a suspended sentence, a “community-based order” (similar to the New South Wales CSO), or release on adjournment (with
or without recording a conviction), the court may request the preparation of a “Justice Plan”, in addition to a Pre-sentence
A Justice Plan is prepared by the Department of Health and Community Services and does not recommend sentencing options but rather
specifies appropriate
services for the offender “which are designed to reduce the likelihood of the person committing further offences.”
If the court orders either a suspended sentence, a community-based order, or release on adjournment, it may also order that the
offender participate in the services specified in the Justice Plan for a period of up to 24 months or for the length of the sentence,
whichever is the shorter.
Review provisions for the special conditions are provided.
Such special conditions involve cooperation between the community services and corrections services personnel.
11.72 The effectiveness of Justice Plans is limited by the programs and services available, as the court does not have the power to
order a special condition if no appropriate option exists.
Hayes and Craddock have commented:
The various reported judgments in relation to Community Based Orders suggest a growing confidence in this form of disposition, notwithstanding
teething problems in the funding and execution of programmes. The legislation in other jurisdictions may permit the making of orders
which mirror the terms of the Victorian orders. The lack of explicit recognition of such orders in these jurisdictions, however,
militates against their use. The value seen in such dispositions by the Victorian judges should encourage the enactment of similar
provisions in other jurisdictions.
As Hayes and Craddock recognise, there appears to be scope for the court to seek information (usually through a Pre-sentence Report)
a bond. However the Commission seeks submissions about whether such a power to seek information and order special conditions for
an offender with an intellectual disability sentenced to a non-custodial option may need to be made more specific. The major difficulty
remains the lack of services. The Commission seeks submissions about whether there should be a provision that a court can order that
such a service be provided.
11.73 The Commission suggests that the advantages of a Justice Plan could be incorporated into the existing system of Pre-sentence
Reports so long as appropriate assistance is provided to the Probation Service. There needs to be development by the Probation Service
(with the assistance of the Department of Community Services and other agencies) of appropriate programs (for example at Attendance
Centres) which can be ordered as part of existing sentencing options, such as CSOs.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
45. With the assistance of the New South Wales Department of Community Services, the NSW Probation Service should develop appropriate
non-custodial programs for the offender with an intellectual disability, within the existing non-custodial (or semi-custodial) options,
such as Community Service Orders. The court should also have the power, as in Victoria, to request information from both agencies
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Sentencing Review 1994
(Issues Paper, Attorney General’s Department, New South Wales, June 1994).
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 191.
. Mr P Hutten
(6 January 1992) at 18-19.
. For example,
R v Vangelder
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 28 February 1994, CCA 60107/93; and
R v Bassett
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 20 May 1994, Hunt CJ at CL, 70082/93, at 16ff.
. See, for example
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 July 1990, CCA 60071/89 at 6;
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 13 April 1992, CCA 60245/90; and
R v Trotter
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 10 August 1993, CCA 70032/93, Hunt J.
Veen v R (No 1)
[1979] HCA 7
(1979) 143 CLR 458
Veen v R (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR 465.
See also R G Fox “The killings of Bobby Veen: The High Court on proportion in sentencing”
Criminal Law Journal
, especially at 347ff.
. Justice M Gleeson “Justice when everyone’s a hanging judge”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(2 December 1993) at 12.
. See, for example the comments of a South Australian judge in
R v Zubrinich and West
(unreported) Supreme Court, South Australia, 26 May 1994, 475/1993, Mohr J, at 2.
R v Letteri
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 March 1992, CCA 60407/91, per Badgery-Parker J (with the concurrence
of Gleeson CJ and Sheller JA) at 14.
R v Letteri
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 March 1992, CCA 60407/91, per Badgery-Parker J (with the concurrence
of Gleeson CJ and Sheller JA), at 12.
R v Champion
(1992) 64 A Crim R 244.
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 26 October 1993, CCA 60398/93.
R v Champion
(1992) 64 A Crim R 244
. Hayes and Craddock at 198-199, referring to the comments of Bray CJ (dissenting) in
(1974) 9 SASR 452.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 158.
[1933] HCA 1
(1936) 55 CLR 182
at 186, per Dixon J, cited in Hayes and Craddock at 192.
R v Shinfield
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 13 May 1993, CCA 60090/93. See also the comments of the South Australian
Court of Criminal Appeal in
R v Mason-Stuart
[1993] SASC 4322
(1993) 68 A Crim R 163
, where King CJ, at 164 commented: “whilst elements of proportionality and general deterrence may not be important in this matter,
the need to deter the appellant, personally, is important.” Compare the Victorian Court of Criminal Appeal in
R v Kilmartin
(1989) 41 A Crim R 22
. Hayes and Craddock at 192.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 6.
. Arguments for and against listing sentencing factors in legislation were set out in the Australian Law Reform Commission’s
(Report 44, 1988) at paras 167-171.
. Under the
Sentencing Act
(NSW) fixed terms must be given for sentences less than 6 months
and where the court so decides
. For example
R v Shinfield
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 13 May 1993, CCA 60090/93;
R v Sanders
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 February 1992, CCA 60480/90; and for brain damage in
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 23 March 1993, CCA 60647/91 and 60002/92.
R v Bassett
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 20 May 1994, Hunt J, 70082/93, at 23. See also Hayes and Craddock at 242.
. Compare the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act
(1985) 14 A Crim R 364.
. Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Intellectually Handicapped Adult Offenders in New South Wales
The Missing Services
(Departments of Corrective Services and Youth and Community Services, Sydney, 1985) at 3.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 5. See also The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 4.
See, for example: New South Wales Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of Community Services], Office on
(26 November 1991) at 2; Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 6; New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 5; Queensland Corrective Services Commission
(23 September 1992) at 1; Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 4; Mr W Challis, Administrative Officer, Prisoner Classification & Placement, Department of Corrective Services,
New South Wales
(25 June 1992) at 1; and Mr F de Silva, NSW Probation Service
(17 March 1994) at 2-3
. Mr F de Silva, NSW Probation Service
(17 March 1994) at 2-3.
. New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of Community Services], Office on Disability
(26 November 1991) at 2.
(1988) 35 A Crim R 458.
. Hayes and Craddock at 242.
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 15 July 1993, CCA 60593/91 per Badgery Parker J at 9.
. For example, New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 5.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 5.
. This was raised, for example, at the consultation with representatives of the DPP, Police Prosecutors, Legal Aid Commission of NSW,
Law Society of New South Wales, Public Defenders, Aboriginal Legal Service and the Judicial Commission on 1 March 1994.
. For example, Mr P Hutten
(6 January 1992) at 10.
. New South Wales. Department of Courts Administration
Annual Report 1992/1993
. Hayes and Craddock at 201.
. R Bray and J Chan
Community Service Orders and Periodic Detention as Sentencing Options: A Survey of Judicial Officers in NSW
(Judicial Commission of New South Wales, Monograph Series 3, 1991) at 2.
. Ms B Smith, Director, NSW Probation Service
(24 March 1994)
. Ms B Smith, Director, NSW Probation Service
(24 March 1994)
. Ierace at 168.
. ALRC Report 44 at para 203.
. Hayes and Craddock at 203.
. ALRC Report 44 at para 203 [footnote references omitted]. See also the general recommendations about Pre-sentence Reports at paras
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances Before Local Courts
(Research Report 4, 1993).
. See NSWLRC RR 4 at para 4.19.
. See J Wade “Psychiatric nursing in the courts” (March 1992)
New Zealand Nursing Journal
. See Illawarra Disabled Persons’ Trust
(7 December 1993), attaching Report of Pre-Sentence Review Panel Preliminary Meeting and a Discussion Paper on intervention strategies
for people with an intellectual disability who are convicted of a criminal offence.
. Hayes and Craddock at 282.
. G P Jones and K Coombes
The Prevalence of Intellectual Deficit Among the Western Australian Prisoner Population
(Department of Corrective Services, Western Australia, 1990), Recommendation 7.
. New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
(14 November 1991) at 1.
. Mr R G Woodham, Assistant Commissioner, Operations, Department of Corrective Services
(23 November 1993).
. For a description of life for prisoners with an intellectual disability before special units see: J Simpson “A visit to four
gaols” (1989) 3 (3)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
. The Commission visited the Development and Education units at Goulburn Correctional Centre on 28 April 1992.
. Mr C Rannard, New South Wales Department of Corrective Services
(20 June 1994).
. New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
Statement of Purpose and Objectives: Goulburn Development Unit
. Mr C Rannard, New South Wales Department of Corrective Services
(20 June 1994).
. At the time of the Commission’s visit some inmates also worked on the prison farm.
. New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
Annual Report
1990/1991 at 76.
. Hayes and Craddock at 278-279.
. Hayes and Craddock at 280.
. Mental Health Review Tribunal
Annual Report 1992
at para 11.2. See also consultation with the Illawarra Criminal Justice Sub-committee on 2 March 1992; Dr J A Thompson, Consultant
Psychiatrist, Community Health Services, Central Sydney Health Service
(26 January 1994) at 1.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 10.
. Mrs V Breheny
(14 July 1992) at 5.
. For example, Queensland Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 4-5.
. The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 4.
. See also ALRC Report 44 at para 217.
. The Commission understands that a review of services provided to prisoners with an intellectual disability is currently being undertaken
for the Attorney General by Mr Chris Puplick. This review is likely to be of assistance in assessing the existing special units.
. Jones and Coombes at 38.
. South Australia. Department of Correctional Services
(27 August 1992) at 3.
. Ms L Goss, Coordinator, Program Development and Implementation, Correctional Services Division, Prisons Branch, Department of Justice,
(11 November 1993).
. Department of Health and Community Services, Victoria
Statewide Forensic Program: IDS Policy, Procedures and Guidelines
(May 1993) at 25.
. Community Services Victoria
Review of the Kingsbury Secure Services Unit
(Management Review Unit, June 1991, PMR RS 003).
. Ms T Brown, Manager, Client Services Section, Department of Health and Community Services, Victoria
(11 March 1994). See also Department of Health and Community Services, Victoria
Statewide Forensic Program: IDS Policy, Procedures and Guidelines
(May 1993).
. Mrs V Breheny
(14 July 1992) at 4-5.
. For example, Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 11.
. Western Australia. Department of Corrective Services
(19 November 1991) at 2.
. Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 4-5.
. Western Australia. Department of Corrective Services
(19 November 1991) at 3.
. Intellectual Disability Review Panel (Victoria)
(17 December 1992) at 9-10.
. New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
(20 July 1992) at 1.
. Associate Professor S C Hayes
(31 August 1992) at 1-2. See also S C Hayes “Services for offenders: Mentally disabled prisoners - planning resources”
(1991) 5 (2)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 10.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 11.
. Hayes and Craddock at 291.
. Queensland. Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 5.
. In national surveys in the United States of America, Georgia, for example, reported a rate of 39.6%: see Hayes and Craddock at 31.
In the United States, it has been commented that despite this variation “the best estimate of most experts is that adult mentally
retarded offenders nationally comprise about 9-10 percent of the total number of inmates”: E F Reed “Legal rights of
mentally retarded offenders: Hospice and habilitation”
Criminal Law Bulletin
at 411-412.
. NSWLRC RR 4 at paras 1.12-1.24.
. See Hayes and Craddock at 32-40 for more detail.
. S C Hayes and D McIlwain
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the New South Wales Prison Population: An Empirical Study
(November 1988) at 47. This study assessed the prevalence of intellectual disability in five NSW prisons: Mulawa Training and Detention
Centre for Women, Central Industrial Prison, Parramatta Gaol, Metropolitan Remand Centre and Broken Hill Gaol. The five gaols held
a population of 1,318 prisoners of which 675 were screened.
. According to the Department of Corrective Services
Annual Report 1992/1993,
at 2, as at 4 July 1993 there were 6401 inmates at correctional centres and 1265 offenders sentenced to periodic detention. According
to that Report however, at 2-3, “a conservative projection is for an incremental progression [of the prison population] of
some 200 inmates per annum until at least 1995.”
. For example New South Wales Department of Corrective Services
(20 July 1992) at 2.
. For example, a study in Western Australia reported that 1.17% of the prison population had an intellectual disability: see Jones
and Coombes at 27.
. Dr J A Thompson, Consultant Psychiatrist, Community Health Services, Central Sydney Health Service
(26 January 1994) at 1. Also in New South Wales, R Hudd and J Timmers in
Borderline and Mild Intellectually Disabled People: The Neglected Group for Services
(Discussion Paper, Sydney City Mission, 1992) at 26, stated that 45-55% of prisoners were estimated (based on unofficial figures)
to have a borderline or mild intellectual disability.
. See also R Jackson, J Cockram and R Underwood “Views from behind prison walls: Prison officers and intellectual disability”,
paper presented at the
1993 National ASSID Conference
(Newcastle University, New South Wales, 30 November - 5 December 1993) at 2-3, for a description of the various explanations for over-representation.
. See C A Buser, P A Leone and M E Bannon “Segregation: Does educating the handicapped stop here?” (June 1987)
Corrections Today
17-18, cited in Hayes and McIlwain at 10.
. J Zimmerman, W D Rich, I Keilitz and P K Broder “Some observations on the link between learning disabilities and juvenile
delinquency” (1981) 9
Journal of Criminal Justice
1-17, cited in Hayes and McIlwain at 10.
. Associate Professor S C Hayes has also suggested, from a study of 134 defendants with an intellectual disability referred for assessment,
that: “[t]he results presented in this study describe an alienated and deprived subgroup of society where unemployment, isolation,
drug and alcohol abuse, sexual victimisation, and dysfunctional childhood experiences are endemic. Their communication and social
skills deficits are both a cause and an outcome of their isolation, which in turn leads to boredom, frustration and a lack of appropriate
social role models. It could be argued that it is not the presence of intellectual disability which leads to criminal behaviour,
but rather in a scenario similar to other afflicted groups (such as epileptics, drug and alcohol abusers, and brain damaged youths)
it is the constellation of negative social circumstances which results in over-representation in the criminal justice system.”
See S C Hayes “Intellectually disabled defendants - characteristics and psychological assessment”, paper presented at
the First International Congress of the European Medical Association
The Mentally Retarded in the 2000’s Society
(23-26 March 1994, Rome) at 17.
. Hayes and McIlwain at 47.
. C Smith, B Algozzine, R Schmid and T Hennly “Prison adjustment of youthful inmates with mental retardation” (1990) 28
Mental Retardation
. Hayes and McIlwain at 49-52.
. From information supplied by Mr C Rannard, Department of Corrective Services
(20 June 1994).
. For an example of screening for intellectual disability in the prison systems of some American States (Georgia and Texas) see Reed
at 430-436.
. Visit by the Commission to the Goulburn Correctional Centre on 28 April 1992.
. Ierace at 167.
. New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
(20 July 1992) at 2.
. Jackson, Cockram and Underwood at 5. Note that the sample interviewed was very small (only 20 officers) and these were nominated
by the Western Australian Department of Corrective Services on the basis that they had recently worked with offenders with an intellectual
disability. Their understanding is therefore likely to be greater than that of the general prison officer population and is not necessarily
reflective of the New South Wales situation.
. Hayes and Craddock at 268-271.
. Mrs V Breheny
(14 July 1992) at 9-10.
. For example: Western Australia. Department of Corrective Services
(19 November 1991) at 6; New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services, [now Department of Community Services] Office
on Disability
(26 November 1991) at 2; and Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 6.
. Hayes and McIlwain at 50.
. New South Wales.Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
(Discussion Paper 29, 1993) ch 4.
. See Chapter 3 of this Paper.
. Hayes and Craddock at 233. See also Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 5.
. Ms B Smith, Director, NSW Probation Service
(24 March 1994)
. For provisions relating to Attendance Centres see the
Community Service Orders Act
(3). The NSW Probation Service operates Attendance Centres at Pendle Hill, Emu Plains, Chatswood, Annandale, Liverpool, Wollongong,
Tuggerah Lakes and Newcastle. Part time Centres are found at Albury, Wagga Wagga, Goulburn, Orange, Dubbo and Tamworth: Ms B Smith,
Director, NSW Probation Service
(24 March 1994).
. New South Wales.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 22 October 1986, at 5199, per the Hon J Akister MP, Minister for Corrective Services, introducing the
Community Service Orders (Amendment) Bill
1986 (NSW) which introduced the Attendance Centre provisions.
Community Service Orders Act
Community Service Orders Act
Community Service Orders Act
. New South Wales. Department of Courts Administration
Annual Report 1992/1993
at 36. See also C Allison “Sweat but no tears in the working alternative to jail”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(4 March 1994) at 3.
Community Service Orders Act
. Bray and Chan at 1.
. Hayes and Craddock at 208-209. See also G M Crombie
Residential and Community Based Options for the Remand and Sentencing of Intellectually Disabled Offenders in Victoria: A Proposal
from Harrison Youth Services
(Harrison Youth Services, Uniting Church in Australia, Victoria, 1988) at 19.
. Bray and Chan at 19.
(NSW) s 432(2) (only available for misdemeanours following a sentence of imprisonment); and s 554(2) (only available for summary
proceedings). See also
Justices Act
(NSW), s 96 for the powers of Magistrates.
(NSW) s 558.
(NSW) s 440B.
(NSW) s 556A(1).
Periodic Detention of Prisoners Act
. Hayes and Craddock at 214-215.
. The Law Society of New South Wales
(24 August 1992) at 4.
. M McCoy and H Lowe “Criminal law and people with intellectual disabilities: Alternative options to custody”, paper presented
at the conference
Questions of Balance: Criminal Law and People with Intellectual Disabilities
(Perth, Western Australia, July 1990) 41 at 42.
. New South Wales. Department of Courts Administration
Annual Report 1992/1993
. M Coultan “Take-away jail sentences just a phone call away”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(2 June 1992).
. Brown at 52-53.
. ALRC Report 44 at paras 130-131; R Lay “Home detention: A community programme” and T Dorey “Home detention and
supervision schemes” in D Biles (ed)
Current Australian Trends in Corrections
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1988).
. Associate Professor S C Hayes
(7 May 1992) at 2.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 6.
. ALRC Report 44 at para 215.
. ALRC Report 44 at para 214.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 3.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 11.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 6. See also Hayes and Craddock at 210.
. Ms B Smith, Director, NSW Probation Service
(26 November 1993).
. Consultation with representatives of the NSW Probation Service, the Department of Corrective Services and the Aboriginal Legal Service
on 2 March 1994.
. New South Wales. epartment of Courts Administration
Annual Report 1992/1993
. Ms B Smith, Director, NSW Probation Service
(24 March 1994).
. Hayes and Craddock at 205.
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
. Ms L Goss, Coordinator, Program Development and Implementation, Correctional Services Division, Prisons Branch, Department of Justice,
(11 November 1993).
. See, for example
R v Roadley
(1990) 51 A Crim R 336
, at 347-349
. Hayes and Craddock at 213.
. See also Recommendation 6 of the Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Intellectually Handicapped Adult Offenders in New
South Wales
The Missing Services
(Departments of Corrective Services and Youth and Community Services, Sydney, 1985).
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
12. Release from Custody
History of this Reference (Digest)
12.1 By its terms of reference the Commission was asked to consider the issue of “the release from custody into the community
of intellectually disabled persons considered dangerous”. “Dangerousness” is a complex issue, and debate about
it often involves inaccurate assumptions about behaviour and its prediction, and about mental disorder. This chapter briefly raises
dangerousness as a general concept, and its applicability to people with an intellectual disability. Additionally, this chapter deals
with issues relevant to the release of all prisoners with an intellectual disability, such as preventive detention, parole and the
availability of, and responsibility for, post release training and re-integration schemes.
"DANGEROUSNESS"
12.2 There is a wide body of literature about “dangerousness”.
It is not appropriate for the Commission to consider this material in detail in this chapter. What makes an individual “dangerous”
is not defined by statute, nor is there a generally accepted definition. It has been argued that “dangerousness” can
become a circular concept - a person is dangerous when some form of containment is considered desirable.
The term is often used to refer to a tendency to engage in serious criminal behaviour, usually of a violent or sexual nature.
Predicting “dangerousness”
12.3 To describe a person as “dangerous” implies that his or her behaviour is predictable. However, it has been stated:
In recent years, there has been a vast outpouring of material on the assessment of risk and the prediction of dangerous behaviour.
... [Prins then refers to 24 studies.] Despite a vast literature ... one has to conclude that there are no reliable actuarial and
statistical devices as yet that can predict with any degree of certainty the likelihood of dangerous behaviour. Moreover, many of
the published studies suffer from serious methodological weakness (for example, inadequate sampling and follow-up).
[p]sychiatric opinion on serious offenders who have been long in custody is frequently inconclusive with regard to crucial issues
such as individual dangerousness.
A contrary view is expressed by the Victorian psychiatrist, Dr William Glaser, in relation to sex offenders: “[a]lthough the
science of sex offenders is still very crude, there is an increasing body of knowledge available which will help us to predict dangerousness.”
12.4 The lack of certainty in predicting dangerousness means that the detention of people on the basis of such predictions amounts
to an exercise of weighing the social and individual costs. The predominant issue thus becomes: what degree of accuracy is morally
and politically acceptable? A common argument of those supporting comprehensive preventive detention legislation is that accuracy
lies as a secondary consideration to risk-aversion. According to one commentator:
... the mistakes involved in deciding to release are quite different than those made in respect of those it is decided to retain.
One involves releasing a number of offenders who will again inflict serious harm on society. The other involves retaining (not releasing)
a number of offenders who, if released, would not do so, but who cannot be distinguished at the time of the decision from those who
would. Most people would consider the first kind of mistake to be far more serious than the second type of mistake. Classifying the
two types of mistakes as simply mistakes and glossing over the differences in the impact that would result from each type of mistake
is, in my opinion, dishonest.
Compounding the issues as to unreliability of predictions are ethical and professional concerns over the possible misuse of individual
psychiatric assessments in making such decisions.
It has been suggested that the potentially serious outcome of releasing a dangerous person, causes psychiatrists to err on the side
of caution in making predictions about dangerousness.
“Dangerousness” and intellectual disability
12.5 Intellectual disability is not a condition which causes criminal behaviour,
and a person with an intellectual disability is not inherently dangerous. It has been stated:
[u]ndoubtedly, some criminals are intellectually disabled, or psychopathic, or otherwise mentally abnormal, but mental abnormality
cannot be used as a general explanation of criminal behaviour.
The condition of retardation and the fact of criminal behaviour are not comparable phenomena ... Criminality ... is not a condition
but an act of “illegal” behavior.
Numerous studies have disclosed highly varied offence rates (according to the type of offence) within, and between, groups of offenders
with and without an intellectual disability. The studies fail to disclose any generally accepted correlation between intellectual
disability and a propensity either to commit given offences or to offend generally. Studies conducted in Australia have disclosed
a variety of (sometimes contradictory) results.
“Dangerousness” and preventive detention
12.6 “Dangerousness” finds its way into various detention provisions. As discussed in Chapter 10, an accused who is found
not guilty on the ground of mental illness, either at trial or at a special hearing, is detained indeterminately on the basis of
presumed dangerousness. Similarly, a person detained for a “limiting term” upon a finding of guilt at a special hearing
(see Chapter 4) may be released prior to the expiry of that term if they are found to present no danger to themself or the community.
“Dangerousness” is also relevant to parole decisions (see para 12.33).
12.7 A further means of detaining people considered dangerous is preventive detention - involving, for example, detention imposed
on offenders who are otherwise eligible for release at the expiry of a determinate sentence or limiting term, but who, for reasons
arising from the nature of their offence, behaviour, or other reasons, are believed to present a danger to themselves and/or the
community. Apart from the mental illness provisions, preventive detention (in the sense of imposing an indeterminate sentence for
perceived dangerousness) does not exist in New South Wales. If it is assumed that an acceptable determination of “dangerousness”
can in fact be made, an issue arises whether it is appropriate for society to detain people - who cannot otherwise be detained under
mental health legislation or the principles and provisions of criminal law - by the employment of specific preventive detention legislation.
In the Issues Paper the Commission sought submissions on whether there is a need in
New South Wales for preventive detention legislation or other measures for people with an intellectual disability who are considered
to be dangerous.
The Legal Aid Commission of NSW stated in a submission that it is:
unreasonable to place additional restraint on intellectually disabled or mentally ill persons when dangerous members of the wider
community are also entitled to unconditional freedom at the expiration of their sentences.
General sentencing principles: proportionality
12.8 The High Court’s decisions in the
confirm that the principle of proportionality demands that protection of the public cannot justify the imposition of a sentence greater
than that otherwise appropriate under the “just deserts” principle: “a sentence should not be increased beyond
what is proportionate to the crime in order merely to extend the period of protection of society from the risk of recidivism on the
part of the offender”.
There is no such impediment where a statute provides for preventive detention. Indeed, Deane J suggested the need for such legislation
Veen (No 2)
... the protection of the community obviously warrants the introduction of some acceptable statutory system of preventive restraint
to deal with the case of a person who has been convicted of violent crime and who, while not legally insane, might represent a grave
threat to the safety of other people by reason of mental abnormality if he were to be released as a matter of course at the end of
what represents a proper punitive sentence.
Preventive detention statutes - Australia
12.9 Most States and Territories have some form of indeterminate or additional detention legislation. Some of these provisions have
not been used frequently in recent times, although there has a been a recent trend towards the introduction of further provisions
in this area. The most recent developments have occurred in Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia.
New South Wales.
Habitual Criminals Act
(NSW) allows a judge to declare a convicted offender an “habitual criminal” where: the offender is 25 years old or above;
he or she has served, on at least two previous occasions, separate terms of imprisonment for indictable offences; and the judge considers
that detention is “expedient with a view to such person’s reformation or the prevention of crime”.
A sentence of at least 5 years and no more than 14 years may then be imposed in addition to the sentence for the subject offence.
There is provision for early release at the direction of the Governor,
but otherwise no formal review process. Because the additional sentence is imposed at the time of conviction, it is not affected
by the prisoner’s good behaviour during the initial sentence period; but conversely is not able to be extended if, at the end
of the additional sentence, the prisoner remains dangerous. The Act is effectively in disuse.
Additional sentences are also possible under s 115
CHP12_23" href="#fnDP35CHP12_23">
(NSW). Whether these sections should be repealed and whether the
Habitual Criminals Act
(NSW) should be repealed or strengthened were raised in an Issues Paper
prepared by Dr Roger Brown as part of the Attorney General’s review of sentencing laws in New South Wales. However that paper
merely raised the issue for discussion and did not contain any recommendations. It did, however, suggest that this was an issue which
could be considered in future by this Commission.
Recently the Attorney General has announced a review of the
Habitual Criminals Act
(NSW) “to ensure that more effective use is made of that legislation to send a clear message that a life of crime is not acceptable
to the community.”
Criminal Code Act
1924 (Tas) an offender, who appears to be at least 17 years of age, convicted of a crime involving an element of violence for at least
the second time, can be declared a “dangerous criminal” and detained at the Governor’s pleasure; if “the
judge is of the opinion that such a declaration is warranted for the protection of the public”,
having regard to the characteristics of the offences and the offender, medical/other opinion, and any relevant matter.
There is no review provision.
Northern Territory.
Criminal Code Act
1983 (NT) provides for the imposition of an indeterminate sentence
on an offender either declared an habitual criminal because of the number and nature of prior convictions or “the manner of
his life revealed by the evidence of such previous convictions”;
or incapable of controlling his/her sexual instincts, where the offence and history of convictions are of a sexual nature, or for
any other reason.
Absolute or conditional discharge is by application to the Supreme Court.
South Australia.
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act
(SA) an indeterminate sentence may be imposed for repeated convictions for certain offences,
or any conviction for other specified offences or where the offence is one which suggests “that the defendant may be incapable
of controlling his or her sexual instincts.”
Release is by way of application to the Supreme Court.
. Considerable controversy and concern arose recently in Victoria over the anticipated release from prison of Garry David (now deceased),
who was believed to represent a danger to the community. Garry David was diagnosed as having a personality disorder, but was not
“mentally ill” under mental health legislation and therefore could not be civilly committed. The Government responded
Community Protection Act
(Vic): “to provide for the safety of members of the public and the care or treatment and management of Garry David”.
An order for preventive detention (not exceeding 12 months) could be made by the Supreme Court if it was satisfied, on the balance
of probabilities, that Garry David: “(a) is a serious risk to the safety of any member of the public; and (b) is likely to
commit any act of personal violence to another person.”
While a detention order was in force regular reports, on specific matters,
to the responsible Minister
were required; and Garry David could be released only by a further order of the Supreme Court.
The Act was the only Australian preventive detention legislation which involved an assessment of the prisoner at the time of release,
rather than at conviction or sentencing. As such, detention was prolonged only for as long as a threat to community safety was posed.
12.15 In 1993 the Act was repealed and a regime of indeterminate sentencing inserted into the
Sentencing Act
The new sections provide that where the court:
is satisfied, to a high degree of probability, that the offender is a serious danger to the community because of -
(a) his or her character, past history, age, health or mental condition; and
(b) the nature and gravity of the serious offence; and
(c) any special circumstances ...
it may, on its own initiative or upon an application by the Director of Public Prosecution (“DPP”), sentence a person
convicted of a serious offence (as defined
) to an indefinite term of imprisonment and must nominate the non-parole period it otherwise would have imposed (the “nominal
sentence”).
In assessing whether the offender is a serious danger to the community, the court must have regard to the circumstances of the offence,
medical or psychiatric evidence, the risk of serious danger to the community, and the need to protect members of the community.
The indefinite sentence must be reviewed (i) where an application is made by the DPP, as soon as practicable after the expiry of
the nominal sentence; or (ii) where the application is made by the offender, at any time after the expiry of three years after the
review in (i) and thereafter at intervals of not less than three years.
Where the court is not satisfied that the offender remains a serious danger to the public, it must order that the indefinite sentence
be discharged, and “make the offender subject to a five year reintegration program administered by the Adult Parole Board and
issue a warrant to imprison in the same way as if it had sentenced the offender to a term of imprisonment for five years”.
Penalties and Sentences Act
(Qld) provides for indeterminate detention upon conviction for a “violent” offence,
where the court is satisfied that mental health legislation does not apply and that the offender is “a serious danger to the
community”.
Where an indefinite term is imposed, the court must specify the fixed term it otherwise would have imposed (the “nominal sentence”);
from which the timing of review procedures is calculated,
and which represents the minimum sentence a subsequent court may impose after discharging an indefinite sentence.
Western Australia
Criminal Code Act
1913 (WA) provides for an indeterminate sentence upon repeated convictions for specific offences,
or any conviction for an indictable offence, having regard to the characteristics of the offender and/or the offence.
Crime (Serious and Repeat Offenders) Act
1992 (WA) provides for the indeterminate detention of juveniles
convicted of violent or repeat offences, as defined.
Release for juveniles and adults is by way of an order of the Supreme Court and at the Governor’s pleasure respectively.
Objections to preventive detention
Preventive detention of persons beyond the sentence for the instant offence amounts to incarceration without conviction. According
to one legal commentator, preventive detention:
punishes offenders for their status rather than for their crimes, or alternatively punishes offenders for crimes they are thought
likely to commit rather than for crimes they have committed. Ultimately it is a highly selective and potentially discriminatory exercise
of dubious efficacy and morality.
... [A]ll such preventive detention devices should be abolished, and ... the search for a better system of preventive detention be
12.19 Other commentators have argued that preventive detention is additional unearned punishment for the public benefit. It relies
upon the uncertain concept of “dangerousness”, undermines the “just deserts” principle, and has been described
as “the hallmark of governments with little respect for due process”.
Preventive detention may transgress human rights (such as freedom from cruel and unusual punishment, the presumption of innocence,
and the right to equality before the law)
as well as offending international standards and obligations within international treaties, conventions and declarations to which
Australia is a party (for example, the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights 1966, and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Mentally Retarded Persons 1975). Further, it has been
argued that the imposition of indeterminate sentences may indirectly affect criminal acts and trials, as:
the prospect of indeterminate detention may provide an incentive to kill a victim rather than risk identification;
an accused fearing the imposition of a preventive sentence may be less likely to plead guilty;
prisoners serving indeterminate sentences would have little incentive to participate in prison rehabilitation programs; and
it starts to undermine the judicial role in sentencing.
12.20 Arguments in favour of preventive detention often assume that the aims of retribution and community protection within the sentencing
process are separate. Conversely, it is argued that they are in fact complementary - that community safety is provided for adequately
by the “just deserts” model, and that to apply any other course would be to “open the floodgates of discretionary
abuse and arbitrary decision-making.”
For example, while prior criminal record and the nature of prior criminal behaviour cannot be relied upon absolutely as predictive
criteria for dangerousness, they do operate within conventional sentencing procedures to justify longer detention upon successive
convictions. People with prior convictions:
lose claim to leniency. ... [They] are generally disadvantaged by being entitled to ... less favourable parole eligibility entitlements.
... Recidivists are adequately punished without resort to concepts of extra punishment.
12.21 The justification for preventive detention of certain convicted offenders has been said to be a redistribution of risk between
potential victims and potential aggressors.
However, whether concerns for the protection of the community outweigh those for the liberty of the individual; and whether the denial
of individual liberty on this basis is best implemented via the criminal justice system, remain controversial issues.
People with an intellectual disability
. Even if it is assumed, albeit erroneously, that intellectual disability does have some causal connection to dangerousness, the jurisdiction
of the criminal law to provide community protection does not extend beyond that contained within “just deserts” sentencing
principles. Preventive detention is sometimes viewed as providing an opportunity for offender rehabilitation. Given that intellectual
disability is a permanent condition, it is somewhat dishonest to call the detention of a legally sane individual “treatment”.
Further, if the basis of indeterminate detention is rehabilitation, then logically release should occur only when the person is rehabilitated.
Statutes which allow for the imposition of a determinate or indeterminate period of detention in addition to that attracted by the
offence at the time of conviction, cannot be said to be rehabilitative, for the imposition, and in the case of a determinate sentence
the length, of the sentence is unaffected by any rehabilitation which occurs during the initial sentence period. Unless the person
detained is incapacitated in some way (for example, through old age or other infirmity):
there can be little confidence that the person assessed as dangerous will be any less dangerous at the end of a period of preventative
detention. ... Indeed, there is good reason to believe that the person will be more dangerous.
Preventative detention is likely to result in the dangerous person placed for an extended period in a violent environment, an environment
which may positively reinforce violent behaviour. Preventative detention may exacerbate any feelings of resentment towards the community
or particular members of the community held by the detained person.
12.23 Where preventive detention is indeterminate, release would only be available where the person no longer displays the behaviour
which gave rise to the detention - usually violent or sexual in nature. Given that detention is imposed as a result of past behaviour,
present dangerousness would be determined by behaviour while incarcerated. Reliance upon such information is inappropriate:
[o]n the one hand the structured environment of a prison or mental institution may remove many of the situational stresses and pressures
present in everyday life which trigger off violent behaviour in some persons. On the other hand, for other persons the only way they
are able to survive a violent environment such as a prison or mental institution is to respond aggressively and violently. While
their behaviour may be effective in surviving the hostile environment of the institution it will almost inevitably mean they are
deemed unsuitable for release.
12.24 A further negative aspect of preventive detention concerns the task of psychiatrists within the detention process. Not only
do psychiatrists disagree as to what, if anything, constitutes identifiable dangerousness, they also may find the determination of
dangerousness for the purpose of justifying indeterminate preventive detention a task inconsistent with their usual therapeutic role.
It has been argued that:
[p]sychiatry and the community can well do without legislation which, even if originally well-intended, ends up being imprecise and
discriminatory in its application and anti-therapeutic if not frankly harmful to individuals. Some legislation is illusory when it
comes to protection of the community. Forensic psychiatrists giving evidence on poorly formulated issues and questions sometimes
end up as the unwilling de facto gaolers of offenders who receive no treatment and may require none.
Alternatives to additional periods of punishment
12.25 One option is to assist prisoners who otherwise may be considered dangerous upon release with their re-integration into the
community. Currently there are no such options available for offenders with an intellectual disability once a person is released.
(See paras 12.40-12.43 and paras 13.25-13.32 in relation to the provision of services.) The Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability
Rights Service (“IDRS”) stated (in relation to prisoners with an intellectual disability serving a “limiting term”,
although the issues are applicable to all prisoners with an intellectual disability considered dangerous):
there are currently no support systems in the community to “catch” them when they are eventually released. Nor are there
sufficient educational supports in the prisons to assist them reintegrate into the community. This increases the likelihood of repeat
offenders. Some of these individuals require high levels of support and intensive one to one training for them to learn more socially
acceptable conduct. Very few receive this support. Some will continue to be a serious danger to the community.
Provision must be made for these few individuals. Perhaps a system similar to the Mental Health Review [Tribunal] needs to be established
for such persons, with some way of referring to the [Tribunal] those prisoners to be released and considered dangerous. The [Tribunal]
may then have the legal power to determine if it is necessary for the safety of the community that they should be placed in a secure
environment. The placement is not for punishment. It should also be a requirement that the person be given support services with
the long term aim being the replacement of dangerous behaviours with more acceptable behaviours so that the person can live in the
community. The law must state what must be found to justify such an order, the purpose of the detention, and what is to be provided
for the person while detained. It must also provide a process of regular review and appeal.
12.26 In rejecting such an option, another submission stated that:
The appropriate forum for dealing with offenders, dangerous or not, is in the courts. If the issue of dangerousness is to be considered
at all, it should be part of the sentencing process and the sentence imposed by the courts should reflect this, (ie no parole etc).
The introduction of special boards to determine an offender’s fate
that person has completed their sentence, seems to inappropriately duplicate what the court is set up to do and introduces the notion
of “double jeopardy”.
12.27 It has been argued that dangerousness arising from mental disorder is not a matter for the criminal justice system at all, but
rather for civil commitment:
any measure which calls for punishment over and above that which is deserved, though it be for social defence purposes, is foreign
to the objects of the criminal law and should therefore not be associated with it. In other words, once punishment has been limited
in accordance with “an evaluation of an offender’s moral responsibility for his crime” the opportunities for affording
added protection to the community under the criminal law are exhausted.
... [P]reventive detention should be relegated to the civil side of the “protection of the community” ledger, and should
no longer constitute an integral part of the criminal law.
... Once the term of imprisonment has come to an end the detainee should be entitled henceforth to be treated in the same manner as
any other civilian ...
12.28 The Commission, in principle, agrees that the criminal justice system should not be associated with “punishment over and
above that which is deserved”. Apart from the defence of mental illness (for which special considerations arise) the Commission
does not generally support preventive detention as a sanction available to the criminal justice system. A detailed consideration
of preventive detention in all its various forms (civil and criminal) is, however, beyond the scope of this reference. If such an
exercise is to be undertaken, it should be noted that preventive detention is clearly not an issue which is limited to people with
an intellectual disability. Nor has the Commission’s research to date revealed a clear or necessary connection between intellectual
disability and criminality or dangerous behaviour. Therefore it seems inappropriate to single out people with an intellectual disability
for any such legislation.
PAROLE AND POST RELEASE SERVICES
12.29 Parole in New South Wales is governed by the
Sentencing Act
(NSW) (the “
Sentencing Act
”), which also established the Offenders Review Board (the “Board”). As discussed in Chapter 11, under the
Sentencing Act
, sentences may be imposed by way of a fixed term;
or alternatively by a minimum term (which must be served in prison) together with a further additional term during which the prisoner
may be released on parole.
If the sentence does not exceed six months, then a fixed term must be imposed.
If the total sentence is less than three years, release on parole is usually automatic at the end of the minimum term.
This automatic parole (following a brief interview with the Parole Service and the prisoner signing a statement that they understand
the parole conditions) means that the first service which picks up the person’s intellectual disability in some cases may be
the NSW Probation Service, as part of its supervision of people released on parole.
12.30 If the total sentence is three years or more, parole may be granted by the Board at the end of the minimum term where the prisoner
is otherwise eligible under the provisions of the
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
further provides that parole may not be granted unless the Board has, amongst other things:
(a) determined that the release of the prisoner is appropriate, having regard to the principle that the
public interest is of primary importance
(e) determined that it has sufficient reason to believe that the prisoner, if released from custody, would be able to adapt to normal
lawful community life; ...
[emphasis added]
12.31 A parole order is subject to specific mandatory conditions. These are that the offender must be of good behaviour and not commit
any offence, that the order may be revoked if any condition is breached, and that:
[t]he order may be revoked if the court that made the order ... or the Board determines that it has sufficient reason to believe that
the offender, having been released from custody, has not adapted to normal lawful community life.
Other “supervising conditions” may be imposed, including that the offender be supervised by the Probation Service,
report to nominated persons at nominated times and places, enter employment, and reside at a particular address.
12.32 Parole has been criticised as creating uncertainty and disparity in sentencing practice, failing to reduce recidivism, and incorporating
predictions of dangerousness and recidivism which are beyond the capacities of the (parole) Board.
The Australian Law Reform Commission has recommended the abolition of parole for federal offenders, to allow the sentencing process
to become fairer, simpler, and more acceptable to the community.
On the other hand, it has been suggested that if the ratio of parole to head sentence is fixed, as occurs under the New South Wales
Sentencing Act
, the graduated steps from full custody to unconditional liberty provided by parole is beneficial to offenders with a mental disorder.
The Commission does not propose to make any comments about the advantages and disadvantages of parole, except in so far as the present
system affects people with an intellectual disability.
Parole and people with an intellectual disability
12.33 Parole poses particular problems for people with an intellectual disability. Firstly, as discussed, the questionable assumptions
surrounding the concept of “dangerousness” find their way informally into parole decisions via the criterion of “public
interest”. Secondly, the prisoner must show the potential, and then exhibit the ability, to adapt to normal lawful community
life. Such an adaptation is difficult for many prisoners, but may be more so for prisoners with an intellectual disability, as discussed
below. And thirdly, there is no guarantee that decision-makers within the parole process are sensitive to those circumstances of
people with an intellectual disability which, if not taken into account, may place them at a disadvantage in obtaining parole, and
set them up to fail upon release:
Studies show that intellectually disabled offenders tend to serve longer sentences than non-disabled offenders for the same crimes
and are less likely to be released on parole. In part, this is a consequence of poor adaptive and social skills, the unlikelihood
of participating in work or education programs, the propensity to break prison rules, and lack of community facilities (eg residential
facilities) willing to accept them upon release or as an alternative to gaol.
12.34 The Prisoners Legal Service of the Legal Aid Commission, for example, commented on the disadvantages faced by prisoners with
an intellectual disability, particularly if they were without family or other support to consider release options for them. It was
commented that they tended to spend longer periods in custody as they were not being released on parole at the expiration of their
minimum term, and were affected by the lack of post release programs and accommodation.
Lack of accommodation and other post release services.
The Parole Service has also commented on the difficulties caused by the fact that a prisoner’s case for parole has to be considered
by the Board at least 60 days before the end of the minimum term,
and that it is difficult to organise appropriate accommodation (which often forms one of the conditions of parole) for offenders
with an intellectual disability this far in advance. People on pre-1989 life sentences who have an intellectual disability face particular
difficulties in this area. They may stay in prison for far longer than another offender without a disability for a similar crime
because of the lack of anywhere for them to go on their release. An illustration of this was provided in the application for a re-determination
of a life sentence under
Sentencing Act
(NSW) by a prisoner who had already been in custody for 20 years.
His sentence was re-determined as a minimum term of 22 years with an additional term (during which he could be released on parole)
of the rest of his life. The prisoner accordingly faces a possible indefinite time in custody due to the absence of any appropriate
facility in the community into which he could be released on parole. The judge in that matter recommended that the New South Wales
Department of Community Services give urgent consideration before the expiration of the minimum term to the establishment of an appropriate
facility for him.
12.36 Another example of how a lack of services adversely affects the parole process for people with an intellectual disability was
provided by a parole officer, who highlighted the disadvantage created by a lack of accommodation when parole is applied for. The
parole officer stated that it is extremely difficult to secure accommodation for people with an intellectual disability, especially
when the person has served a gaol term, and even more so where the offence concerned was arson or of a violent or sexual nature.
Services for ex-prisoners/parolees are reluctant to accept people with an intellectual disability, who require a great deal of support,
but disability service providers also are reluctant to accept ex-prisoners. As the Board cannot make a conditional parole order until
it has decided, in light of the offender’s circumstances, that it will be feasible to secure compliance,
the Board usually requires the nomination of an address to ensure supervision - hence, people with an intellectual disability are
disadvantaged.
Prisoners with an intellectual disability who seek parole are likely to fall through the accommodation gap and remain in gaol longer
than non-disabled prisoners. The Parole Service provided an example of the steps taken by parole officers to obtain accommodation
and post release services for a particular offender referring to the difficulties faced, including: having an offer of a place at
a boarding house withdrawn because the other residents had “read about him in the paper”; boarding houses and hostels
being unable to confirm a place over 60 days in advance of release; another agency refusing to provide services because it believed
the relevant services were the responsibility of the Department of Community Services (“DOCS”); and DOCS stating that
because the person had a “borderline” intellectual disability, he therefore did not fall within their guidelines.
Lack of post release services is considered further at paras 12.40-12.43 below.
Understanding of parole conditions.
Even if parole is granted to a prisoner with an intellectual disability, they may have difficulty meeting the conditions imposed:
[m]entally disabled offenders can easily be placed in a “no win, back to gaol” situation through the demands of probation
or parole conditions which they cannot meet. The simplest tasks - catching public transport to the probation and parole office, using
a telephone to make appointments, telling the time, knowing the date, paying fares, negotiating time away from work or sheltered
workshop, enrolling in a suitable educational course, keeping away from negative peer group influences: may prove insurmountable
barriers for the mentally disabled offender. Having breached the conditions, the severity of sentencing escalates. It is essential
that an assessment be undertaken of the offender’s daily living skills and abilities to meet the conditions, and appropriate
support services (eg travel training) be provided.
12.38 IDRS argued in a submission to the Commission that:
those people responsible for setting and enforcing the conditions must be able to identify:
when a person may have an intellectual disability;
the special needs of people with an intellectual disability; and
the supports available in the community for people with an intellectual disability.
In a submission to the Commission the Western Australian Department of Corrective Services noted that:
the courts may question the suitability of offenders with an intellectual disability for parole. These concerns may to a large extent
relate to the offender’s capacity to complete the parole period successfully. It must be recognised that these offenders have
special needs in respect of supervision and habilitation. Provided that adequate attention is given to meeting these needs there
is no reason to expect that a person with an intellectual disability would be less likely than any other offender to complete his/her
parole period successfully.
12.39 This raises the question of how the needs of parolees with an intellectual disability are to be met, and who primarily is to
meet them. In a submission to the Commission, the governmental predecessor of the New South Wales Department of Community Services
The release from custody of people with a developmental disability needs close attention. All too often, there is no family to return
to. The hostel services do not necessarily meet the needs of people with a developmental disability. As a result, recidivism is high
as the only option is often a return to “care” in the prison system.
Some innovative resources have been prepared: for example, in Victoria, social work students produced a “visual pamphlet”
video to help ex-offenders with an intellectual disability plan their future after release from prison. The video also explains the
services provided by one agency, Francis House.
Post release services
12.40 Efforts to rehabilitate prisoners, to curb their “dangerous” or recidivist tendencies, and to prepare them for release
back into the community should occur within the normal prison term. The issues facing the Department of Corrective Services, such
as difficulties in identifying whether a person has an intellectual disability and the need for specialist services have been discussed
in Chapter 11 and will not be repeated here. Post release services must also be considered. The Kingsford Legal Centre emphasised
that the power to incarcerate raises an obligation to reintegrate:
custody often results in a diminution of living skills; without adequate services the recidivism rate for intellectually disabled
offenders has been high.
We strongly submit that if the criminal justice system insists on incarcerating intellectually disabled offenders knowing that custody
has a greater than usual impact on them, then the system must also ensure re-integration services are available. More emphasis should
be given to the provision of such services. The cost of their availability would be small compared to the cost of recidivism to the
public and to intellectually disabled people.
The Kingsford Legal Centre also suggested that:
there should be a person working in [the Probation Service] with a special ability to deal with people with an intellectual disability.
At the very least, there should be minimum guidelines produced to enable community corrections officers to understand and to deal
effectively with people with an intellectual disability. Such measures would help reduce the incidence of breaches of recognisance
conditions; such breaches occur frequently due to a lack of understanding on the part of the intellectually disabled person.
12.41 In the United States there has been at least one program (in Pima County, Arizona) where a probation service adopted a highly
active role in supervising probationers with an intellectual disability, with a view to reducing the incidence of recidivism.
All new probationers were screened and those identified as possibly having an intellectual disability referred for a more thorough
evaluation. The identified probationers received intensive counselling and supervision and were initially seen each day by the probation
officer. The ultimate impact of the program is unknown.
Also in the United States some States have special pre-release and post release “transitional programs” to provide for
a successful return to the community.
12.42 In its submission, the Office of Legal Aid and Family Services questioned the capacity of probation and parole services to effect
the re-integration of people with an intellectual disability:
Difficulties with parole are probably magnified for those with intellectual disabilities. Depending on the period of time an individual
has spent in custody, there may be severe life handicaps to overcome in order to reintegrate into society. Parole officers usually
only have time to periodically check on the progress of those assigned to them. They have no time to spend on extensive counselling,
life skills education, or assistance in organising basic requirements.
12.43 In any event support may not be limited to supervision, and may be required beyond the parole period. Other post release options
in the community must be considered. Submissions and consultations involving the Commission identified the absence and/or insufficiency
of community-based accommodation and services as contributing to recidivism and preventing successful reintegration into the community.
(See also Chapter 13.) If released, a prisoner without community support may fail to comply with the parole order, and/or is more
likely to re-offend, and so end up back within the correctional setting. Submissions have stated:
We submit that efforts to assist and accommodate people with an intellectual disability at this point in the criminal justice system
ought to be mandatory. A failure to do so will result in substantial wastage of resources and significant injustice being done to
the intellectually disabled person.
“Circuit breakers” should be devised for people leaving prison, including housing and support services.
Although there is general agreement among criminal justice system agencies that the absence or lack of accommodation and services
is the crucial issue, there is less certainty over which body should be responsible for providing them.
A multi-disciplinary approach: the Lancaster Program
12.44 There is a tendency to view the roles of the criminal justice and welfare systems, as distinct:
Workers in both the criminal justice system and the community [mental health/intellectual disability] system often do not know how
to deal effectively with the reciprocal system, or lack the means or time to do so. This results in offenders with mental retardation
falling through the cracks and receiving less than appropriate and adequate services from either system.
An alternative approach involves the integration of custodial and community services and service personnel. Integration of services
is necessary to ensure that prisoners with an intellectual disability who are released do not fall into gaps between existing services,
and re-offend or otherwise breach parole/release conditions: “[t]he solution is a team approach incorporating representatives
from all services, one of whom is appointed as case manager.”
Establishing links between the released person and service providers in the community can ease the person’s reintegration into
the community, and avoid them being simply “cast adrift” when Corrective Services, the Probation Service or the Mental
Health Review Tribunal are no longer accountable for their care and custody.
12.45 The issue of a co-ordinated service has been considered in several submissions to the Commission. In a submission to the Commission,
DOCS stated that:
Corrective Services personnel should be able to gain assistance from the Department of Community Services in the planning and implementation
of post release support for a person with an intellectual disability. Joint case management of clients with an intellectual disability
may be an option particularly where the person would be likely to seek assistance from the Department when their parole period was
12.46 The Western Australia Department of Corrective Services operates a “case management” scheme for all prisoners, which
assists prisoners plan the various stages of their sentence, including post release.
In the case of a prisoner with an intellectual disability considered dangerous, it was stated that the case manager would usually
be the Authority for Intellectually Handicapped Persons, and the sentence plan developed would include elements of a behaviour management
program designed to address or curtail the offending behaviour. Where the offender is willing to comply, supervision and management
in a residential facility may arise as a post release option. The Western Australian Department also stated in its submission that
it is considering the development of a system of service brokerage for prisoners with an intellectual disability, to assist the process
of prisoner reintegration. The service broker’s role usually would begin upon the prisoner’s release, and would involve
establishing appropriate community support networks, acting as the link between those services and the prisoner, and working with
the prisoner’s Community Corrections Officer if release was by way of parole. There may be a need in some cases for the service
broker and case manager to work together at both the pre and post release stages, to ensure that the development and execution of
programs at both stages are complimentary and appropriate.
12.47 One model of service integration is the Special Offenders Services program operating in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, USA (“the
Lancaster program”), the goal of which is to:
enable offenders with mental retardation to successfully complete probation or parole. This is accomplished by providing teaching,
training, services, and counseling in a habilitation plan specifically designed to meet the needs of each offender. The habits, routines,
and mores learned in this setting ... apply to all areas of their lives, helping them to successfully participate in society, and
not just to probation and parole.
The Lancaster program deals only with probationers/parolees with an intellectual disability. Participation in individualised programs
is a condition of release on parole, and so is compulsory. A failure to participate amounts to a breach of probation/parole regulations.
A prisoner in breach of the program is returned to prison before being brought before the original sentencing judge, who determines
whether detention will continue. This process usually is enough to modify prisoners’ behaviour, and so the co-operation of
the courts is necessary in order for the program to be successful.
The philosophy of the Lancaster program is to build individualised programs based upon services towards which the client has shown
interest, such as vocational training. Because many people with an intellectual disability breach probation/parole conditions because
they have not been given the opportunity to learn either what constitutes unacceptable behaviour, or the consequences that society
attaches to that behaviour, the Lancaster program reinforces the link between behaviour and consequences. This applies also to positive
consequences arising from success within the individual’s programs, so that skills are learned and self-esteem increased. Because
staff are knowledgable about available services, referrals have a high success rate.
A juvenile unit was added in 1985.
12.48 For nine years the Lancaster program maintained a recidivism rate of 5% compared to the national USA rate of 60%. This success
is said to flow from:
the adoption of a “joint systems” approach: that is, combining intellectual disability and probation/parole services in
one department, so that the best of both services is provided;
a restricted caseload;
the consistency and intensity of service provision. Clients are seen on a regular basis (at the initial stage, daily), crisis situations
are dealt with immediately, and individual programs are designed to ensure client success which can be built upon; and
the focus is on making clients responsible and accountable for their behaviour, backed by, if necessary, the sanction of the courts.
12.49 There is a strong argument for the adoption of an inter-departmental program similar to the Lancaster program in New South Wales,
which would apply to prisoners released from custody in addition to those on non-custodial sentences. However, before such a program
could be established in New South Wales, several issues would have to be resolved:
any program would have to be sufficiently resourced to implement the special programs and services required for individual clients,
and to provide sufficient staff to maintain high levels of supervision;
community-based residential accommodation would have to be in place to provide further supervision where necessary;
staff for the program would have to be drawn from DOCS and the Probation Service, with staff trained in the areas of assessing and
designing programs, and implementing behavioural modification programs;
the program would have to have communication and interaction with criminal justice agencies, other government agencies such as the
Department of Education, the Department of Housing, and mental health services (for clients with a dual diagnosis), and voluntary
agencies offering services;
the program must be run according to legislative guidelines, to ensure that programs are court sanctioned, and determinate in their
length and effect.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
That a pilot service co-ordination scheme, based upon the Special Offenders Service, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, USA, be established
jointly by the New South Wales Department of Community Services and the NSW Probation Service, with staff drawn from both organisations,
and that appropriate community-based accommodation be established to provide for those participants in the program who do not have
adequate accommodation or community ties to facilitate their participation in the program.
Negotiated agreements
12.50 A further alternative is that suggested by the Victorian Parliament’s Social Development Committee, which rejected the
use of preventive detention and recommended instead pre-release programs and intensively supervised parole defined by a negotiated
agreement, extending in some instances beyond the time-frame of the sentence, to enable the person to live with support within the
A negotiated agreement would be a voluntary contract between the government and an individual offender, negotiated according to
statutory provisions. The contract would include reference to: the mechanism of negotiation (in relation to both the formation and
any subsequent amendment of the agreement); rehabilitation and re-entry into the community; and arrangements as to accommodation,
education, training, employment, support programs, and health. Criminal sanctions for a breach of the agreement also would be negotiated
and form part of the agreement. Sanctions may involve the imposition of an additional term of imprisonment up to an agreed maximum
or a return to the court to re-negotiate the agreement.
The parole and agreement conditions envisaged by the Social Development Committee generally were very restrictive, in order to ensure
protection of the community.
12.51 Although the recommendations of the Social Development Committee were aimed primarily at persons with severe personality disorder,
offenders with an intellectual disability may benefit from the use of negotiated agreements suitably structured to reflect their
different needs and possible difficulties in negotiating and abiding by the necessarily complex agreement. Negotiated agreements
could operate within, and may actually enhance, a co-ordinated services scheme such as the Lancaster program discussed above. Although
the Lancaster program and negotiated agreement schemes are enforceable by criminal sanction, the combination of the two may facilitate
offender compliance, by allowing the offender some input into the program with which he or she is to comply.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
That the proposed pilot service co-ordination scheme include, in appropriate circumstances, a negotiated agreements option, so that
offenders with an intellectual disability may have some input into the structure and sanctions of their individual programs. This
option should provide safeguards to ensure that the person’s disability and unequal bargaining position are not exploited.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. See, for example: J Floud and W Young
Dangerousness and Criminal Justice
(Cambridge Studies in Criminology XLVII, Heinemann, London, 1981) discussed and summarised in J Floud “Dangerousness and criminal
justice” (1982) 22
British Journal of Criminology
213 and T Honderich “On justifying protective punishment” (1982) 22
British Journal of Criminology
268; M Craft and A Craft (eds)
Mentally Abnormal Offenders
(Bailliere Tindall, London, 1984); H Prins
Dangerous Behaviour, the Law, and Mental Disorder
(Tavistock, London, 1986); S Gerull and W Lucas (eds)
Serious Violent Offenders: Sentencing, Psychiatry and Law Reform
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Conference Proceedings 19, Canberra, 1993); P Shea
Psychiatry in Court
(Institute of Criminology Monograph Series 3, Sydney, 1993) ch 9-11. See also the four reports of the Victorian Parliament’s
Social Development Committee:
Inquiry into Mental Disturbance and Community Safety.
. D Greig “The politics of dangerousness” in Gerull and Lucas 47 at 50.
. Prins at 87.
. Lucas “Review for release: the use and misuse of psychiatric opinion” in Gerull and Lucas 223 at 224. See also Shea
. W Glaser “Assessing the dangerousness and treatability of sex offenders in the community” in Gerull and Lucas 245 at
. J Van Groningen “Dangerousness and preventive detention” (July 1991)
Australian Crime Prevention Council
. Lucas at 235-241.
. Prins at 87-88.
. See, for example: Submission by Dr W Glaser to the Victorian Parliament’s Social Development Committee
Inquiry into Mental Disturbance and Community Safety
(“VSDC”) (2nd Report, Government Printer, Melbourne, March 1992) at 212. Other literature has stated:
• Serious crimes by people with an intellectual disability against the person usually arise not from greater aggressiveness,
but a reduced ability to inhibit the expression of aggressive impulses and/or an ignorance of right and wrong due to reduced social
skills: S C Hayes “Mental retardation: Criminal justice?” (1982) 7
Legal Service Bulletin
168 at 169; E S Rockoff and R J Hofmann “The normal and retarded offender: some characteristic distinctions” (1972) 21
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology
52-56, cited in S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 45-46.
• Violence may result from an escalation of events initiated by harmless but socially inappropriate behaviour: Prins at 112-113.
Violence may also result from boredom, inappropriate responses learned within institutional environments, or a “backlog”
of behavioural problems caused by prior inadequate assessment and treatment: VSDC (4th Report, August 1992) at 126-128.
Most sexual offences are due to a low functional age (the person may have the interpersonal skills of a much younger person): cite
It has also been stated that “[t]hey may have normal libido but less self-control”: VSDC (4th Report, August 1992)
at 120. Lack of self-control may arise from difficulties in acquiring interpersonal skills and/or coping with the demands of society,
for example, pornography is a major source of distorted perceptions about human relationships and sexuality in offenders with an
intellectual disability: submission by Dr W Glaser to VSDC (2nd Report, March 1992) at 215.
10. Hayes and Craddock at 43.
. M B Santamour “A functional discussion of mental retardation and criminal behavior” in M B Santamour and P S Watson
The Retarded Offender
(Praeger, New York, 1982) 133 at 133-134.
. For instance a variety of results have been found in relation to the incidence of sex offences by prisoners with an intellectual
disability: for example a New South Wales study found that there was no significant difference between the percentage of maximum
security prisoners with an intellectual disability (3.7%) who had been convicted of sex offences and the non-disabled prison population
(4%): S C Hayes and D McIlwain
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the New South Wales Prison Population - An Empirical Study
(1988). However, a West Australian study found that the percentage of prisoners with an intellectual disability (50%) or a borderline
intellectual disability (30.8%) incarcerated for sex offences was higher than for non-disabled prisoners (15.4%). The prison census
found a level of 9.6% for sexual offences: G P Jones and J Coombes
The Prevalence of Intellectual Deficit Among the Western Australian Prisoner Population
(Department of Corrective Services, Western Australia, 1990) at 21-22.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper 8, 1992) at para 6.18-6.26.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(8 January 1992) at 3.
Veen v R (No 1)
[1979] HCA 7
(1978) 143 CLR 458
Veen v R (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR 465.
Veen v R (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR 465
Veen v R (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR 465
Habitual Criminals Act
Habitual Criminals Act
Note that the sentences are to be served concurrently:
R v Roberts
(1961) 78 WN (NSW) 329.
Habitual Criminals Act
. P Svensson “The case for due process in reviewable sentences” in Gerull and Lucas 115 at 122.
creates a new offence with a maximum penalty of 10 years, if an offender with a previous conviction is then convicted of any offence
specified in
(“Being armed, etc, with intent to commit offence”).
(NSW) s 443 provides for an additional period of imprisonment when a person has been previously convicted of an offence. It has
been held that this section only applies if the judge believes the maximum punishment available for the present offence is insufficient
in the circumstances:
[1933] 50 WN 57.
Sentencing Review 1994
(Issues Paper, Attorney General’s Department, New South Wales, June 1994).
. Brown at 12.
. The Hon J Hannaford MLC “Address on the Launch of the Law and Order Policy Statement” (22 June 1994). See also M Coultan
“Fahey promises 500 extra police”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(23 June 1994) at 2.
Criminal Code Act
1924 (Tas) s 392.
Criminal Code Act
1924 (Tas) s 392(1A).
Criminal Code Act
1983 (NT) s 398.
Criminal Code Act
1983 (NT) s 397.
Criminal Code Act
1983 (NT) s 401.
Criminal Code Act
1983 (NT) s 399, 403.
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act
(this must be determined by psychiatric assessment).
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act
Community Protection Act
Community Protection Act
Community Protection Act
(Vic) s 15.
Community Protection Act
(Vic) s 14.
Community Protection Act
(Vic) s 12.
Sentencing (Amendment) Act
(Vic). A new Subdivision “Indefinite Sentences”, s 18A-18Q, was inserted.
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
Penalties and Sentences Act
“violent offence” is defined as: (a) an indictable offence that involves the use or attempted use of violence against
a person and for which the offender may be sentenced to imprisonment for life; or (b) an offence against specified sections of the
Criminal Code, some of which may render the offender liable to a life sentence. This Act repealed the habitual criminal provisions
Criminal Code
1899 (Qld), except in relation to people already detained under the previous legislation.
Penalties and Sentences Act
Section 163(4)
sets out the factors which the court must consider in assessing whether an offender is a serious danger to the community, but these
are not exhaustive criteria.
Section 169
places the onus of satisfying the Court onto the prosecution.
Penalties and Sentences Act
Penalties and Sentences Act
Penalties and Sentences Act
Criminal Code Act
1913 (WA) s 661.
Criminal Code Act
1913 (WA) s 662. See
Chester v R
[1988] HCA 62
(1988) 165 CLR 611
for consideration of this provision by the High Court.
Crime (Serious and Repeat Offenders) Act
1992 (WA) s 6. (Subject to particular exclusions:
Criminal Procedure Amendment Act
1993 (WA) s 17.)
Crime (Serious and Repeat Offenders) Act
1992 (WA) s 8, subject to s 19.
Crime (Serious and Repeat Offenders) Act
1992 (WA) s 4.
. The Act was to expire on 6 March 1994, but was extended to 6 June 1994, and amended, by the
Criminal Procedure Amendment Act
1993 (WA) Part 4. The Act is to expire when s 124 of the
Young Offenders Bill
1994 (WA), which is currently before the Western Australian Parliament, commences operation.
Just Deserts for the Mad
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1982) at 195-196.
. G Zdenkowski “Crimes of punishment”
The Bulletin
(1 June 1993) at 24.
. See for example Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 6.
. L Porter “Indefinite jail would hurt victims too: criminologist”
The Sunday Age
(28 March 1993) at 5, reporting comments by Professor A Freiberg, referring to the proposed Victorian legislation.
. Potas at 209.
. Potas at 196.
. Floud (1982) at 218.
. D Thomson, A Birgden and M Morison “The release of serious violent offenders and community safety” in Gerull and Lucas
255 at 259.
. Thomson, Birgden and Morison at 260.
. Lucas at 241.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 4.
. Queensland. Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
(18 August 1992) at 6.
. Potas at 210 [footnote references omitted].
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Act
. Consultation with representatives of the NSW Probation Service, the Department of Corrective Services and the Aboriginal Legal Service
on 2 March 1994.
Sentencing Act
, Division 2.
Sentencing Act
Sentencing Regulation
1989 (NSW) r 8(1).
Sentencing Regulation
1989 (NSW) r 8(2), 8(3), 8(4).
Sentencing Regulation
1989 (NSW) Schedule 1.
. Potas at 184.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(Interim Report 15, 1980) at paras 342-350.
. Potas at 185-186.
. S C Hayes “What corrections should offer the intellectually disabled offender - an idealistic view” in D Challinger
Intellectually Disabled Offenders
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Seminar Proceedings 19, Canberra, 1987) 85 at 89 [footnote reference omitted].
. Consultation with representatives of the DPP, Police Prosecutors, Legal Aid Commission, Law Society of NSW, Public Defenders, Aboriginal
Legal Service and the Judicial Commission on 1 March 1994; and consultation with solicitors from the Legal Aid Commission of NSW
on 17 March 1994.
Sentencing Act
R v Oehlers
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 6 May 1994, Blanch J, L047/1990.
. Mr R Hogan, Director, Parole Service, Department of Corrective Services (New South Wales)
Oral Submission
(2 March 1994).
Sentencing Regulation
1989 (NSW) reg 8(5).
. Mr R Hogan, Director, Parole Service, Department of Corrective Services (New South Wales)
Oral Submission
(2 March 1994).
. Mr R Hogan, Director, Parole Service, Department of Corrective Services (New South Wales)
(22 June 1994), attaching a case study showing the difficulties obtaining post release accommodation.
. S C Hayes “Services for offenders: Mentally disabled prisoners - planning resources” (1991) 5 (2)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
32 at 34-35.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 10.
. Western Australia. Department of Corrective Services
(19 November 1991) at 4.
. New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of Community Services], Ageing & Disability Services
(21 January 1992) at 2.
. C McShee, Francis House, Epistle Post Release Service “New video for intellectually disabled ex-offenders” (1992) 4
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 5-6.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 5.
. C D Walters “The probation experience for adult retarded offenders” in Santamour and Watson 371-386.
. E F Reed “Legal rights of mentally retarded offenders: Hospice and habilitation”
Criminal Law Bulletin
at 440-441.
. Reed at 433-436.
. Australia. Attorney-General’s Department, Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 5.
. See for example: Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 4-5; Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 5; New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
(14 November 1991) at 2; New South Wales. Office of the Public Guardian
(26 August 1992) at 2; consultation with representatives of the NSW Probation Service, the Department of Corrective Services and
the Aboriginal Legal Service on 2 March 1994; and Epistle Post Release Service
(26 August 1992) at 1.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 5.
. New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of Community Services], Office on Disability
(26 November 1991) at 2.
. H R Wood and D L White “A model for habilitation and prevention for offenders with mental retardation: The Lancaster County
(PA) Office of Special Offenders Service” in R W Conley, R Luckasson and G N Bouthilet (eds)
The Criminal Justice System and Mental Retardation: Defendants and Victims
(Paul Brookes Publishing Co, Baltimore, 1992) 153 at 155. See also Reed at 437-439.
. Hayes (1991) 32 at 34.
. New South Wales. Department of Community Services, Ageing & Disability Services
(2 September 1992) at 2.
. Western Australia. Department of Corrective Services
(19 November 1991) at 6-7.
. Wood and White at 155.
. Wood and White at 156.
. Wood and White at 156.
. Wood and White at 162-163.
. S C Hayes
Reducing Recidivism amongst Offenders with an Intellectual Disability
(unpublished report, 1994) at 17-18.
. VSDC (Interim Report, 1990) at 88-90.
. VSDC (Interim Report, 1990) at 91-94 for example of a negotiated agreement.
. See also Hayes (1991) at 36-37.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
13. Services and Co-ordination
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
13.1 The previous 12 chapters have considered a variety of issues which affect people with an intellectual disability throughout the
criminal justice system. It is important not to overlook the need to consider the criminal justice process, and the needs of the
people involved in it, as a whole, rather than as discrete parts, each requiring separate reforms. Many of the same difficulties
arise for the person with an intellectual disability at each stage of the process and it is therefore important to consider these
issues in general terms. This chapter identifies common themes and concerns raised in this Paper. These include:
the “double disadvantage” faced by some people with an intellectual disability, for example, by juveniles and Aborigines
with an intellectual disability, and the lack of information and specialist services for such groups;
difficulties involved in the identification and assessment of a person’s disability;
the need for continuity, support and case management as the person with an intellectual disability progresses through the criminal
justice system;
the need for co-ordination between government departments; and
the general lack of services and sentencing options.
SOME GENERAL PROBLEMS
People with a “double disadvantage”
13.2 Apart from people with an intellectual disability, there are a number of groups of people traditionally considered “vulnerable”
in our criminal justice system. These include juveniles,
Aborigines, people with a mental illness or physical disability and people from a non English-speaking background. Special rules
and procedures already exist for most of these groups to ensure that they are treated fairly. A person from one of these groups may
have an intellectual disability and be “doubly disadvantaged”
in the criminal justice system. This chapter will raise some additional problems faced by these “doubly disadvantaged”
groups. The Commission seeks further submissions about whether additional reforms are required for any of these groups, and about
whether any of the proposals in the previous 12 chapters would have an unfair impact on any particular group.
13.3 Many of the areas under consideration in this Discussion Paper, such as difficulties in identification and communication, the
need for training of service personnel, the understanding of court procedures and the appropriateness of diversion, will apply to
both adults and juveniles with intellectual disabilities in the criminal justice system. As for adults with an intellectual disability
in prison, there are concerns about the appropriateness of juvenile detention centres for juveniles with an intellectual disability
and about the lack of specialised support services in these centres.
There are, however, distinct issues which arise for juveniles. The juvenile justice system generally aims to provide diversionary
and community-based services to juveniles, rather than incarcerating them in detention centres,
owing to such concerns as the vulnerability of juveniles in custody and the desirability of maintaining community links. Such concerns
must apply with greater force to juveniles with an intellectual disability. It has been suggested that if a juvenile with an intellectual
disability becomes involved in the criminal justice system, he or she is more likely to progress into the adult criminal justice
This reflects general statistics that a high percentage of adult offenders have spent time in detention as children.
13.4 Another matter raised with the Commission is the young people who seem to fall between the gaps of youth services and disability
services and who are at risk, both as likely offenders and victims. We have been told of the victimisation of juveniles with an intellectual
disability in refuges and detention centres,
and of the mimicking by these juveniles of the behaviour of other juvenile offenders without understanding of the consequences of
their actions. Examples have been provided of a person with an intellectual disability, in seeking acceptance from a group of “normal”
people, being used as a lookout or “fall guy” and taking a larger share of blame than is appropriate.
According to Hayes and Craddock, a study of juvenile offenders with intellectual disabilities found that they:
when compared with non-disabled delinquent peers were found to have lower self-images, were more concerned about ease and comfort
than about opportunity to learn, looked to the peer group for approval, were less likely to feel in control of their lives, were
more disruptive and more frequently disciplined, exhibited inadequate attentional skills, became easily flustered and confused, were
behind in academic achievement, had a history of progressive failure and alienation within the school system, had rarely been taught
in special education classes despite strong indications of the need for this, and had a high degree of cultural deprivation at home.
The study concluded that a vast number of intellectually disabled young people who would otherwise become inmates in juvenile correctional
establishments could avoid this fate if they acquired sufficient skills to meet the complexities of daily living.
13.5 A recent Brisbane study provided an insight into the difficulties faced by young people with a mild intellectual disability considered
“at risk” of homelessness, contact with the criminal justice system or inappropriate involvement with the psychiatric
The study referred to the vulnerability of this group (estimated at including approximately 150 to 200 young people) and the lack
of appropriate services available, particularly in the area of accommodation. Not only were this group likely to have had contact
with the police and to have been charged with an offence, but they were also often victimised and exploited, both financially and
sexually, including by their peers. They were a particularly mobile group with a history of contact with a variety of agencies and
services. Many service providers commented that no one department or service was seen as having a coordinating role in the provision
of services to this group.
13.6 There have been a number of major reviews and initiatives affecting the juvenile justice system as a whole: the New South Wales
Department of Family and Community Services
Report from the Working Party on Services to Young Persons with Intellectual Disabilities in the Juvenile Justice System
(1988); the Youth Justice Coalition (NSW)
Kids in Justice: A Blueprint for the 90s
(1990); the New South Wales Legislative Council’s Standing Committee on Social Issues
Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
(Report, 1992), and the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council of New South Wales
Future Directions for Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
(Green Paper, 1993). These reviews culminated in the release, on 15 August 1994, of the New South Wales Government White Paper
Breaking the Crime Cycle: New Directions for Juvenile Justice in New South Wales.
In this Discussion Paper it is only possible to refer to the recommendations of these reviews in brief, though all of them contained
recommendations likely to be of assistance to juveniles with an intellectual disability.
13.7 The 1988 Working Party Report criticised the lack of adequate identification and assessment procedures, insufficient staff training
and resources, lack of co-ordination of services between the Departments of Corrective Services and Community Services, and contained
33 recommendations for change. Many of these recommendations are still under consideration by the Department of Juvenile Justice.
The Standing Committee Report did not deal in any detail with the particular needs and issues faced by juveniles with an intellectual
disability, though the Committee visited a number of juvenile detention centres, and commented on the “high incidence of learning
difficulties”.
The Committee referred to the lack of information provided to it in this area and the need for further consideration.
13.8 The Green Paper also contained little detailed consideration of the particular problems faced by juveniles with an intellectual
disability, though the Paper recognised that “[y]oung people with disability tend to be a highly disadvantaged group within
a juvenile justice setting. Many have also been exposed to previous negative experiences within wardship.”
The Green Paper commented:
Greater information is needed on the number of juveniles in custody who are disabled. More comprehensive procedures for the identification
of such juveniles are required, when received into a Juvenile Justice Centre or in the Juvenile Justice Community Services. Staff
training should be adequate for ensuring staff have the skills to make this identification both amongst generalist and specialist
The Green Paper therefore made a number of specific recommendations in the areas of services, identification and staff training.
The White Paper outlined a range of reforms to the juvenile justice system, including greater co-ordination between government and
other agencies, alternatives to the sentencing and detention of young people, and the use of community youth conferencing. The White
Paper stated that young people with disabilities should have access to a range of educational and other services and sentencing options,
including, where necessary, specialised services and programs. Little further detail was provided in that document, however, and
it is impossible at this stage to assess the likely impact of the White Paper on juveniles with an intellectual disability. The Commission’s
earlier comments on the need for training of criminal justice personnel apply equally to all those involved in the juvenile justice
system. The issues of identification and specialist services are discussed further below.
13.9 The over-representation of, and the discrimination and difficulties faced by, Aborigines within the criminal justice system have
been extensively documented, in particular by the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody.
The Royal Commission did not, however, address the issue of Aborigines with an intellectual disability, though it did include consideration
of the need for health and related services, including mental health services.
In the Issues Paper the Commission referred to a study suggesting that there is also an over-representation of Aboriginal prisoners
with an intellectual disability in New South Wales prisons.
There were, however, a number of factors in this particular study (recognised by the authors) which may have affected this finding,
such as the inclusion of Broken Hill Gaol, which has a high Aboriginal population, and the possible cultural bias in the screening
In response to that study the Department of Corrective Services noted that this over-representation “has not been substantiated
by large numbers of referrals of Aboriginal inmates to the special units for intellectually disabled inmates.”
The principal author of the study, while supporting the need for further research into the prevalence of intellectual disability
amongst the Aboriginal inmate population so that their special needs may be more suitably addressed, suggested a number of reasons
why Aboriginal inmates may not be represented in large numbers in the special units:
One is that the presence of intellectual disability amongst the Aboriginal inmate population may not be being recognised, because
of the general deficits in communication amongst the members of that sub-group. Secondly, the Aboriginal prisoner information support
network in the gaols is extremely strong, and many Aboriginal intellectually disabled prisoners may be assisted and protected by
others, and therefore not come to the notice of officers. Thirdly, a number of Aboriginal prisoners are accommodated in country correctional
facilities where the system of management is more like the special units in any case.
13.10 A recent Western Australian study also found a high proportion of Aboriginal prisoners with intellectual deficits.
That study therefore recommended (Recommendations 8-10) that:
education and personal development programs available for Aboriginal prisoners should be reviewed to ensure that they meet the needs
of Aboriginal prisoners with intellectual deficits;
peer group input should be used for developing appropriate screening procedures for Aboriginal prisoners with intellectual deficits;
a role for Aboriginal organisations should be considered in post release plans for Aboriginal prisoners with intellectual deficits.
13.11 Though few submissions were received on this issue, the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service supported
further inquiry into the needs of Aborigines including the difficulties caused by geographical isolation and the access to services.
Difficulties in providing correctional and “respite” services to Aborigines who live in remote locations were referred
to in the submission of the South Australian Department of Correctional Services, together with comments about the advantages of
Aboriginal Liaison Officers.
The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability was also concerned that Aborigines with intellectual disability were under-represented
in the receipt of specialist services and suggested that intellectual disability may not be as readily identifiable:
when many of the “flags” for such identification may occur in the Aboriginal population due to other factors, eg difficulty
in reading, writing, and/or understanding complex language due to poor educational background; different body language and gestures
due to culture rather than an individual’s slower ability for social adaptation.
The need for culturally appropriate psychological testing to determine the extent of the problem was referred to in several submissions
and consultations.
13.12 The Commission is unaware of any other research about the particular difficulties faced by Aborigines with an intellectual disability,
though their additional disadvantage appears to be generally recognised. Further research into the number of Aborigines with an intellectual
disability in the Local Courts is currently being undertaken by Associate Professor Susan Hayes. The Commission has invited representatives
of the Aboriginal Legal Service to its consultations, who have referred to such issues as the need for appropriate specialist services,
but the Commission believes it needs further information before making proposals in this area. The Commission invites submissions
from Aboriginal groups and believes that further consultations with such groups, as suggested in several submissions, would be appropriate.
Mental illness
13.13 By its Terms of Reference the Commission was asked to consider whether any recommendations should be made for people with a
mental illness, where the law and practice relating to people with an intellectual disability is relevant to the treatment of mental
illness in the criminal justice system. The Commission does not believe that it is within the scope of this inquiry to consider the
fitness to be tried and the criminal defence of not guilty on the ground of mental illness, will be relevant to some people with
a mental illness, but the Commission does not propose to raise issues which are solely applicable to such people. The issue of the
rights of people with a mental illness, including in the criminal justice system, has been recently considered in detail by the Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission’s
Report of the National Inquiry into the Human Rights of People with a Mental Illness
(the “Burdekin Report”).
“Dual diagnosis”.
One area where overlap issues do arise is the treatment of a person with a “dual diagnosis”, that is a person with both
an intellectual disability and a mental illness. Such people may find themselves in the invidious position of falling between services
designed for either group. Their difficulties were considered in the Burdekin Report, which referred to the lack of services, research
and expertise in this area, despite the fact that people with an intellectual disability were more likely than the non-disabled to
experience mental illness, and to the inappropriateness of existing psychiatric services.
That Report referred to the negative effects of the “compartmentalisation” of the two conditions, particularly in terms
of ongoing service provision, and the dangers of inappropriate use of medication.
13.15 The Commission sought further information and submissions about the position of people with an intellectual disability who also
suffer from a mental illness within the criminal justice system. Few submissions were received in this area, though difficulties
referred to included: the general lack of support by mental health and intellectual disability services, leading to a greater chance
of such people coming into contact with the criminal justice system as either an offender or a victim;
the lack of services once the person comes into contact with the criminal justice system;
the inappropriate use of medication, the lack of psychiatric training in the area of intellectual disability and the fact that people
were seen as having either an intellectual disability or a mental illness so that those with both diagnoses were poorly treated.
In the absence of detailed information in this area the Commission suggests that further research be undertaken. It also proposes
that any training for criminal justice personnel (see Chapters 3 and 11) and any new procedures introduced also include reference
to the possibility that a person with an intellectual disability may also have a mental illness (and vice versa). It also suggests
that specialist services for people with a dual diagnosis should be developed through consultation between the Department of Health
and the Department of Community Services. The Commission understands that there are already protocols in this area.
Identification and assessment
13.16 Apart from the particular difficulties faced by people with an intellectual disability with some additional disadvantage or
vulnerability, there are also issues which are likely to affect
people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system. The remainder of this chapter will focus on those issues and
some possible solutions. One general issue is the identification of the person’s intellectual disability. The lack of recognition
of a person’s disability, whether by the police, the courts or in prison, can lead to many of the injustices discussed in this
Paper. It has been commented that the assessment of people with an intellectual disability coming before the courts appears to be
poor, with neither lawyers, nor in some cases psychiatrists, realising that the person may have an intellectual disability.
It is also clear from the discussion in Chapter 11 that prison assessments are not identifying intellectual disability sufficiently.
Submissions and consultations have referred to the lack of assessment services at all stages of the criminal justice process, and
to the cost and delays involved. The solution, however, is not necessarily a simple one. A variety of necessary assessment services
have referred to, for example:
assessment over varying periods of time [is needed] - depending upon the multiplicity and complexity of the individual’s challenging
behaviours. Multiple
assessments by experts are hardly likely to provide the information needed to identify effective interventions for complex problem
behaviours. Such an intensive and extensive assessment and training service requires an on-site multi-disciplinary team.
Additionally, some people with an intellectual disability have experienced a lifetime of (sometimes inappropriate) testing, or may
seek to hide their disability because of experiences of discrimination, and are unwilling to be assessed by a psychologist (see paras
3.26-3.28). In any event, for a person to be referred for assessment, the
possibility
of an intellectual disability must be first identified, which often does not occur.
As discussed for adults, identification of intellectual disability is a major difficulty, particularly for juveniles in the borderline
range. The disability may be masked by, or wrongly attributed to, learning disabilities, low levels of literacy, cultural factors
or behavioural difficulties. Possibilities for assessment occur when a Background Report (similar to a Pre-sentence Report) is prepared
for a court matter. Assessment can also occur in detention centres. Following the release of the Commission’s Research Report
revealing an over-representation of people appearing before Local Courts, the Department of Juvenile Justice surveyed the last 625
juveniles who entered Juvenile Justice Centres on committal orders. This preliminary study found 3.4% in the mild intellectual disability
range, and 15% in the borderline range.
This study did not assess adaptive and social skills, which, for some people in the borderline range, may be severe enough to bring
the person into the category of mild intellectual disability based on the dual test for intellectual disability.
13.18 According to the Department, all juveniles entering detention centres receive some assessment as part of the general admissions
procedures and the legislative requirements in relation to the treatment of detainees.
The detention centres have places for 450 juveniles (120 remandees and 330 under control orders).
The Department pointed out, however, that they do not have a legislative mandate to assess juveniles on remand. On arrival juveniles
are initially assessed for any need for urgent attention, for example, whether the juvenile is a suicide risk or is likely to require
protection from other inmates. Within a week after arrival the Centre’s nurse, psychologist and drug and alcohol counsellor
prepare reports on the juvenile and a multi-disciplinary case plan is prepared, which is regularly reviewed. Psychometric testing
is not necessarily carried out on the juveniles.
One submission commented on the need for a standardised screening/identification procedure for intellectual disability as a “safety
net” to prevent juveniles with an intellectual disability without either observable characteristics or an accompanying pre-existing
report from being overlooked. It also noted that the:
effectiveness of a subject assessment or diagnosis on whether or not a person has an intellectual disability has to be questioned.
An individual’s presentation at intake interview or other contact is not indicative of functional ability or extent of intellectual
capability in comprehending the Criminal Justice System and its procedures etc ...
13.19 The Department of Juvenile Justice has commented in relation to psychological services: “current staffing levels prohibited
a fuller service provision of this type. Notwithstanding this every effort is made to formulate an individually tailored case plan”.
As at March 1994,
the Department had 12 psychological positions, all but one of which were filled, at the nine detention centres (three positions are
based at Mt Penang, the largest centre). Obviously there are likely to be a range of difficulties experienced by juveniles in detention
centres (apart from intellectual disability) for which psychological assistance is required. Less psychological input is available
in the services provided by the Department in the community, for example community workers (Juvenile Justice Officers) prepare court
reports and may need psychological assistance. Such workers may not necessarily have the training to identify a juvenile’s
intellectual disability.
Children can, however, be referred to psychologists practising in the community, but this is costly and still requires the worker
to identify the
possibility
that the person may have an intellectual disability.
Continuity and support
13.20 Another issue referred to throughout this Paper is the lack of continuity, not just in legal representation (see paras 3.31-3.32)
but in the provision of support and in the consideration of the needs of the person on a continuing basis. Many people with an intellectual
disability do not have family members who can provide support as they face the criminal justice system, nor are they necessarily
already clients of the Department of Community Services (“DOCS”). They are therefore at a particular disadvantage in
the criminal justice system, as services are often provided in a sporadic and crisis-based manner, rather than in a co-ordinated
and pro-active way.
It has therefore been argued that support persons are needed in interviews with police and lawyers, and that case managers may also
be required. (See Proposals 22-26 and 42-44 of the Policing Issues Discussion Paper, Proposals 7 and 8 of this Paper, and para 13.40
Policy and co-ordination
13.21 Another issue which has arisen throughout this reference, and which was discussed in the Policing Issues Discussion Paper (Chapter
5), is the lack of co-ordination between government departments. The issues facing people with an intellectual disability in (or
at risk of being involved in) the criminal justice system are likely to lead to the involvement of a number of government departments
and agencies, including School Education, Health, Community Services, Police, Courts Administration (including the NSW Probation
Service), Juvenile Justice, Corrective Services, Attorney General’s and the Judiciary/Magistracy. There appears to be little
co-ordination between such agencies to meet the needs of people with an intellectual disability, and little communication to remedy
this fact. There is currently general uncertainty about who, or which department, is the appropriate contact, provider of services
or source of information. This confusion is caused by the absence of policies in many departments about intellectual disability issues.
Such problems are not limited to New South Wales, for example in the United States the lack of co-operation among community agencies
was seen as “a persistent problem”:
Mental retardation, vocational rehabilitation, and criminal justice agencies do not understand each other’s perspective, nor
do they want to assume responsibility for clients with multiple statuses ... or diagnoses. Each views the mentally retarded offender
as the responsibility of the other, with the result that the offender “falls through the cracks” of community services,
continues to recidivate, and ends up in prison.
13.22 Additionally, at both the policy and the operational level, a major problem appears to be the absence of any formal system of
liaison and consultation between some criminal justice agencies, such as the police, and the disability community, with resulting
ignorance, and perhaps suspicion, on both sides. Where policies do exist, the community is often unaware of their content. The need
for more contact between the police and people with an intellectual disability, to assist understanding, was referred to in the Commission’s
consultations with people with an intellectual disability,
and has been discussed in the Policing Issues Discussion Paper.
Lack of co-ordination between community services and the juvenile justice system is a particular problem for juveniles with an intellectual
disability.
The Department of Juvenile Justice has commented:
As with state wards often Juvenile Justice ends up taking the lionshare of the responsibility for these clients in cases where the
Department of Community Services ought to have more of an ongoing role.
Similarly the New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability has noted “a reluctance by Community Services to “stretch”
their resources to provide assistance for a person with an disability who may be seen to be the “responsibility” of another
department.”
13.24 Concerns that children are being inappropriately dealt with by the juvenile justice system, rather than through the use of community
services, to ensure that the child obtains some assistance, have been expressed in consultations with the Commission.
For example, it has been suggested that a Magistrate will order a Background Report to ensure that the needs of the child are looked
at, which may prolong the contact of children charged with quite minor offences with the juvenile justice system. The Legal Aid Commission
of NSW has also expressed concern that juveniles on remand are usually supervised by the juvenile justice system rather than by DOCS:
it therefore suggested that legislative amendment should ensure that DOCS provides such supervisory services due to their expertise
and facilities in this area. It commented, however, that such options:
don’t always result in easy solutions for the disposition of matters involving children with an intellectual disability in that
often there are few available resources to ensure on-going supervision, protection and care for the child. [DOCS] appears to be reluctant
to become involved in criminal matters and this of course may be quite proper. However, the Office of Juvenile Justice is not able
to offer much assistance once the court proceedings are over. This is one area which should receive urgent attention.
As the Legal Aid Commission recognised, the juvenile justice system is not the most appropriate place to consider and service the
long term special needs of juveniles with intellectual disabilities. The emphasis on diversion and the short time spent by many juveniles
in detention centres (the average stay is three months)
means that treatment or other programs will necessarily be of short duration. An ongoing casework role cannot be undertaken by the
Department of Juvenile Justice for these children. There are, however, some juveniles who will spend a number of years in detention
and their needs should not be overlooked.
Lack of services
13.25 However, policies, liaison and co-operation are insufficient if there are needs for which no agency will accept responsibility.
Without the provision of necessary services inter-departmental co-operation becomes meaningless. The lack of services for people
with an intellectual disability in the community, particularly for those with some contact with the criminal justice system, has
already been discussed in detail in many previous reports, for example
The Missing Services
Submissions and consultations for this reference have also constantly referred to the lack of services and its adverse implications
for the person and often their family or carers, for example:
the lack of appropriate services providing accommodation, care and support for people with an intellectual disability is well known.
Although it is occasionally possible to find care for persons who have not committed offences, this becomes virtually impossible
for those who have offended. Whilst I do not advocate the establishment of facilities to which people can be “sentenced”,
alternative sentences such as bonds, would be more readily available if the judge or magistrate could be satisfied that the person
is receiving appropriate care.
13.26 A number of other reports have made recommendations in the area of services. For example a Community Youth Support Taskforce
was established in March 1993 and released its report in September 1993.
That report identified a main priority to be the co-ordination of government departments at the local level, through community youth
coordinating committees. Following that report a two year pilot scheme has been set up in a number of communities. Recommendations
have also been made to improve services for abused children and co-ordination between the Departments of Health, School Education
and Community Services in the New South Wales Child Protection Council’s report
Systems Abuse.
The Commission does not wish to duplicate the reports and recommendations which already exist in this area.
13.27 Of concern is the frequently made claim that offenders with an intellectual disability are being imprisoned by default, or are
remaining in prison or juvenile detention centres, even though gaol may be particularly inappropriate, because there is no other
option in the community (see paras 11.14-11.15).
For example, a representative of the Brain Injury Association commented to the Commission that she had received three calls over
a period of four weeks looking for alternative accommodation with 24 hour support as an alternative to gaol, and nothing was available.
Similar problems arise for juveniles with an intellectual disability:
Council is aware that current residential and similar support services to juveniles with intellectual disability and their families
are very limited. In some instances the young person does not attend school, and spends a large part of the day with nothing to occupy
his/her time. The family is unable to meet the needs of the individual for meaningful activity and support. The young person may
end up with a group of other children, usually younger, and may become involved in criminal activity such as break and enter, graffiti,
being a passenger in stolen cars, or shoplifting. The Department of Community Services may become involved when a pre-sentence report
is being prepared. It has been known that some disability services and professionals will not accept the juvenile into services saying
“this is delinquent behaviour rather than behaviour associated with their disability”. When approaches are made to Juvenile
Justice, the response is that most services cannot accommodate the needs of a person with intellectual disability. The person may
end up receiving a custodial sentence because of the lack of a community-based option.
The situation for juveniles therefore appears to replicate that for adults. People with intellectual disability will be sentenced
to custodial centres, not because they are necessarily deserving of such sentences, but because community-based services fail to
accommodate their needs.
Similar concerns about Magistrates being forced to jail State wards convicted of minor offences (or juveniles being refused bail)
because of lack of community services have been reported in the media.
13.28 Courts are often unwilling to imprison people with an intellectual disability but are often left with no option. It has also
been suggested that families (often elderly parents) feel obliged to provide an offender with an alternative to incarceration (by
agreeing to provide supervision), when their ability to provide adequate supervision may be limited.
Similarly, lack of services, particularly accommodation, can reduce the person’s likelihood of obtaining parole (see Chapter
12) or of being diverted from the Local Courts (see Chapter 5).
13.29 The Commission has also often been told of carers or people with an intellectual disability being referred from person to person
in government departments or other agencies seeking services. One example detailed a fruitless paper and telephone chase which ended
up “coming full circle” with the referral after many months back to the first agency contacted.
A person with an intellectual disability who does not have an energetic advocate to fill such a role may be even more disadvantaged
in the provision of services. Consultations have therefore referred to the concern that there is a distortion in service provision
in favour of those with the most vocal advocates.
13.30 The consequences of this lack of services in the community was graphically illustrated by the comments of a New South Wales
judge in relation to a person (“D”) charged with eight nuisance type offences and six charges of stealing:
The psychiatric and psychological evidence establishes beyond doubt that [D] is suffering from a severe handicap, the result of his
having both a marked intellectual handicap, apparently the result of brain damage, and from his also suffering from hyperactivity.
In combination, these two disorders leave him functioning at a psychological age of twelve or less; he is unable to plan ahead or
to foresee the consequences of his actions, particularly when he acts impulsively; and he is unable to help acting impulsively. If
therefore at any given moment he needs money or thinks he needs money for some purpose, perhaps of only ephemeral importance, he
simply takes it from wherever it is available; and as I have already said, he cannot control this impulsive conduct. Additionally,
and for the same reasons, he is frequently guilty of conduct which other people find offensive, eg exposing his person, using indecent
language in inappropriate circumstances, and the like.
Although he is only 21 years old, he has therefore accumulated a lengthy criminal record, and, unless his behaviour pattern can be
changed, he will quite plainly continue to be an utter nuisance to the community at large, and will be in and out of jail fairly
constantly for the next several years, at no doubt considerable expense to the community; his lifestyle will almost certainly become
quite degraded; and in the longer term he will probably spend the latter part of his life either in prison or as a hopeless derelict,
continuing to act in a manner which others will find offensive or worse; and all because he cannot help himself.
The evidence also establishes that imprisonment will not serve as an effective deterrent to him, because of his inability to think
ahead or foresee consequences: he is not capable of appreciating that imprisonment will or might be the consequence if he acts impulsively.
Nor will imprisonment serve any useful function in terms of rehabilitation: indeed, the complete reverse seems all too likely.
The one chance of his escaping from this appalling future,
and the one chance of the community being able to escape from this future lies in there being devised and implemented a behaviour
therapy program. The evidence establishes that such a program must be put into effect whilst he is in a custodial situation, for
there is no other way of constraining him so as to secure his effective cooperation and therefore treatment.
[emphasis added]
13.31 A magistrate later released D on bail upon the condition that a community based behavioural management program (in accordance
with the recommendations of an expert witness in the matter) be provided by the relevant government departments. No such program
existed at that time and the departments were therefore required to develop such a program. This order was overturned in a later
judgment, which held that conditions can only be imposed on D, not on any other person or organisation.
That later judgment commented, in returning the matter to the Local Court:
If all else fails, in terms of effectively providing for the implementation of an appropriate program for [D] at this stage, then
it may well be that it will be a particularly useful operation if the relevant government departments were able to take appropriate
steps so that, if as seems inevitable [D] is released in the not too distant future, and then reoffends and is then imprisoned, it
will then be possible to initiate the implementation of an appropriate program as soon as possible, and at a time when, because he
is in prison, it will be possible to take these steps.
This is, of course, not a matter for me, and the fact that it is the best solution which seems now available is of itself a powerful
comment on how society has failed to adequately protect [D], his family, and society itself.
Services needed
13.32 Submissions have referred to a large number of services required by people with all levels of intellectual disability (not just
those with a more severe level of disability) and their carers or support people. It is important to note that services do not merely
involve the provision of facilities, but also the provision of skilled intervention in people’s lives to stop the cycle of
recidivism referred to above.
A representative list of services needed includes:
education for people with an intellectual disability and their carers about the criminal justice system (see paras 3.19-3.23);
pre-offence programs: it has been stated that most people with an intellectual disability who end up in the criminal justice system
had previously given clear indications that some form of intervention or counselling was required, but that the resources did not
counselling, both for offenders and victims;
support at court (see also Chapter 7);
supervision by appropriately trained officers of people with an intellectual disability serving non-custodial sentences or on parole
(see Chapters 11 and 12);
accommodation services, both crisis and longer term with varying degrees of supervision and security.
Accommodation is particularly needed for people on bail who are itinerant or homeless or those whose current place of residence can
no longer offer them a place. The appalling conditions of some people with an intellectual disability or a mental illness who live
in private “for profit” boarding houses has been canvassed in detail elsewhere,
and it is sufficient to say that there must be a better alternative for the accommodation of people with an intellectual disability;
assessment services (see also paras 5.15 and 11.20); and
post release or re-integration programs, including residential options (see paras 12.40-12.43), as many post custodial services will
not take people with an intellectual disability or people with a mental illness.
The role of the Department of Community Services
13.33 According to the Office of the Public Guardian, referring to a number of their clients involved in the criminal justice system:
If they are not diagnosed as suffering from a mental illness and if they are not already clients of the Department of Community Services,
there are significant difficulties in getting appropriate services by way of accommodation and behaviour management programmes for
these clients.
The Department of Community Services appears not to be “geared up” to providing such services (ie to people who have a
mild developmental disability and concurrent behaviour [problems]). It is the experience of this Office that it is much easier to
advocate for services for someone who has a moderate developmental disability as opposed to someone who has a mild developmental
disability.
Often because a client is “only” mildly developmentally disabled the expectation is that they can be accommodated in “private
for profit” boarding houses. Our experience and the experience of “grass roots” Department of Community Services
workers is that such accommodation is often inappropriate because of the behavioural problems they have.
This raises the additional issue of the role of the Department of Community Services in providing services to people with an intellectual
disability who are or have been involved in the criminal justice system, particularly those with a mild or borderline level of intellectual
disability. One submission commented that these people may be placed in the Department of Corrective Services special units (discussed
in Chapter 11) but on release, are provided with no community follow-up and may therefore re-offend.
The submission continued:
DOCS, whilst having the funding, facilities and services tend to provide for the severe to moderate intellectual disability groups,
and say the others should be treated as any other person in the community (normalisation). DOCS staff are very thinly stretched,
and are not capable of providing the required service with current staffing. Consequently some of this group tend to be admitted
to psychiatric hospitals as a way of containment. It is inappropriate for intellectually handicapped or brain damaged people to be
admitted to short term Psychiatric Admissions, for long term care, mostly because they are perceived to be dangerous to others.
13.34 DOCS is clearly the government department with the most expertise in the area of intellectual disability, and has specialist
disability teams. Historically however, DOCS (and before that the Department of Health) has mainly provided residential services
to people with moderate to profound levels of disability, though predecessors of DOCS also provided services to State Wards, some
of whom had a mild level of intellectual disability. DOCS now provides services to a wide variety of clients on a statewide basis
and now has more clients with a mild level of intellectual disability living in the community.
Its responsibilities following the passing of the
Disability Services Act
(NSW) have expanded but not, according to comments made to the Commission, its resources. DOCS is currently developing its policy
on people with an intellectual disability who come into contact with the criminal justice system, but it presently provides primarily
non-residential services such as case management, assessment and counselling/therapy to these people. It also provides information
to the court about the availability of services. When a person with an intellectual disability who is a client of DOCS comes into
Support Teams. The Commission met with a Community Support Team, consisting of two psychologists and a number of case workers and
community workers. Each case worker had approximately 60 clients, each with an intellectual disability, some also with physical disabilities
or a mental illness. A limited specialist service was also available in the area for approximately 10 clients with “challenging
behaviour”. The case workers had performed such functions as attending police interviews, accompanying their clients to court
and preparing case plans to be presented at court, and the psychologists had also attended at court and undertaken counselling programs.
The team commented that the contact between their clients and the criminal justice system was a matter of increasing concern.
13.35 Where accommodation is requested this must be met within the Department’s usual service delivery system.
DOCS now only has a small number of institutions and 234 group homes which together, as at 1992, provided accommodation for approximately
3,300 people with an intellectual disability.
The Department does not provide crisis accommodation itself but there is a State/Commonwealth-funded Supported Accommodation Assistance
Programme, which funds a range of non-government community organisations to provide transitional accommodation and support services
for homeless people in crisis.
13.36 The Commission has been provided with examples of people with an intellectual disability involved (or at risk of being involved)
in the criminal justice system who (or their carers) have sought, but not received, support of varying kinds from DOCS. According
to one submission, DOCS should have facilities/programs for people who have “offended in the past and will re-offend without
suitable intervention. Such intervention of counselling and behaviour management is a function of the Department.”
DOCS is, however, placed in a difficult position in this area, particularly in the area of secure residential facilities. Apart from
the resources issue, the philosophy of DOCS is based on the voluntary provision of services, rather than a social control role. Some
people with a mild intellectual disability may choose not to use the services provided by DOCS, for example they may simply walk
out of a group home, and DOCS states that it does not maintain any special facilities in which a person can be confined, though a
guardian in certain circumstances could authorise the detention of a person in an existing DOCS facility.
For DOCS to provide secure residential facilities and supervision would raise philosophical, structural, staffing, and funding implications,
and would need public discussion and appropriate checks and balances.
Apart from accommodation, DOCS does not provide 24 hour services, except in the areas of family crisis and child protection, and
therefore the role which can be played by a DOCS case worker is presently a limited one.
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS
13.37 It is clear that these general problems in the criminal justice system, primarily the need for services and co-ordination, can
be met in a number of, often complementary, ways. Some possible solutions to the general areas of difficulty identified above are
set out below. Each provides different results and therefore one perfect solution cannot be suggested. Many of these solutions have
already been discussed throughout the Paper, but are repeated here for convenience.
Information
13.38 One proposed solution involves setting up an information service or “hotline” about intellectual disability and
available services. In the Policing Issues Discussion Paper the Commission proposed, for example, that Police should have 24-hour
access to experts to provide advice, answer specific questions or arrange assessments. Such a service could be telephone-based and
available 24 hours a day. It could provide information and contact numbers, including where to get legal advice, assessments, the
availability of crisis accommodation etc, and could be used by people with an intellectual disability, parents and carers, the police
and the legal profession. One submission commented:
Practically all Health Areas now provide a 24 hour (usually 16 hour on duty with 8 hour on call) “Crisis Service” or “Extended
hours” service with experienced psychiatric nurses or other experienced staff. With some additional training, and access to
up to date databases, these teams could provide the 24 hour information service, rather than establishing parallel services.
13.39 Apart from information about intellectual disability, there is also a need for information about services and sentencing options
for the courts and the Probation Service. One important innovation which will be of assistance to the judiciary is the development
by the Judicial Commission of New South Wales of a “Facilities” database, as part of the Sentencing Information System.
This information will be available later this year on-line to all judges and magistrates and will include information about the availability
of sentencing facilities (custodial, non-custodial and services such as drug and alcohol facilities) in particular areas, and details
It has also been suggested that procedures be established within each agency to allow the flow of information (both internally and
externally to other government departments, private service providers and the disability community) and the co-ordination of (always
limited) resources. The Commission believes that for effective change to occur within the criminal justice system there must be an
established system of contacts for all agencies with the disability community at both the policy and the operational levels (where
there is such a division). The intellectual disability liaison officers proposed for the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
and the Legal Aid Commission of NSW (see Proposal 9) should be of assistance in this area.
Case management
3.40 As discussed in Chapter 3, some submissions have referred to the advantages of providing a designated “case manager”
for all people with an intellectual disability involved in the criminal justice system, whether clients of DOCS or not. A case manager
provides information and advice and identifies what services are necessary (and available) for the person. The form of management
provided will vary from person to person and from organisation to organisation. Case management is designed to ensure that the person’s
needs will be considered in a pro-active way and that a consistent and logical provision of services and support will be maintained.
The key element is the individualised approach and the continuity provided. Such an approach is particularly important in the criminal
justice system, which involves a wide variety of people and organisations, often with no expertise in the area of intellectual disability.
The case manager’s role should continue throughout the criminal justice system, that is, the responsibilities should not cease
simply because the person is involved with another agency, for example under the supervision of the Probation Service. It has been
suggested that the most appropriate department to provide case management services is DOCS, as that Department has the expertise
to provide such a service and it is designed to be a “whole of life” service for people with disabilities. Unlike, for
example, the Probation Service, its role does not end with the completion of a sentence. This possible solution was reflected in
Proposal 8. DOCS, however, appears to lack the resources at this stage to undertake such a role on the scale envisaged.
Guardianship
13.41 Guardianship provisions may also be used to ensure that a person with an intellectual disability has adequate support. As discussed
in Chapter 3, a guardian cannot be appointed if the checks and balances of the guardianship legislation are not met, and the appointment
of a guardian cannot assist the person to find services if none exist, but guardianship may be appropriate to assist a person to
gain access to available services. The Guardianship Board provided the following example:
Mr P was charged with sexual assault and physical assault. The alleged victim shared his supported accommodation and it was therefore
not possible for Mr P to return there. Mr P had a mild intellectual disability. Mr P’s caseworker was concerned that Mr P lacked
the capacity to instruct a solicitor and also that Mr P would be incapable of finding alternative accommodation. The Board made guardianship
orders to ensure that Mr P had consistent legal advocacy which took cognisance of his disability, to arrange accommodation on his
release; and to liaise with the Department of Corrective Services as to his safety and well-being while in custody. ...
The difference between guardianship and case management is that a guardian is a substitute decision-maker, whereas a case manager
provides a support role. Guardianship will not be necessary or appropriate for many people with a mild level of intellectual disability.
Provision of assessment, accommodation and other services
13.42 There is a need for access to experts to provide assessments and advice, whether for court proceedings or otherwise. Often such
expertise is needed at short notice and outside normal business hours, for example in police situations. Many organisations, for
example the Department of Juvenile Justice (see para 13.19), have their own “in house” psychological services, but others,
for example the NSW Probation Service, do not. In Chapter 11 the Commission proposed (Proposal 39) a pilot assessment service for
use in the courts. Many submissions also referred to the need for accommodation services, both crisis and long term. The need for
stable accommodation is particularly important for the development of appropriate non-custodial options for offenders with an intellectual
disability. It needs to be available at short notice, for example in bail situations. However, some submissions have rejected the
establishment of facilities such as bail hostels for such situations.
Concerns have been expressed about the inflexibility of facilities and the danger that they could become “dumping grounds for
people with an intellectual disability. The limitations of a facility-based approach to the needs of people with an intellectual
disability has been stressed.
Instead, what is preferred is individual-based solutions, for example using the provisions of the
Disability Services Act
(NSW) to construct a service plan for the person rather than attempting to slot the person into existing (and perhaps inappropriate)
facilities. Services should be based on a person’s need rather than because of a person’s IQ level. Another way of organising
services is a system of service brokerage whereby an amount of money is allocated for an individual and the broker can therefore
organise (and pay for) services for that person using government and non-government options.
13.43 Many submissions referred to training about intellectual disability issues as essential within the criminal justice system.
Such training needs to be available to a wide range of personnel, not just a few key officers, and the Commission has made a number
of proposals in this regard. The relevant agencies which have been discussed in this way are:
the NSW Police Service (see the Policing Issues Discussion Paper, Chapter 4, Proposals 12-14);
the legal profession, the judiciary and court staff (see Chapter 3, Proposals 2-5); and
the Department of Corrective Services and the NSW Probation Service (see Ch 11, Proposal 45).
Policy development and specialist units
13.44 It is clear from the previous 12 chapters that each of the departments or agencies involved in the criminal justice system needs
to develop a (sufficiently flexible) policy for their contact with, and services for, people with an intellectual disability. Such
a policy will affect the level of knowledge of the agency as a whole about people with an intellectual disability and should influence
training and resources priorities. Some agencies in the criminal justice system might not have a policy on intellectual disability
owing to a (mis)perception that the issue is not seen as large enough to warrant the diversion of scarce resources. However, the
generally accepted over-representation and vulnerability in the criminal justice system of people with an intellectual disability,
both as offenders and as victims, must be considered in this context. Input from the disability community, as discussed above, is
needed in this process. The most appropriate way to consider the needs of people with an intellectual disability will naturally vary
from agency to agency and the Commission has raised this issue on a case by case basis. For some agencies a specialist unit may be
appropriate, for others this would be a waste of resources better used to train all operational staff. Other agencies may prefer
to allocate current staff with the responsibility of acting as a contact and referral point for intellectual disability issues. The
relevant agencies which have been discussed in this way are:
the NSW Police Service (see the Policing Issues Discussion Paper, Chapter 5);
the legal profession and the judiciary, including the Legal Aid Commission of NSW and the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
(see Chapter 3);
the Department of Corrective Services (see Chapter 11); and
the NSW Probation Service (see Chapters 11 and 12).
Inter-department initiatives and the transfer of information
13.45 As discussed in the Policing Issues Discussion Paper, in addition to communication, practical co-operation between the criminal
justice agencies (whether government departments or otherwise) is crucial and seen as a solution to many of the difficulties in this
area. In 1993, following the release of the Commission’s Research Reports in this area, an inter-departmental committee was
set up, as an initiative of the Social Policy Directorate within the Department of Community Services.
The Social Policy Directorate and the Disability Council of New South Wales commissioned Associate Professor Susan Hayes to prepare
a consultant’s report on recidivism by people with an intellectual disability and how this may be addressed, including consideration
of inter-departmental co-operation. That report has been completed but has not yet been publicly released.
13.46 The Commission has heard constant allegations of “buck passing” in the provision of services to people with an intellectual
disability,
and examples of such people thereby suffering from lack of services. The Commission believes that the needs of people with an intellectual
disability in the criminal justice system must be tackled on an on-going basis at an inter-departmental level, including the establishment
of guidelines as to departmental responsibilities, at both the local and policy levels. Non-government agencies should also be involved
as they are a major provider of services and referrals. Though issues of client confidentiality and privacy are crucial and should
be considered in any inter-departmental protocols, there are occasions where information does need to be passed from agency to agency,
for example if a court recommends that a person be detained in a special unit in the Department of Corrective Services. There are
also issues which are best tackled on a multi-disciplinary or inter-departmental basis, for example the proposed Lancaster model
discussed in Chapter 12. Inter-departmental initiatives and co-ordination must start from a basis of agreed positions and policies
by the relevant departments. There needs to be agreement about each Department or agency’s role and responsibility and what
will trigger (and end) its involvement with the person. There needs to be somebody with the authority to bring involved departments
together to form a coordinated plan for a person - though the identity of the relevant organisation is not important.
One danger of an inter-departmental model is that, unless each department’s responsibilities are clearly defined, one department
may be left with all the responsibility - this may contribute to the hesitation by some agencies to become involved in such a process.
Criminal justice worker
13.47 Another possibility, which is currently being piloted in the Illawarra area, is the establishment of a criminal justice worker,
unattached to any particular Department, whose brief is to coordinate services for people with an intellectual disability involved
in the criminal justice system (such as the provision of a support person) and to act as a training, contact and referral point.
Such a worker would obviously be assisting a large number of people and would not be able to provide the same level of individual
assistance as a case manager. In the Illawarra pilot, the criminal justice worker has primarily been involved in training, both of
police and of support people to accompany people with an intellectual disability to police interviews and to court.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
13.48 Though all of the above solutions have their uses, the Commission believes that the problems of the lack of services and co-ordination
affecting people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system is so fundamental that many of the legislative and
administrative changes suggested in the previous 12 chapters would be rendered meaningless without the better provision of appropriate
services, including accommodation, assessment facilities and case managers. The Commission therefore suggests, that in addition to
the perhaps piecemeal proposals referred to in this Paper, including proposals about the detail of the services needed, there needs
to be a mechanism to ensure the provision of services, and the ongoing consideration of the needs of people with an intellectual
disability in the criminal justice system. The Commission proposes that an Intellectual Disability Commissioner with statutory powers
and duties should be established.
13.49 At the Federal level the position of Disability Discrimination Commissioner in the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
was established by the
Disability Discrimination Act
1993 (Cth). The Commissioner has a number of functions, including the investigation and conciliation of complaints, reporting to
the Minister about the development of disability standards and undertaking research and educational programs. In New South Wales
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act
1993 (NSW) established the Community Services Commission and a Community Services Commissioner to investigate and conciliate complaints
support to clients and service providers. Two other bodies have also been established: a Community Services Appeals Tribunal with
the power to review certain decisions involving community services and a Community Services Review Council to coordinate the agencies
providing community services and advise the Minister. The role of the Intellectual Disability Commissioner would need to be developed
in consultation with these bodies and the Office on Disability. Apart from the functions set out below, other possible functions
could include, for instance, an independent in-house assessment service. The Commissioner could also advocate on behalf of people
with an intellectual disability and advise government departments generally about intellectual disability services. The Commission
seeks submissions about other appropriate functions.
PROVISIONAL PROPOSALS FOR REFORM
48. The position of Intellectual Disability Commissioner should be established, independent of any Department, to perform the following
roles, in consultation with the disability community, government agencies and appropriate experts:
(a) identify the service needs of people with an intellectual disability involved (or at risk of being involved) in the criminal justice
system, and review these services on a regular basis;
(b) decide which government departments could best provide such services and be involved in their allocation, considering the necessity
of appropriate resources to meet those needs;
(c) once the departmental responsibilities are clearly outlined, assist in the establishment, at both the operational and the policy
levels, of formal channels of communication between the relevant criminal justice and service agencies;
(d) provide an information and referral contact point for personnel in the criminal justice system (police, lawyers, probation officers
etc), and preparing appropriate information for dissemination to the public;
(e) encourage research into this area, through the commissioning of projects and the supervision of, for example, inter-departmental
initiatives;
(f) assist (perhaps on a contract basis) in the training of criminal justice system personnel about intellectual disability; and
(g) develop and provide a list of support persons available for police interviews on a 24 hour basis.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. In New South Wales a person is considered a juvenile until the age of 18 years.
. L Gething, T Poynter and F Reynolds
Disability Awareness Package - Manual
(Community Disability and Ageing Program, University of Sydney, 1991) at 52, referring to people from a non English-speaking background.
. For example, Illawarra Disabled Persons’ Trust
(10 August 1992) at 3.
. New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice
What’s Happening in Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
(1992) at 7.
. New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services
Report from the Working Party on Services to Young Persons with Intellectual Disabilities in the Juvenile Justice System
(Department of Family and Community Services, 1988) at 9.
. New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice
What’s Happening in Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
(1993) at 7.
. For example, consultation with Ms S Allan, Community Living Programme Inc, Queensland on 14 December 1993.
. See, for example E F Reed “Legal rights of mentally retarded offenders: Hospice and habilitation”
Criminal Law Bulletin
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 284, citing F Dennis
The Retarded Juvenile Offender Research and Demonstration Project
(Tennessee Department of Correction, 1971).
. A Coleman
It Doesn’t Mean I Can’t Do It: Expanding Options for Young People at Risk with a Mild Intellectual Disability
(The YAR<>MID Project Report, Brisbane, 1994).
. Coleman at 4.10.
. Mr I Graham, Director-General, Department of Juvenile Justice
(28 April 1994).
. New South Wales. Legislative Council Standing Committee on Social Issues
Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
(Report 4, 1992) (the “Standing Committee Report”) at 123.
. Standing Committee Report at 21.
. Juvenile Justice Advisory Council of New South Wales
Future Directions for Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
(Green Paper, 1993) (the “Green Paper”) at 233.
. Green Paper at 236.
. Green Paper, Recommendations 338-343.
. Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
National Report
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991). See also, for example, R Lincoln and P Wilson “Aboriginal offending: patterns and causes” in
D Chappell and P Wilson (eds)
The Australian Criminal Justice System: The Mid 1990s
(Butterworths, 1994); and S McKillop (ed)
Aboriginal Justice Issues
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Conference Proceedings 21, Canberra, 1993).
. For example, Commissioner P L Dodson
Regional Report of Inquiry into Underlying Issues in Western Australia: Volume 2
(Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, AGPS, Canberra, 1991) at 651ff.
. S C Hayes and D McIlwain
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the New South Wales Prison Population: An Empirical Study
(November 1988) at 39-43, 46-47.
. See also the comments of G P Jones and K Coombes
The Prevalence of Intellectual Deficit Among the Western Australian Prisoner Population
(Department of Corrective Services, Western Australia, 1990) at 27-30.
. New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
(20 July 1992) at 2-3.
. Associate Professor S C Hayes
(31 August 1992) at 3.
. Jones and Coombes at 38-41.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 2.
. South Australia. Department of Correctional Services
(27 August 1992) at 1.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 3.
. New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
(20 July 1992) at 3; consultation with representatives of the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council, the New South Wales Department of
Juvenile Justice and the Aboriginal Legal Service on 9 March 1994.
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Human Rights and Mental Illness: Report of the National Inquiry into the Human Rights of People with Mental Illness
(AGPS, 1993) (the “Burdekin Report”), see especially ch 25.
. Burdekin Report, ch 21. See also data prepared by Associate Professor Susan Hayes showing that just over half of a sample of defendants
appearing in court (51.5%, N = 134) had a dual diagnosis of psychiatric disorder in addition to intellectual disability: S C Hayes
“Intellectually disabled defendants - characteristics and psychological assessment”, paper presented at the First International
Congress of the European Medical Association
The Mentally Retarded in the 2000’s Society
(23-26 March 1994, Rome) at 7.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 12.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 5.
. Dr R Vine, Rosanna Forensic Psychiatric Centre
(21 July 1992) at 1-2.
. New South Wales. Department of Family and Community Services [now Department of Community Services], Ageing & Disability Services
(21 January 1992) at 3.
. For example, in a case referred to in consultations, a person saw three psychiatrists, none of whom suspected the existence of an
intellectual disability, even though the person had an IQ of approximately 50: Consultation with the Mental Health Review Tribunal
and the Mental Health Advocacy Service on 11 March 1994.
. Mr M Porter, Clinical Psychologist
(8 June 1994) at 1.
. Mr I Graham, Director-General, Department of Juvenile Justice
(7 March 1994): 60% of this group were assessed using Ravens Progressive Matrices and only 30% by the more appropriate Wechsler Scale
(according to the Department of Juvenile Justice, the Ravens Progressive Matrices Scales correlate 0.7 or 0.8 with Wechsler Scales).
Children (Detention Centres) Act
. New South Wales. Office of Juvenile Justice
Annual Report 1992/93
. Consultation with representatives of the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council, the New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice and
the Aboriginal Legal Service on 9 March 1994.
. Illawarra Area Consultative Committee Meeting
(12 August 1992) at 1. Similar comments were made by the Illawarra Disabled Persons’ Trust
(10 August 1992) at 3.
. Mr I Graham, Director-General, Department of Juvenile Justice
(7 March 1994).
. Consultation with representatives of the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council, the New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice and
the Aboriginal Legal Service on 9 March 1994.
. Consultation with representatives of the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council, the New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice and
the Aboriginal Legal Service on 9 March 1994.
. Consultation with representatives of the NSW Probation Service, the Department of Corrective Services and the Aboriginal Legal Service
on 2 March 1994.
. Reed at 437 [footnote references omitted].
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Consultations
(Research Report 3, 1993).
. For example, The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 2.
. Mr I Graham, Director-General, Department of Juvenile Justice
(7 March 1994).
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 2.
. For example, consultation with representatives of the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council, the New South Wales Department of Juvenile
Justice and the Aboriginal Legal Service on 9 March 1994.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 7.
. Consultation with representatives of the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council, the New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice and
the Aboriginal Legal Service on 9 March 1994.
. Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Intellectually Handicapped Adult Offenders in New South Wales
The Missing Services
(Departments of Corrective Services and Youth and Community Services, Sydney, 1985). See also the follow-up story in the Ombudsman
of New South Wales’
Annual Report 1990
at 115-119 and the Department of Family and Community Services
Report from the Working Party on Services to Young Persons with Intellectual Disabilities in the Juvenile Justice System
(Department of Family and Community Services, 1988).
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 6. Other submissions which refer to the issue of lack of services include: Mr M Porter, Clinical Psychologist
(8 June 1994) at 1; Mr R Hogan, Director, Parole Service, Department of Corrective Services, (New South Wales)
(22 June 1994); Mr G Simpson, Social Worker, Lidcombe Hospital, Head Injury Community Outreach Team
(21 February 1994) at 16; Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 4-5; Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 5; New South Wales. Department of Corrective Services
(14 November 1991) at 2; New South Wales. Office of the Public Guardian
(26 August 1992) at 2; consultation with representatives of the NSW Probation Service, the Department of Corrective Services and
the Aboriginal Legal Service on 2 March 1994; and Epistle Post Release Service
(26 August 1992) at 1.
. New South Wales. Community Youth Support Taskforce
Supporting Young People in their Communities
(Report, Social Policy Directorate, New South Wales, 1993).
. New South Wales Child Protection Council
Systems Abuse: Problems and Solutions
(New South Wales Child Protection Council, February 1994), for example, Recommendations 4.1-4.2.
. See also Mr M Porter, Clinical Psychologist
(8 June 1994) at 1.
. Consultation with representatives of Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service, The New South Wales Council for
Intellectual Disability, Disability Council of NSW, New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee and the Brain Injury Association on
10 March 1994.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 September 1992) at 2-3.
. For example, E Jurman “Stuck inside: the kids a department forgot”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(2 March 1993) at 1; and S Kirk “Magistrate rejects jailing of children”
The Sydney Morning Herald
(21 September 1993) at 6.
. For example see Mr G Simpson, Social Worker, Lidcombe Hospital, Head Injury Community Outreach Team
(21 February 1994) at 16.
. Mr P Hutten
(17 June 1994) at 47.
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 12 March 1987, Brownie J, 8204/87 at 2-4.
Minister for Corrective Services v Harris
Petty Sessions Review
3892 at 3896-3897.
Minister for Corrective Services v Harris
Petty Sessions Review
3892 at 3897.
. Consultation with representatives of Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service, The New South Wales Council for
Intellectual Disability, Disability Council of NSW, New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee and the Brain Injury Association on
10 March 1994.
. Mr M Porter, Clinical Psychologist
(8 June 1994) at 1.
. For example the Burdekin Report; Sydney City Mission
Neglect of Duty: A Sydney City Mission response to the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission’s National Inquiry concerning
the Human Rights of People with Mental Illness
(October 1993); and Task Force on Private Hostels
Report of the Task Force on Private “For Profit” Hostels
(Volumes 1 and 2, December 1993).
. Consultation with the Mental Health Review Tribunal and the Mental Health Advocacy Service on 11 March 1994.
. New South Wales. Office of the Public Guardian
(26 August 1992) at 2.
. Dr J A Thompson, Consultant Psychiatrist, Community Health Services, Central Sydney Health Service
(26 January 1994) at 2.
. Dr J A Thompson, Consultant Psychiatrist, Community Health Services, Central Sydney Health Service
(26 January 1994) at 2.
. Consultation with a Community Support Team, Department of Community Services on 29 November 1993.
. Consultation with a Community Support Team, Department of Community Services on 29 November 1993.
. Consultation with representatives of the New South Wales Department of Community Services, the Office of the Public Guardian and
the Guardianship Board on 15 March 1994.
. New South Wales. Department of Community Services
Annual Report 1991-1992
. New South Wales. Department of Community Services
Annual Report 1991-1992
. Mr P Hutten
(17 June 1994) at 2.
. See letter from Ms J Woodhouse, Director, Ageing and Disability Services, Department of Community Services, New South Wales to the
Commission dated 29 January 1993 and consultation on 8 March 1993 with representatives of New South Wales Department of Community
Services and the Guardianship Board.
. Consultation with representatives of the New South Wales Department of Community Services, the Office of the Public Guardian and
the Guardianship Board on 15 March 1994.
. Dr J A Thompson, Consultant Psychiatrist, Community Health Services, Central Sydney Health Service
(26 January 1994) at 2.
. Letter from Mr S Cumines, Judicial Commission of New South Wales dated 27 June 1994.
. New South Wales. Guardianship Board
(31 January 1994) at 2-3.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(28 January 1994) at 21-22; The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(16 December 1993) at 6.
. For example, consultation with representatives of the New South Wales Department of Community Services, the Office of the Public
Guardian and the Guardianship Board on 15 March 1994.
. The New South Wales Law Reform Commission is represented on that Committee. See also letter from the Hon J Longley, MP, Minister
for Community Services to the Commission dated 10 January 1994.
. Legal Aid Solicitors referred to the lack of facilities and the “buck passing” between Departments and services which
occurs in relation to clients considered particularly difficult: consultation with solicitors from the Legal Aid Commission of NSW
on 17 March 1994.
. Consultation with representatives of the New South Wales Department of Community Services, the Office of the Public Guardian and
the Guardianship Board on 15 March 1994.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
History of this Reference (Digest)
Statutory Definitions of Intellectual Disability and Related Terms
DEFINITIONS
"defective" means a person suffering from severe subnormality within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act
Criminal Code Act
1924 (Tas) s 126(3)
developmental delay
"developmental delay" means a delay in the development of the child which-
(a) is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or a combination of mental and physical impairments; and
(b) is manifested before the child attains the age of 6 years; and
(c) results in substantial functional limitations in one or more of the following areas of
major life activity:
(i) self care;
(ii) receptive and expressive language;
(iii) cognitive development;
(iv) motor development; and
(d) reflects the child's need for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or generic care, treatment or other services
which are of extended duration and are individually planned and co-ordinated.
Intellectually Disabled Person's Services Act
In this Act, a reference to a person who has a disability is a reference to a person:
(a) who is intellectually, physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) who is of advanced age;
(c) who is a mentally ill person within the meaning of Chapter 3 of the
Mental Health Act 1990
(d) who is otherwise disabled, and who, by virtue of that fact, is restricted in one or more major life activities to such an extent
that he or she requires supervision or social habilitation.
Guardianship Act
"disability” in relation to a person means a disability-
(a) that is attributable to intellectual, psychiatric, cognitive, neurological, sensory or physical impairment, or a combination of
any of those impairments; and
(b) that is, or is likely to be, permanent; and
(c) that results in the person having -
(i) a reduced capacity for social interaction, communication, learning, mobility, decision making or self care; and
(ii) a need for continuing support services,and includes such a disability notwithstanding that it is of an episodic nature;
Disability Services Act
disability”, in relation to a person, means:
(a) total or partial loss of the person’s bodily or mental functions; or
(b) total or partial loss of a part of the body; or
(c) the presence in the body of organisms causing disease or illness; or
(d) the presence in the body of organisms capable of causing disease or illness; or
(e) the malfunction, malformation or disfigurement of a part of the person’s body; or
(f) disorder or malfunction that results in the person learning differently from a person without the disorder or malfunction; or
(g) a disorder, illness or disease that affects a person’s thought processes, perception of reality, emotions or judgment or
that results in disturbed behaviour;and includes a disability that:
(h) presently exists; or
(i) previously existed but no longer exists; or
(j) may exist in the future; or
(k) is imputed to a person.
Disability Discrimination Act
disability” means:
(a) total or partial loss of a person’s bodily or mental functions or of a part of a person’s body; or
(b) the presence in a person’s body of organisms causing or capable of causing disease or illness; or
(c) the malfunction, malformation or disfigurement of a part of a person’s body; or
(d) a disorder, malfunction, illness or disease that affects a person’s thought processes, perception of reality, emotions or
judgment or that results in disturbed behaviour.
Anti-Discrimination Act
impaired mental functioning
“impaired” includes impaired because of mental illness, intellectual disability, dementia or brain injury.
“impaired”, in relation to mental functioning, includes impaired because of mental illness, intellectual disability, dementia
or brain injury.
Evidence Act
(Vic) s 3(1)
intellectual disability
“intellectual disability” means an appreciably below average general intellectual function that results in the person
requiring supervision or social habilitation in connection with daily life activities.
intellectual disability
“intellectual disability” in relation to a person over the age of 5 years means a significant sub-average general intellectual
functioning existing concurrently with deficits in adaptive behaviour and manifested during the developmental period.
Intellectually Disabled Persons' Services Act
“intellectual disability” has the same meaning as in the
Intellectually Disabled Persons’ Services Act
intellectually disabled citizen
“intellectually disabled citizen” means a citizen who is limited in his functional competence by reason of intellectual
impairment which is -
(a) of a congenital or early childhood origin; or
(b) the result of illness, injury or organic deterioration.
Intellectually Disabled Citizens Act
1985 (Qld) s4
intellectually impaired person
A person is an “intellectually impaired person” if the person has a disability -
(a) that is attributable to an intellectual, psychiatric, cognitive or neurological impairment or a combination of these; and
(b) that results in -
(i) a substantial reduction of the person’s capacity for communication, social interaction or learning; and
(ii) the person needing support.
Criminal Code Act
1899 (Qld) s 1, 229F
mental disorder
“mental disorder” means mental illness, arrested or incomplete development of mind, psychopathic disorder, and any other
disorder or disability of mind ...
Mental Health Act
1963 (Tas) s 4(1)
mental impairment
“mental impairment” means a state of arrested or incomplete development of mind (not amounting to severe mental impairment)
which includes significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning and is associated with abnormally aggressive or seriously
irresponsible conduct on the part of the person concerned ...
Mental Health Act
1983 (UK) s 1 (2)
severe mental impairment
“severe mental impairment” means a state of arrested or incomplete development of mind which includes severe impairment
of intelligence and social functioning and is associated with abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part
of the person concerned ...
Mental Health Act
1983 (UK) s 1
mentally handicapped
“mentally handicapped”, in relation to a person, means that he is in a state of arrested or incomplete development of
mind which includes significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning.
Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984 (UK) s 77(3)
severe subnormality
“severe subnormality” means a state of arrested or incomplete development of mind that includes subnormality of intelligence
and is of such a nature or degree that the patient is incapable of living an independent life or of guarding himself against serious
exploitation, or will be so incapable when of an age to do so.
Mental Health Act
1963 (Tas) s 4(2)
subnormality
“subnormality” means a state of arrested or incomplete development of mind (not amounting to severe subnormality) that
includes subnormality of intelligence and is of a nature or degree that requires or is susceptible to medical treatment or other
special care or training of the patient.
Mental Health Act
1963 (Tas) s 4(3)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
History of this Reference (Digest)
Tables from the
Mental Health Act 1990
Table 1: Persons found not guilty by reason of mental illness
Table 2: Persons who may be unfit to plead
Table 3: Persons found by Tribunal not likely to be fit to be tried within 12 months
Table 4: Effects of review of cases and determination by Tribunal that a person is fit to be tried
Mental Health Act
Explanatory Note
The following Tables set out the way in which mentally ill persons or other persons suffering from a mental condition are dealt with
in criminal proceedings and the functions of the Tribunal in relation to such proceedings. The Tables are provided merely as a guide
and do not form part of this Act and are not intended to have any legislative effect. The statutory provisions referred to in the
Tables are contained in this Act and the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
TABLE 1 - PERSONS FOUND NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF MENTAL ILLNESS
Link to text only version of chart
TABLE 2 - PERSONS WHO MAY BE UNFIT TO PLEAD
Question of unfitness raised after being brought before Court to answer charges (s. 8, M.H. (C.P))
Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead (ss. 10, 11, M.H. (C.P.))
Court determines not to conduct inquiry and to dismiss charges. (There is a presumption that the person continues to be fit to be
tried). (s. 10, M.H. (C.P.))
Person found fit to be tried, criminal proceedings recommence or continue in normal way (s. 113, M.H. (C.P))
Person found unfit to be tried, referred to Tribunal for finding as to whether the person is likely to become fit to plead in the
next 12 months and for finding as to whether person is mentally ill or suffering from mental condition. (There is a presumption that,
until otherwise determined, the person continues to be unfit to be tried). (s. 14-16, M.H. (C.P.))
Person found by Tribunal likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Court may order person to be released on bail or to be
detained in prison or other place (s. 17, M.H. (C.P.))**
Person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months and detained*
Question of unfitness raised before the person is brought before Court to answer charges, Attorney General determines inquiry should
be conducted by Court (ss. 7, 8, M.H. (C.P.))
Attorney General determines no longer any need for inquiry to be conducted (s. 8, M.H. (C.P.))
Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead (ss. 10, 11, M.H. (C.P.))
Court determines not to conduct inquiry and to dismiss charges. (There is a presumption that the person continues to be fit to be
tried). (s. 10, M.H. (C.P.))
Person found fit to be tried, criminal proceedings recommence or continue in normal way (s. 113, M.H. (C.P))
Person found unfit to be tried, referred to Tribunal for finding as to whether the person is likely to become fit to plead in the
next 12 months and for finding as to whether person is mentally ill or suffering from mental condition. (There is a presumption that,
until otherwise determined, the person continues to be unfit to be tried). (s. 14-16, M.H. (C.P.))
Person found by Tribunal likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Court may order person to be released on bail or to be
detained in prison or other place (s. 17, M.H. (C.P.))**
Person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months and detained*
Link to text only version of table 2
Link to text only version of table 3
Link to text only version of table 4
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
History of this Reference (Digest)
Excerpts from Legislation
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
PART 3 - SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS BEFORE
A MAGISTRATE RELATING TO PERSONS
AFFECTED BY MENTAL DISORDERS
Application
31. (1) This Part applies to criminal proceedings in respect of summary offences or indictable offences triable summarily, being proceedings
before a Magistrate, but does not apply to committal proceedings.
(2) Sections 32 and 33 apply to the condition of a defendant as at the time when a Magistrate considers whether to apply the relevant
section to the defendant.
Persons suffering from mental illness or condition
32. (1) If, at the commencement or at any time during the course of the hearing of proceedings before a Magistrate, it appears to
the Magistrate:
(a) that the defendant is developmentally disabled, is suffering from mental illness or is suffering from a mental condition for which
treatment is available in a hospital, but is not a mentally ill person within the meaning of Chapter 3 of the
Mental Health Act 1990
(b) that, on an outline of the facts alleged in the proceedings or such other evidence as the Magistrate may consider relevant, it
would be more appropriate to deal with the defendant in accordance with the provisions of this Part than otherwise in accordance
with law, the Magistrate may take the action set out in subsection (2) or (3).
(2) The Magistrate may do any one or more of the following:
(a) adjourn the proceedings;
(b) grant the defendant bail in accordance with the
Bail Act 1978
(c) make any other order that the Magistrate considers appropriate.
(3) The Magistrate may dismiss the charge and discharge the defendant:
(a) into the care of a responsible person, unconditionally or subject to conditions; or
(b) on the condition that the defendant attend on a person or at a place specified by the Magistrate for assessment of the defendant’s
mental condition or treatment or both; or
(c) unconditionally.
(4) A decision under this section to dismiss charges against a defendant does not constitute a finding that the charges against the
defendant are proven or otherwise.
Mentally ill persons
33. (1) If, at the commencement or at any time during the course of the hearing of proceedings before a Magistrate, it appears to
the Magistrate that the defendant is a mentally ill person within the meaning of Chapter 3 of the
Mental Health Act 1990
, the Magistrate (without derogating from any other order the Magistrate may make in relation to the defendant, whether by way of
adjournment, the granting of bail in accordance with the
Bail Act 1978
or otherwise):
(a) may order that the person be taken by a member of the Police Force to, and be detained in, a hospital for assessment; or
(b) may discharge the defendant, unconditionally or subject to conditions, into the care of a responsible person.
*25/94 repeals (1)(a) and (b) and inserts:
(a) may order that the defendant be taken by a police officer to, and detained in, a hospital for assessment; or
(b) may order that the defendant be taken by a police officer to, and detained in, a hospital for assessment and that, if the defendant
is found on assessment at the hospital not to be a mentally ill person or mentally disordered person, the person be brought by a
police officer back before the court; or
(c) may discharge the defendant, unconditionally or subject to conditions, into the care of a responsible person.
(2) If a defendant is dealt with at the commencement or at any time during the course of the hearing of proceedings before a Magistrate
in accordance with this section, the charge which gave rise to the proceedings, on the expiration of the period of 6 months after
the date on which the defendant is so dealt with, is to be taken to have been dismissed unless, within that period, the defendant
is brought before a Magistrate to be further dealt with in relation to the charge.
(3) If a defendant is brought before a Magistrate to be further dealt with in relation to a charge as referred to in subsection (2),
the Magistrate must, in dealing with the charge, take account of any period during which the defendant was in a hospital as a consequence
of an order made under this section.
(4) The fact that charges are to be taken to have been dismissed under subsection (2) does not constitute a finding that the charges
against the defendant are proven or otherwise.
*(5) The regulations may prescribe the form of an order under this section.
*The amendments marked in bold were inserted by the
Mental Health (Amendment) Act
1994 (NSW), which at 31 August 1994, had not yet been proclaimed.
Evidence Bill 1993 (NSW)
CHAPTER 2 - ADDUCING EVIDENCE
PART 2.1 - WITNESSES
Division 1 - Competence and compellability of witnesses
Competence and compellability
[cl 12 of the Cth Bill]
11. Except as otherwise provided by this Act:
(a) every person is competent to give evidence; and
(b) a person who is competent to give evidence about a fact is compellable to give that evidence.
Competence: lack of capacity
[cl 13 of the Cth Bill]
12. (1) A person who is incapable of understanding that, in giving evidence, he or she is under an obligation to give truthful evidence
is not competent to give sworn evidence.
(2) A person who because of subsection (1) is not competent to give sworn evidence is competent to give unsworn evidence if:
(a) the court is satisfied that the person understands the difference between the truth and a lie; and
(b) the court tells the person that it is important to tell the truth; and
(c) the person indicates, by responding appropriately when asked, that he or she will not tell lies in the proceeding.
(3) A person who is incapable of giving a rational reply to a question about a fact is not competent to give evidence about the fact,
but may be competent to give evidence about other facts.
(4) A person is not competent to give evidence about a fact if:
(a) the person is incapable of hearing or understanding, or of communicating a reply to, a question about the fact; and
(b) that incapacity cannot be overcome.
(5) It is to be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that a person is not incompetent because of this section.
(6) Evidence that has been given by a witness does not become inadmissible merely because, before the witness finishes giving evidence,
he or she dies or ceases to be competent to give evidence.
(7) For the purpose of determining a question arising under this section, the court may inform itself as it thinks fit.
Division 3 - General rules about giving evidence [cl 27-37]
Court’s control over questioning of witnesses
[cl 26 of the Cth Bill]
27. The court may make such orders as it considers just in relation to:
(a) the way in which witnesses are to be questioned; and
(b) the production and use of documents and things in connection with the questioning of witnesses; and
(c) the order in which parties may question a witness; and
(d) the presence and behaviour of any person in connection with the questioning of witnesses.
Manner and form of questioning witnesses and their responses
[cl 29 of the Cth Bill]
30. (1) A party may question a witness in any way the party thinks fit, except as provided by this Chapter or as directed by the court.
(2) A witness may give evidence wholly or partly in narrative form if:
(a) the party that called the witness has applied to the court for a direction that the witness give evidence in that form; and
(b) the court so directs.
(3) Such a direction may include directions about the way in which evidence is to be given in that form.
Interpreters
[cl 30 of the Cth Bill]
31. A witness may give evidence about a fact through an interpreter unless the witness can understand and speak the English language
sufficiently to enable the witness to understand, and to make an adequate reply to, questions that may be put about the fact.
Deaf and mute witnesses
[cl 31 of the Cth Bill]
32. (1) A witness who cannot hear adequately may be questioned in any appropriate way.
(2) A witness who cannot speak adequately may give evidence by any appropriate means.
(3) The court may give directions concerning either or both of the following:
(a) the way in which a witness may be questioned under subsection (1);
(b) the means by which a witness may give evidence under subsection (2).
(4) This section does not affect the right of a witness to whom this section applies to give evidence about a fact through an interpreter
under section 31.
Division 5 - Cross-examination
Improper questions
[cl 41 in the Cth Bill]
42. (1) The court may disallow a question put to a witness in cross-examination, or inform the witness that it need not be answered,
if the question is:
(a) misleading; or
(b) unduly annoying, harassing, intimidating, offensive, oppressive or repetitive.
(2) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account for the purposes of subsection (1), it is to take into account:
(a) any relevant condition or characteristic of the witness, including age, personality and education; and
(b) any mental, intellectual or physical disability to which the witness is or appears to be subject.
Leading questions
[cl 42 of the Cth Bill]
43. (1) A party may put a leading question to a witness in cross-examination unless the court disallows the question or directs the
witness not to answer it.
(2) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether to disallow the question or give such a
direction, it is to take into account the extent to which:
(a) evidence that has been given by the witness in examination in chief is unfavourable to the party who called the witness; and
(b) the witness has an interest consistent with an interest of the cross-examiner; and
(c) the witness is sympathetic to the party conducting the cross-examination, either generally or about a particular matter; and
(d) the witness’s age, or any mental, intellectual or physical disability to which the witness is subject, may affect the witness’s
(3) The court is to disallow the question, or direct the witness not to answer it, if the court is satisfied that the facts concerned
would be better ascertained if leading questions were not used.
(4) This section does not limit the court’s power to control leading questions.
“Leading question”
is defined in the Dictionary, which is set out at the end of the Bill as meaning a question asked of a witness that:
(a) directly or indirectly suggests a particular answer to the question; or
(b) assumes the existence of a fact the existence of which is in dispute in the proceeding and as to the existence of which the witness
has not given evidence before the question is asked.]
PART 4.4 - CORROBORATION
Corroboration requirements abolished
[cl 164 of the Cth Bill]
163. (1) It is not necessary that evidence on which a party relies be corroborated.
(2) Subsection (1) does not affect the operation of a rule of law that requires corroboration with respect to the offence of perjury
or a similar or related offence.
(3) Despite any rule, whether of law or practice, to the contrary, but subject to the other provisions of this Act, if there is a
jury, it is not necessary that the judge:
(a) warn the jury that it is dangerous to act on uncorroborated evidence or give a warning to the same or similar effect; or
(b) give a direction relating to the absence of corroboration.
PART 4.5 - WARNINGS
Unreliable evidence
[NB cl 165 of the Cth Bill is not in identical terms]
164. (1) This section applies to evidence of a kind that may be unreliable, including the following kinds of evidence:
(a) evidence in relation to which Part 3.2 (Hearsay Evidence) or 3.4 (Admissions) applies;
(b) identification evidence;
(c) evidence the reliability of which may be affected by age, ill-health (whether physical or mental), injury or the like;
(d) evidence given in a criminal proceeding by a witness called by the prosecutor, being a witness who might reasonably be supposed
to have been criminally concerned in the events giving rise to the proceeding;
(e) oral evidence of official questioning of a defendant that is questioning recorded in writing that has not been signed, or otherwise
acknowledged in writing, by the defendant;
(f) in a proceeding against the estate of a deceased person - evidence adduced by or on behalf of a person seeking relief in the proceeding
that is evidence about a matter about which the deceased person could have given evidence if he or she were alive.
(2) If there is a jury and a party so requests, the judge is to:
(a) warn the jury that the evidence may be unreliable; and
(b) inform the jury of matters that may cause it to be unreliable; and
(c) warn the jury of the need for caution in deciding whether to accept the evidence and the weight to be given to it.
(3) The judge need not comply with subsection (2) if there are good reasons for not doing so.
(4) It is not necessary that a particular form of words be used in giving the warning or information.
(5) This section does not affect any other power of the judge to give a warning to, or to inform, the jury.
Crimes Act 1900
- PROCEDURE, EVIDENCE, VERDI
Closed-circuit television may be used for giving child victim’s evidence
405D.(1) In any criminal proceedings in which it is alleged that the accused person has committed a prescribed sexual offence on a
child, the court may, on the application of the prosecution, make an order permitting the child’s evidence to be given by means
of closed-circuit television facilities.
(2) If the court is not equipped with closed-circuit television facilities or it otherwise considers it appropriate to do so, the
court may, for the purpose of permitting the child’s evidence to be given by means of such facilities, adjourn the proceedings
or any part of them to a court that is equipped with such facilities.
(2A) If, pursuant to an order under subsection (1), a child’s evidence is permitted to be given from other premises:
(a) the court may also order a court officer to be present at those other premises, or any other person to be present with the child
as a support or interpreter, or both; and
(b) those other premises are taken to be part of the court in which the proceedings are being held.
(3) An order may only be made under subsection (1) if the court is satisfied:
(a) that it is likely that the child would suffer mental or emotional harm if required to give evidence in the ordinary way; or
(b) that it is likely that the facts would be better ascertained if the child’s evidence is given in accordance with such an
(4) The court may vary or revoke an order made under this section, either of its own motion or on application by a party to the proceedings.
(5) In this section,
, in relation to any proceedings, means a child under the age of 16 years at the time that the child is giving evidence in the proceedings.
Use of closed-circuit television facilities
405E.(1) Closed-circuit television facilities used for the giving of evidence by a child are to be operated in such a manner that
the persons who have an interest in the proceedings are able to see the child (and any person present with the child) on the same
or another television monitor.
(2) The Governor may make regulations for or with respect to the use of closed-circuit television facilities for the giving of evidence
by children in accordance with an order made under section 405D.
(3) Rules of court may (subject to the regulations) also make provision for or with respect to the use of closed-circuit television
facilities for the giving of evidence by children in accordance with an order made under section 405D.
Alternative arrangements for child victim’s evidence
405F. (1) In any criminal proceedings in which it is alleged that the accused person has committed a personal assault offence on a
child, the court may, of its own motion or on the application of the prosecution, direct alternative arrangements to be made for
the giving of evidence by the child.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the following alternative arrangements may be directed to be made:
(a) seating arrangements for persons who have an interest in the proceedings (including the level at which they are seated and the
persons in the child’s line of vision);
(b) the use of screens;
(c) adjournment of the proceedings or any part of the proceedings to other premises.
(2A) Any premises to which proceedings are adjourned for the purposes of subsection (2) are taken to be part of the court in which
the proceedings are being held.
(3) The court may vary or revoke a direction made under this section, either of its own motion or on application by a party to the
proceedings.
(4) Nothing in this section limits any discretion that a court has with respect to the conduct of proceedings in any case.
(5) In this section:
, in relation to any proceedings, means a child under the age of 16 years at the time that the child is giving evidence in the proceedings;
“personal assault offence”
means an offence under:
(b) section 25 of the
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
or an offence of attempting, or of conspiracy or incitement, to commit such an offence (but does not include any offence exempted
from this section by the regulations).
405G. [Repealed]
Warning to jury
405H.(1) In any criminal proceedings in which the evidence of a child is given by means of closed-circuit television facilities, the
Judge must warn the jury not to draw any inference adverse to the accused person or give the evidence any greater or lesser weight
because of the use of those facilities.
(2) In any criminal proceedings in which alternative arrangements for the giving of evidence by a child are directed to be made under
section 405F, the Judge must warn the jury not to draw any inference adverse to the accused person or give the evidence any greater
or lesser weight because of the use of those alternative arrangements.
Validity of proceedings not affected
405I. The failure of a child to give evidence in accordance with an order made under section 405D or a direction made under section
405F does not affect the validity of the proceedings or any decision made in connection with those proceedings.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issue
Select Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION ON MENTAL RETARDATION
Mental Retardation: Definition, Classification and Systems of Supports
(9th ed, American Association on Mental Retardation, Washington DC, 1992)
ASHTON, G R and WARD A D
Mental Handicap and the Law
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1992)
ASHWORTH, A and GOSTIN, L “Mentally disordered offenders and the sentencing process” [1984]
Criminal Law Review
AUSTRALIA. DISABILITY ADVISORY COUNCIL
Report on the National Consultations with People with a Disability
(AGPS, Canberra, 1991)
AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Children’s Evidence by Video Link
(Report 63, 1992)
AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
(Report 38, 1987)
AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
(Report 44, 1988)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY. THE COMMUNITY LAW REFORM COMMITTEE
Victims of Crime
(Report 6, 1993)
BAKER, E “Dangerousness, rights and criminal justice” (1993) 56
Modern Law Review
BLUGLASS, R BOWDEN, P and WALKER, N (eds)
Principles and Practice of Forensic Psychiatry
(Churchill Livingstone, Melbourne, 1990)
BRECKENRIDGE, J and CARMODY, M (eds)
Crimes of Violence: Australian responses to rape and child sexual assault
(Allen & Unwin, Sydney, 1992)
BRENNAN, M and BRENNAN, R E
Strange Language: Child Victims Under Cross Examination
(3rd ed, Charles Sturt University-Riverina, 1988)
BRIGHT, J “Intellectual disability and the criminal justice system: new developments” (1989) 63
Law Institute Journal
BRITON, J “Obtaining evidence from people with an intellectual disability - The right to be heard”, paper presented to
Fourth AAMR/ASSID National Conference on Intellectual Disability
(Canberra, December 1988)
BROWN, B S and COURTLESS, T F The Mentally Retarded Offender (The President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration
of Justice, USA, 1971)
BROWN, H and SMITH, H
Normalisation - A Reader for the Nineties
(Tavistock/Routledge, London and New York, 1992)
CAHILL, R J “Intellectual disability and the criminal justice process”, paper presented at the
Conference of Northern Territory Magistrates
(Darwin, 30 August-1 September 1993)
CAMPBELL, I G
Mental Disorder and Criminal Law in Australia and New Zealand
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1988)
CANADA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Mental Disorder in the Criminal Process
(Report 5, 1976)
CARMODY, M “Invisible victims: Sexual assault of people with an intellectual disability” (1991) 17
Australia and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities
CASHMORE, J “The use of video technology for child witnesses” (1990) 16
Monash University Law Review
CHALLINGER, D (ed)
Intellectually Disabled Offenders
(Australian Institute Of Criminology, Seminar Proceedings 19, Canberra, 1987)
CLARKE, A M, CLARKE, A A B and BERG, J M (eds)
Mental Deficiency - the Changing Outlook
(Free Press, New York, 1985)
COCKRAM, J, JACKSON, R, and UNDERWOOD, R “Perceptions of the judiciary and intellectual disability” (1992) 18
Australia and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities
An Introduction to Intellectual Disability in Australia
(Australian Institute on Intellectual Disability, Canberra, 1989)
It Doesn’t Mean I Can’t Do It: Expanding Options for Young People with a Mild Intellectual Disability
(The YAR<>MID Project Report, Brisbane, 1994)
COMMITTEE ON THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH HANDICAPS (The Bright Committee)
The Law and Persons with Handicaps
Vol 2 - Intellectual Handicaps
(South Australia, March 1981)
CONLEY, R W, LUCKASSON, R and BOUTHILET, G N (eds)
The Criminal Justice System and Mental Retardation: Defendants and Victims
(Paul H Brookes, Baltimore, 1992)
Why Me? Understanding Intellectual Disability
(Shirley Cornish, Australia, 1992)
CRAFT, M and CRAFT, A (eds)
Mentally Abnormal Offenders
(Bailliere Tindall, London, 1984)
CRIMINAL LAW OFFICERS COMMITTEE OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE OF ATTORNEYS-GENERAL
Model Criminal Code: Chapter 2 - General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
(Final Report, December 1992)
CROMBIE, G M
Residential and Community Based Options for the remand and sentencing of intellectually disabled offenders in Victoria: a proposal
from Harrison Youth Services
(Harrison Youth Services, Discussion Paper, July 1988)
DENT, H and FLIN, R (eds)
Children as Witnesses
(John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1992)
DUDLEY, J R
Living with Stigma: The Plight of the People Who We Label Mentally Retarded
(Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Illinios, 1983)
ELLIS, J W “Decisions by and for people with mental retardation: balancing considerations of autonomy and protection”
(1992) 37 (6)
Villanova Law Review
ELLIS, J W “Presidential Address 1990: Mental retardation at the close of the 20th century: A new realism” (1990) 28
Mental Retardation
ENGLAND. HOME OFFICE
Report of the Advisory Group on Video Evidence
(Home Office, London, 1989) (the Pigot Report)
The Right to be Heard - Obtaining Evidence From Intellectually Disabled People
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, Discussion Paper, August 1988)
FENBURY, A “Video Witnesses” (April 1994) 21 (3)
The Law Society of Western Australia: Brief
FENNELL, P “Diversion of mentally disordered offenders from custody” [1991]
Criminal Law Review
FENNELL, P “Vulnerable Witnesses” (June 1993) 90 (21)
[Law Society’s] Gazette
FITZGERALD, R E and DOWNS-STONEY, D
Prisoners who are known to the Authority for Intellectually Handicapped Persons - A Review
(Department of Corrective Services, Western Australia, Policy Planning & Review, February 1987)
FLOUD, J “Dangerousness and criminal justice” (1982) 22
British Journal of
Criminology
FOX, R G “Sentencing the mentally disordered offender” (1986) 60
Law Institute Journal
FREIBERG, A “‘Out of mind, out of sight’; The disposition of mentally disordered persons involved in criminal proceedings”
Monash University Law Review
FYFFE, C and THOMSON, D “The impact of misleading post-event information on the memory for events of people with intellectual
disabilities” (1991) 5 (4)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
GERULL, S and LUCAS, W (eds)
Serious Violent Offenders: Sentencing, Psychiatry and Law Reform
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Conference Proceedings 19, Canberra, 1993)
GETHING, L “Generality vs specificity of attitudes towards people with disabilities” (1991) 64
British Journal of Medical Psychology
GLASER, W “When the law won’t lock them up” (1992) 17
Alternative Law Journal
GOLDHAR, J “People with intellectual disabilities and the criminal justice system” (1989) 63
Law Institute Journal
HAYES, R “Mental retardation: Criminal responsibility”
Legal Service Bulletin
HAYES, S C “Homicide and intellectually disabled offenders” in H Strang and S Gerull (eds)
Homicide: Patterns, Prevention and Control
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Conference Proceedings 17, Canberra, 1993)
HAYES, S C “Intellectually disabled defendants - characteristics and psychological assessment”, paper presented at the
First International Congress of the European Medical Association
The Mentally Retarded in the 2000’s Society
(Rome, 23-26 March 1994)
HAYES, S C “Mental retardation: Criminal justice”
Legal Service Bulletin
HAYES, S C “Mentally disabled prisoners - Planning resources” in S McKillop (ed)
Keeping People out of Prison
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Conference Proceedings 11, Canberra, 1991)
HAYES, S C “Pilot Prison Programmes”, paper presented at the seminar
Meeting the Challenge: Helping People with Developmental Disabilities and Challenging Behaviour
(University of Sydney, 22-23 August 1991)
HAYES, S C “Prosecutorial discretion and mentally abnormal offenders” in I Potas (ed)
Prosecutorial Discretion
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Seminar Proceedings 6, Canberra, 1984)
HAYES, S C “Sex Offenders”, paper presented at the seminar
Meeting the Challenge: Helping People with Developmental Disabilities and Challenging Behaviour
(University of Sydney, 22-23 August 1991)
HAYES, S C “Sexual violence against intellectually disabled victims” in P W Easteal (ed)
Without Consent: Confronting Adult Sexual Violence
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Conference Proceedings 20, Canberra, 1993)
HAYES, S C “The accused with an intellectual disability - Fitness and sentencing”, paper presented at the
Public Defenders’ Seminar
(Sydney, 14 May 1992)
HAYES, S C “The challenge of intellectually disabled offenders in gaol”, paper presented at the conference
Changing Realities - 4th Joint National Conference on Intellectual Disability
(Canberra College of Advanced Education, 6-9 December 1988)
HAYES, S C “Reducing over-representation of people with intellectual disability in the criminal justice system”, paper
presented at the Edith Cowan University Challenge Seminar (Perth, 15th October 1993)
HAYES, S C and CRADDOCK, G
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992)
HAYES, S C and HAYES, R
Mental Retardation: Law Policy and Administration
(Law Book Co, Sydney, 1982)
HAYES, S C and McILWAIN, D
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the New South Wales Prison Population: An Empirical Study
(November 1988)
HEWITT, S E K “The abuse of de-institutionalised persons with mental handicaps” (1987) 2 (2)
Disability, Handicap and Society
HUDD, R and TIMMERS, J
Borderline and Mild Intellectually Disabled People: The Neglected Group For Services
(Sydney City Mission, Discussion Paper, November 1992)
HUNTER, J “Unreliable memoirs and the accused: Bending and stretching hearsay - Part 1” (1994) 18
Criminal Law Journal
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989)
JACKSON R, COCKRAM J and UNDERWOOD R “Intellectual disability and the law: noticing the negative and ignoring the obvious”,
paper presented at the conference
Disability Discrimination and Justice
(Griffith University, Queensland, November 30 - December 2 1992)
JOHNSON, K, ANDREW, R and TOPP, V
Silent Victims: A Study of People with Intellectual Disabilities as Victims of Crime
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988)
Out of Sight, Out of Mind
(The South Australian Branch of Disabled Peoples’ International Inc, Adelaide, 1990)
JONES, G P and COOMBES, K
The Prevalence of Intellectual Deficit among the Western Australian Prison Population
(Department of Corrective Services, Western Australia, October 1990)
JUVENILE JUSTICE ADVISORY COUNCIL OF NSW
Future Directions for Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
(Green Paper, 1992)
MacFARLANE, P J M “Unfitness to be tried for an offence” (1987) 11
Criminal Law Journal
MALS, P, and GRANTHAM, G “Queensland boards a sinking ship: New dangerous offenders legislation” (1993) 18
Alternative Law Journal
MARCHETTI, A G and McCARTNEY, J R “Abuse of persons with mental retardation: Characteristics of the abused, the abusers, and
the informers” (December 1990) 28
Mental Retardation
McCONVILLE, M
Corroboration and Confessions: The Impact of a Rule Requiring that no Conviction can be Sustained on the Basis of Confession Evidence
(Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, HMSO, London, 1993)
McCORMACK, B “Sexual abuse and learning disabilities” (1991) 303
British Medical Journal
NATIONAL COUNCIL ON INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
The Rights of People with Disabilities: Areas of Need for Increased Protection
(Discussion Paper, 1988)
NEW SOUTH WALES CHILD PROTECTION COUNCIL
Out-Of-Court Videotaping Of The Statements Of Children Who Are The Victims Of Child Sexual Assault In New South Wales
(Discussion Paper, 1987)
NEW SOUTH WALES CHILD PROTECTION COUNCIL
Position Paper on the Use of Closed-Circuit Television for Child Witnesses
(January 1994)
NEW SOUTH WALES.
MENTAL HEALTH ACT
IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING COMMITTEE
Report to the Honourable R A Phillips Minister for Health on the NSW
Mental Health Act 1990
(New South Wales Parliamentary Paper 275, August 1992)
NEW SOUTH WALES. ATTORNEY GENERAL’S CRIMINAL LAW REVIEW DIVISION
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper, 1991)
NEW SOUTH WALES. COUNCIL FOR INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Glossary on Intellectual Disability
NEW SOUTH WALES. COUNCIL FOR INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
A Decent Life
(Policy Statement, New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability, June 1988)
NEW SOUTH WALES. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
Brain Injury: What is it all about?
(July 1993)
NEW SOUTH WALES. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
Procedures for responding to Sexual Assault of Adults with an Intellectual Disability in Accommodation and Community Support Services
NEW SOUTH WALES. DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
Report from the working party on services to young persons with intellectual disabilities in the juvenile justice system
(Juvenile Justice Unit, 1989)
NEW SOUTH WALES. INTER-DEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEE ON INTELLECTUALLY HANDICAPPED ADULT OFFENDERS IN NEW SOUTH WALES, AUSTRALIA
The Missing Services
(Departments of Corrective Services and Youth and Community Services, Report, 1985)
NEW SOUTH WALES. JUSTICE ADMINISTRATION RESEARCH GROUP (JARG)
Caught in the System: Forensic patients in NSW
(Sydney, March 1987)
NEW SOUTH WALES. VICTIMS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL The Review of the Victims Compensation Act (Attorney General’s Department, Sydney,
March 1993)
NEW SOUTH WALES. WOMEN’S CO-ORDINATION UNIT
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Final Report, 1990)
NICHOLSON, R D “The courts and people with an intellectual disability” (1993) 23
Western Australian Law Review
Finding New Ways: A Review of Services to the Person with Intellectual Disability in the Victorian Criminal Justice System
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, December 1988)
PAPALEO, L A “The mentally retarded and the criminal justice system” (1985) 59
Law Institute Journal
Unequal Justice?
(Abingdon Press, Nashville, 1991)
Towards Normalisation: People with Intellectual Disability involved in the South Australian Criminal Justice System
(Court Services Department, South Australia, 1991)
Just Deserts for the Mad
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1992)
Dangerous Behaviour, the Law, and Mental Disorder
(University Press, Cambridge, 1986)
REDFERN LEGAL CENTRE, INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY RIGHTS SERVICE
Legal Rights Teaching Kit: a course for people with a learning difficulty or an intellectual disability
Klause, J and Rauch, A (eds) (Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, 1990)
REDFERN LEGAL CENTRE, INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY RIGHTS SERVICE
Questions of Rights: A guide to the law and rights of people with an intellectual disability
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, 1992)
REED, E F “Legal rights of mentally retarded offenders: Hospice and habilitation” (1989) 25
Criminal Law Bulletin
ROGERS, L “New rules on evidence for the under 12s” (April 1991) 29 (3)
Law Society Journal
ROSSER, K “A particular vulnerability” (February 1990) 15 (1)
Legal Service Bulletin
ROSSER, K “Sexual Assault: Vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability” (1989) 3 (4)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
RUSSELL, T and BRYANT, C A “The effects of a lecture training program and independent study on the knowledge and attitudes of
law students toward the mentally retarded offender” (Spring/Summer 1987) 11 (2)
Journal of Offender Counselling, Services and Rehabilitation
SALES, B D, POWELL, D M and VAN DUIZEND, R
Disabled Persons and the Law
(Plenum, New York, 1982)
SANTAMOUR, M and WEST, B
The Mentally Retarded Offender and Corrections
(National Institute of Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, US Department of Justice,
Washington, August 1977)
SANTAMOUR, M and WEST, B
Retardation and Criminal Justice: A Training Manual for Criminal Justice Personnel
(New Jersey Association for Retarded Citizens, September 1979)
SCANNELL, M “Acting for a client with an intellectual disability: How to provide the best service”, paper presented at
National Community Legal Centres Conference
(Canberra, 1992)
SCOTTISH LAW COMMISSION
Report on the Evidence of Children and Other Potentially Vulnerable Witnesses
(Report 125, 1990)
SIGELMAN, C K, BUDD, E C, SPANHEL, C L and SCHOENROCK, C J “When in doubt, say yes: acquiescence in interviews with mentally
retarded persons” (1981) 19
Mental Retardation
SIMPSON, J :”A visit to four gaols” (1989) 3 (3)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
SIMPSON, J “Acting for a client with an intellectual disability: what solicitors need to know” (April 1987) 25
Law Society Journal
Sexual Assault Laws and People with an Intellectual Disability
(Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service, unpublished paper, 6 July 1987)
SIMPSON, J “The law and intellectually disabled people - some casework experience” (April 1984)
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
White Paper on the Courtroom Environment and Vulnerable Witnesses
(November, 1992)
SUTCLIFFE, J
Adults with learning difficulties: Education for choice & empowerment
(The National Institute of Adult Continuing Education in association with The Open University Press, 1991)
TASMANIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSIONER
Child Witnesses
(Report 62, 1989)
THARINGER, D, BURROWS HORTON, C, and MILLEA, S “Sexual abuse and exploitation of children and adults with mental retardation
and other handicaps” (1990) 14
Child Abuse and Neglect
THE ROEHER INSTITUTE
No More Victims: a manual to guide the legal community in addressing the sexual abuse of people with a mental handicap
(The Roeher Institute, Ontario, 1992)
TOMASIC, R “The Dangerousness of Dangerousness”, paper presented at the seminar
The Dangerous Offender - Prediction and Assessment
(Institute of Criminology, University of Sydney, 20 July 1977)
VICTORIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Mental Malfunction and Criminal Responsibility
(Report 34, October 1990)
VICTORIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Sexual Offences Against People with Impaired Mental Functioning
” (Report 15, 1988)
VICTORIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
The Concept of Mental Illness in the
Mental Health Act 1986
" (Report 31, 1990)
VICTORIA. OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC ADVOCATE
Finding the Way: the Criminal Justice System and the person with Intellectual Disabilities
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1987)
VICTORIA. PARLIAMENT. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
Inquiry into Mental Disturbance and Community Safety
(Interim Report, 1990; Second Report, March 1992; Third Report, April 1992; Fourth and Final Report, August 1992)
VICTORIAN SENTENCING COMMITTEE
Sentencing - Volume 2
(Victorian Attorney General’s Department, Melbourne, April 1988)
WALTERS C D “The probation experience for adult retarded offenders” in Santamour M and Watson P
The Retarded Offender
(Praeger Publishers, New York, 1982)
WESTCOTT, H L “The disabled child witness” paper presented at the conference
The Child Witness in Context: Cognitive, Social and Legal Perspectives
(Lucca, Italy, 20-31 May, 1992)
WESTERN AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
The Criminal Process and Persons Suffering from Mental Disorder
(Report 69, 1991)
WESTERN AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
The Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses
(Report 87, 1991)
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Persons With An Intellectual Disability: Guidelines for Associates, Orderlies And Security Officers
(December 1992)
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Persons With An Intellectual Disability: Issues For Consideration of Judges and Magistrates
(December 1992)
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Questions of Balance: Criminal Law and People with Intellectual Disabilities,
(Conference Proceedings, Perth, Western Australia, July 1990)
WILLIAMS, C R “Psychopathy, mental illness and preventive detention: issues arising from the David Case” (1990) 16
Monash University Law Review
The Incidence of Crime Victimization among Intellectually Disabled Adults:
(Final Report, National Police Research Unit, 1990)
WOOD, D “Dangerous offenders, and the morality of protective sentencing” [1988]
Criminal Law Review
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Executive summary
Provisional proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issues
Persons Found Not Guilty by Reason of Mental Illness
person is found not guilty by reason of mental illness
detained in strict custody
, M.H. (C.P.))
case to be reviewed by Tribunal
case to be further reviewed by Tribunal
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issues
Table 2 - Persons Who May be Unfit to Plead
Question of unfitness raised after being brought before Court to answer charges
, M.H. (C.P)) | Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Court determines not to conduct inquiry and to dismiss charges. (There is a presumption that the person continues
to be fit to be tried).
, M.H. (C.P.))
Question of unfitness raised after being brought before Court to answer charges
, M.H. (C.P)) | Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found fit to be tried, criminal proceedings recommence or continue in normal way
, M.H. (C.P))
Question of unfitness raised after being brought before Court to answer charges
, M.H. (C.P)) | Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found unfit to be tried, referred to Tribunal for finding as to whether the person is likely to become fit
to plead in the next 12 months and for finding as to whether person is mentally ill or suffering from mental condition. (There is
a presumption that, until otherwise determined, the person continues to be unfit to be tried).
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found by Tribunal likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Court may order person to be released
on bail or to be detained in prison or other place
, M.H. (C.P.))**
Question of unfitness raised after being brought before Court to answer charges
, M.H. (C.P)) | Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found unfit to be tried, referred to Tribunal for finding as to whether the person is likely to become fit
to plead in the next 12 months and for finding as to whether person is mentally ill or suffering from mental condition. (There is
a presumption that, until otherwise determined, the person continues to be unfit to be tried).
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months and detained*
Question of unfitness raised before the person is brought before Court to answer charges, Attorney General determines inquiry should
be conducted by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Attorney General determines no longer any need for inquiry to be conducted
, M.H. (C.P.)) |
Question of unfitness raised before the person is brought before Court to answer charges, Attorney General determines inquiry should
be conducted by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Court determines not to conduct inquiry and to dismiss charges. (There is a presumption that the person continues
to be fit to be tried).
, M.H. (C.P.))
Question of unfitness raised before the person is brought before Court to answer charges, Attorney General determines inquiry should
be conducted by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found fit to be tried, criminal proceedings recommence or continue in normal way
, M.H. (C.P))
Question of unfitness raised before the person is brought before Court to answer charges, Attorney General determines inquiry should
be conducted by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found unfit to be tried, referred to Tribunal for finding as to whether the person is likely to become fit
to plead in the next 12 months and for finding as to whether person is mentally ill or suffering from mental condition. (There is
a presumption that, until otherwise determined, the person continues to be unfit to be tried).
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found by Tribunal likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Court may order person to be released
on bail or to be detained in prison or other place
, M.H. (C.P.))**
Question of unfitness raised before the person is brought before Court to answer charges, Attorney General determines inquiry should
be conducted by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Inquiry conducted by Court as to plead
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found unfit to be tried, referred to Tribunal for finding as to whether the person is likely to become fit
to plead in the next 12 months and for finding as to whether person is mentally ill or suffering from mental condition. (There is
a presumption that, until otherwise determined, the person continues to be unfit to be tried).
, M.H. (C.P.)) | Person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months and detained*
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Courts and Sentencing Issues
Table 3 - Person Found by Tribunal Not Likely to be Fit to be Tried Within 12 Months
person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Attorney General notified
, M.H. (C.P)) | Attorney General decides not to further proceed against the person
, M.H. (C.P))
person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Attorney General notified
, M.H. (C.P)) | Attorney General directs special hearing to be held by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | verdicts on special hearing
, M.H. (C.P.)) | not guilty of offence charged | person to be dealth with as though found not guilty in normal trial
, M.H. (C.P.))
person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Attorney General notified
, M.H. (C.P)) | Attorney General directs special hearing to be held by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | verdicts on special hearing
, M.H. (C.P.)) | not guilty on ground of mental illness | person to be detained in strict custody
, M.H. (C.P))*
person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Attorney General notified
, M.H. (C.P)) | Attorney General directs special hearing to be held by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | verdicts on special hearing
, M.H. (C.P.)) | that on limited evidence available, the person committed the offence charged or an offence available as an alternative
| Court may impose no penalty or sentence
, M.H. (C.P))
person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Attorney General notified
, M.H. (C.P)) | Attorney General directs special hearing to be held by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | verdicts on special hearing
, M.H. (C.P.)) | that on limited evidence available, the person committed the offence charged or an offence available as an alternative
| Court may nominate “limiting term” and refer person to Tribunal | if the Tribunal determines that the person is suffering
from a mental illness or from a mental condition and does not object to being detained in a hospital, the Court may order that the
person be detained in a hospital (s 27m M.H. (C.P.))** | review of detained person’s case by Tribunal (22. 80, 82, M.H.)
person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Attorney General notified
, M.H. (C.P)) | Attorney General directs special hearing to be held by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | verdicts on special hearing
, M.H. (C.P.)) | that on limited evidence available, the person committed the offence charged or an offence available as an alternative
| Court may nominate “limiting term” and refer person to Tribunal | if the Tribunal determines that the person is not
suffering from a mental illness or a mental condition, or is suffering from a mental condition but objects to being detained in a
hospital, the Court may order the person be detained in a place other than a hospital
, M.H. (C.P))** | review of detained person’s case by Tribunal
person found by tribunal not likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months, Attorney General notified
, M.H. (C.P)) | Attorney General directs special hearing to be held by Court
, M.H. (C.P.)) | verdicts on special hearing
, M.H. (C.P.)) | that on limited evidence available, the person committed the offence charged or an offence available as an alternative
| Court may impose some other penalty
* Note: The person is a forensic patient. See section 101 for circumstances when the person ceases to be a forensic patient.
** Note: The person is a forensic patient. See section 103 for circumstances whent he person ceases to be a forensic patient.
Discussion Paper 35 (1994) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System:Courts and Sentencing Issues
Table 4 - Effects of Review of Cases and Determination by Tribunal that a Person is Fit to be Tried
person who is found likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months and detained
, M.H. (C.P)) | case to be review by Tribunal
, M.H.) | Tribunal forms opinion, on review, that person is fit to be tried, notifies Attorney General
, M.H.) | Attorney General advises Court that no further proceedings will be taken. Person released
, M.H. (C.P))
person who is found likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months and detained
, M.H. (C.P)) | case to be review by Tribunal
, M.H.) | Tribunal forms opinion, on review, that person is fit to be tried, notifies Attorney General
, M.H.) | Attorney General requests Court to hold further inquiry as to fitness to plead
, M.H. (C.P)) | Court finds person fit to be tried. Criminal proceedings recommence or continue
, M.H. (C.P.))
person who is found likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months and detained
, M.H. (C.P)) | case to be review by Tribunal
, M.H.) | Tribunal forms opinion, on review, that person is fit to be tried, notifies Attorney General
, M.H.) | Attorney General requests Court to hold further inquiry as to fitness to plead
, M.H. (C.P)) | Court finds person unfit to be tried | if person accused has been detained for aggregate periods of more than 12 months,
Court must hold special hearing
, M.H. (C.P))* if special hearing has not been held
person who is found likely to become fit to be tried within 12 months and detained
, M.H. (C.P)) | case to be review by Tribunal
, M.H.) | Tribunal forms opinion, on review, that person is fit to be tried, notifies Attorney General
, M.H.) | Attorney General requests Court to hold further inquiry as to fitness to plead
, M.H. (C.P)) | Court finds person unfit to be tried | in any case, Court may conduct special hearing, if a special hearing has not
been held, or order person’s return to custody
, M.H. (C.P))**
person detained after special verdict that, on limited evidence available, the person committed an offence | case to be review by
, M.H.) | Tribunal forms opinion, on review, that person is fit to be tried, notifies Attorney General
, M.H.) | Attorney General advises Court that no further proceedings will be taken. Person released
, M.H. (C.P))
person detained after special verdict that, on limited evidence available, the person committed an offence | case to be review by
, M.H.) | Tribunal forms opinion, on review, that person is fit to be tried, notifies Attorney General
, M.H.) | Attorney General requests Court to hold further inquiry as to fitness to plead
, M.H. (C.P)) | Court finds person fit to be tried. Criminal proceedings recommence or continue
, M.H. (C.P.))
person detained after special verdict that, on limited evidence available, the person committed an offence | case to be review by
, M.H.) | Tribunal forms opinion, on review, that person is fit to be tried, notifies Attorney General
, M.H.) | Attorney General requests Court to hold further inquiry as to fitness to plead
, M.H. (C.P)) | Court finds person unfit to be tried | if person accused has been detained for aggregate periods of more than 12 months,
Court must hold special hearing
, M.H. (C.P))* if special hearing has not been held
person detained after special verdict that, on limited evidence available, the person committed an offence | case to be review by
, M.H.) | Tribunal forms opinion, on review, that person is fit to be tried, notifies Attorney General
, M.H.) | Attorney General requests Court to hold further inquiry as to fitness to plead
, M.H. (C.P)) | Court finds person unfit to be tried | in any case, Court may conduct special hearing, if a special hearing has not
been held, or order person’s return to custody
, M.H. (C.P))**
* Note: See Table 3 for results of special hearing.
** Notes: The person is a forensic patient. For circumstances when the person ceases to be a forensic patient, see section 102 (where
there has not been a special hearing) or section 103 (where there has been a special hearing).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter