URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2006/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jury Service - Issues Paper [2006] NSWLRCIP 28
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Table of Contents
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of Issues
INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND TO THE REFERENCE
USE OF JURIES
Criminal trials
Coroner’s inquests and inquiries
Civil trials
Defamation proceedings
Cost of jury service
UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES AND THEMES
Rights and duties of citizenship
Representation
People from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds
Indigenous people
Random selection
Participation
Unequal burden on those who cannot be exempted or excused
Engendering public confidence
IDENTIFYING QUALIFIED JURORS
ENROLMENT AS AN ELECTOR
Citizenship
Disqualified from voting
IDENTIFYING POTENTIAL JURORS
Compiling the jury roll
Need for a separate jury roll?
Using the electoral roll to identify and locate potential jurors
Supplementing the roll by reference to other sources
Cross-checking the roll
ABILITY TO READ OR UNDERSTAND ENGLISH
CURRENT STRUCTURE OF EXEMPTION
DISQUALIFICATION
INELIGIBILITY
RIGHT TO BE EXEMPTED
EXEMPTION FOR GOOD CAUSE
ISSUES ARISING
Merging the categories
Reducing the grounds
Civil juries
DISQUALIFICATION ON THE GROUNDS OF CRIMINALITY
GENERAL REASONS FOR DISQUALIFICATION
PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN CHARGED OR CONVICTED
Custodial sentences for adult offenders
Custodial sentences for young offenders
Non-custodial orders
Orders not specifically covered
PEOPLE AWAITING TRIAL OR SENTENCING
IDENTIFYING PEOPLE WITH CRIMINAL HISTORIES
INELIGIBILITY BASED ON OCCUPATION
INVOLVEMENT IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF LAW AND JUSTICE
Australian lawyers
Past and present judicial officers and coroners
Administration of justice and corrections
Retirees previously involved in the administration of law or justice
Spouses of ineligible people
OTHER GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
The Governor and Lieutenant Governor
Members of parliament
Officers of the parliament
Senior public servants
Supervisory bodies
PEOPLE EXEMPT UNDER COMMONWEALTH PROVISIONS
RIGHT TO EXEMPTION BASED ON OCCUPATION
HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
EMERGENCY SERVICES
CLERGY AND RELIGIOUS
MINING MANAGERS AND UNDER-MANAGERS OF MINES
GROUPS NOT INCLUDED
Small business owners and employees
OTHER GROUNDS OF EXEMPTION
INABILITY TO READ AND UNDERSTAND ENGLISH
Assessing ability
MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS
Sickness or infirmity
CARER RESPONSIBILITIES
Care of people under 18 years
Care of people in need of full-time care
DISTANCE FROM COURT
PREVIOUS JURY SERVICE
CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTION
EXCUSED FOR GOOD CAUSE
REASONS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
RIGHT OF APPEAL
MANAGEMENT OF JURY SERVICE
SELECTION AND EMPANELMENT
Selection boundaries
Matters impacting upon the convenience of jurors
Sufficient notice of attendance
Attendance on the wrong day
Case management
Attendance on more than one day before empanelment
When individual jurors are discharged
Length of trial
Dealing with bias and conflicts of interest
Before or at the commencement of proceedings
After the commencement of proceedings
ACCOMMODATING JURORS
ENFORCEMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH JURY DUTY
Failure to attend
Procedure and penalties
JURORS’ EMPLOYMENT
Protecting jurors’ jobs
Employment during jury service
COMPENSATION TO JURORS
Attendance allowances
Continuing normal salary or wages
Amount of payment
Compensation to employers
Recoupment of personal expenses
Travelling allowance
Refreshment allowance
Appendix A:
Preliminary Submissions
Appendix B:
Preliminary consultations
Table of cases
Table of legislation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Terms of reference
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
a letter to the Commission received on 14 August 2006, the Attorney
General, the Hon R J Debus MP issued the following terms of
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
the Law Reform Commission is to inquire into and report on the
operation and effectiveness of the system for selecting jurors under
Jury Act 1977
In undertaking this inquiry, the Commission should have regard to:
Whether the current statutory qualifications and liability for jury service remain appropriate;
Alternative options for excusing a person from jury service;
Recent developments in other Australian and international jurisdictions in relation to the selection of jurors; and
Any other related matter.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Participants
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the
purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
The Hon James Wood AO QC (Commissioner-in-charge)
Professor Michael Tilbury
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
The Hon James Wood AO QC
Mr Joseph Waugh
Mr Nelson Trieu
Ms Anna Williams
Desktop Publishing
Mr Terence Stewart
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Submissions
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review,
including but not limited to the issues raised in this Issues
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
Postal addresses:
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 2001
or DX 1227 Sydney
Street Address:
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
Telephone (02) 9228 8230
Facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
The closing date for submissions is 17 February 2007.
Confidentiality and use of submissions
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission
will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. If
would like all or part of your submission to be treated as
confidential, please indicate this in your submission. The Commission
will respect requests for confidentiality when using submissions in
later publications.
Copies of submissions made to the Commission will also normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. Any
request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act
Other publication formats
The Commission is committed to meeting fully its obligations
under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination legislation. These
require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices
which may prevent people with disabilities from having full and equal
access to our services. This publication is available in alternative
formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
List of issues
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Should the principal qualification for jury service be enrolment as an elector for the Legislative Assembly?
Should qualification to serve as a juror be limited to Australian citizens?
Should the qualification be extended to permanent residents or to other classes of people?
Is it necessary to have a jury roll that is separate from the electoral roll?
Should it be possible to use other sources of information to:
(a) cross-check entries in the electoral roll, for example as to their current address or possible disqualification;
(b) supplement the names of potential jurors derived from the
electoral roll by including those who are entitled to register as
but have not done so?
What other sources of information should be used to identify potential jurors?
Should an ability to read or understand English be a qualification for jury service?
What should the level of ability be?
Should there continue to be separate grounds of disqualification and ineligibility?
Should the categories for excluding, exempting or excusing jurors be the same for civil juries as they are for criminal juries?
Should people who have been subject to custodial sentences continue to be disqualified from jury service?
What level of penalty ought to disqualify a person from jury service?
How long after the termination of the sentence should a person continue to be disqualified?
Should separate provision be made for the disqualification of young offenders?
Should there be any modification of the disqualification criteria
for those people who have been dealt with as a juvenile, but who
now attained their majority?
What non-custodial or other orders should disqualify a person from jury service?
Should the grounds be amended so as to reflect in a more precise and currently relevant way, the criteria for disqualification?
Should people who are awaiting trial or sentencing be disqualified from jury service?
Should this category be varied so as to include those awaiting trial
or sentence, who have been released unconditionally or otherwise?
Should lawyers or a particular group of lawyers, continue to be ineligible to serve on juries?
Under what conditions, if any, should lawyers be ineligible to serve on juries?
Should judicial officers continue to be ineligible for jury service?
Under what conditions, if any, should judicial officers be ineligible for jury service?
Should ineligibility for jury service continue to apply to people
currently employed or engaged (except on a casual or voluntary basis)
in the public sector in law enforcement, criminal investigation, the
provision of legal services in criminal cases, the administration
justice or penal administration?
Should this ineligibility apply to civil trials as well as criminal trials?
Should any categories of people who have retired from positions
associated with the administration of law and justice continue to
ineligible for jury service and, if so, which of these categories?
Should there be a period of ineligibility and, if so, what should it be for any or all of those categories?
Should the spouses or partners of any categories of people who hold
or have held positions associated with the administration of law
justice be ineligible for jury service?
Should members of the NSW Parliament, or some members (for example,
ministers or shadow ministers) continue to be ineligible for jury
Should officers and/or other staff of the NSW Parliament continue to be ineligible for jury service?
Should any public servants be ineligible to serve as jurors?
If so, what should be the relevant criteria for ineligibility?
Should the Ombudsman or Deputy Ombudsman continue to be ineligible for jury service?
Should officers of other supervisory bodies, such as the Independent
Commission Against Corruption and the Police Integrity Commission,
be ineligible for jury service?
Should NSW request that the Commonwealth repeal any or all of the exemptions under the
Jury Exemption Act 1965
Should the members of any profession or calling be entitled to claim an exemption as of right from jury service?
Should members of any of the health professions be entitled to claim exemption as of right from jury service?
If so, which categories should have that right?
Should members of any of the emergency services be entitled to claim exemption as of right from jury service?
Should any conditions be attached to that right?
Under what circumstances, if any, ought clergy and/or religious be entitled to claim an exemption as of right from jury service?
Should mining managers and under-managers of mines continue to be entitled to exemption from jury service?
Should the teaching staff at schools, universities and colleges be entitled to exemption as of right from jury service?
If so, under what conditions?
Should students be entitled to exemption as of right from jury service?
If so, under what conditions?
How should the concerns of small business owners and employees be met?
What should be the requirement for eligibility concerning a juror’s ability to read, understand or communicate English?
Should disability which impacts upon a person’s ability to
discharge the duties of a juror continue to be a ground of
ineligibility?
Should such disability be more precisely defined?
Should inability to discharge the duties of a juror because of
sickness or infirmity continue to be a ground of ineligibility or
it be dealt with as an application to be excused for good cause?
Should pregnancy continue to be a ground of exemption as of right from jury service?
Should age be a ground of ineligibility or exemption from jury service?
What conditions should attach to any requirement of ineligibility or right of exemption?
Should the care of children or of others continue to be a ground of exemption as of right?
What, if any, conditions should attach in order for it to be exercised?
What geographical criteria, if any, should be applied in
determining whether a person should be exempted or excused from jury
On what terms, if any, should people be exempted or excused from
jury service on the grounds of previous jury service or attendance
jury service?
What provision, if any, should be made for people who have a conscientious objection to jury service?
Should those, or some of those, within the present category of
exemption as of right, be required instead to apply to be excused from
jury service by demonstrating a good cause?
Should there be a statutory list of “good reasons” for
excusing a person from jury service or should the power to excuse
left at large to be exercised at the discretion of the Sheriff or of
the trial judge or coroner?
If the former, what reasons should be included on that list?
Should there be published guidelines for excusing people from jury service?
Should they be in addition to or instead of any statutory list of reasons?
What reasons should the guidelines identify as constituting good cause?
Should there be a right of appeal against a decision not to excuse a person for good reason?
What provision, if any, should be made for potential jurors to defer jury service?
Should it be possible to reallocate potential jurors to serve in a
trial that would avoid or limit the hardship that may be occasioned
requiring them to serve in the trial to which their panel is allocated?
How should the geographic areas from which jurors are chosen for particular courts be selected?
What provision, if any, should be made for people to volunteer for jury service?
What additional strategies could be adopted to make jury service more convenient for jurors?
What strategies could be adopted to accommodate jurors and potential jurors better?
Are the current procedures and penalties for enforcing jury service adequate?
Are the current provisions protecting a juror’s employment during jury service adequate?
Should employers be prevented from requiring jurors to work at times when they are not required for jury service?
Are the provisions for the reimbursement and/or compensation of
jurors and potential jurors who attend for jury service adequate?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
1. Introduction
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
ckground to the reference
Use of juries
Underlying principles and themes
BACKGROUND TO THE REFERENCE
1.1 This reference has been stimulated by two main concerns.
First, the extent to which juries have become unrepresentative of the
community because of the numbers of people who are either disqualified,
ineligible to serve or who exercise their entitlement to
be excused as
of right or apply to be excused for good reason. Secondly, the fact
that the burden of serving on juries is shared
inequitably or in
circumstances where the resource is not used to the best economic and
efficient advantage.
1.2 Further, a review of the legislation in NSW is timely in
light of the fact that substantial reforms concerning the composition
of juries and the conditions of service have occurred in other
and the fact that the last formal review of the
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) occurred in 1993-1994.
USE OF JURIES
1.3 Although juries may be used in criminal trials in the Supreme and District Courts,
in the Coroner’s Court
and in some civil trials,
their use has diminished significantly in recent years.
Criminal trials
1.4 In the Supreme Court or District Court, an accused person
who elects to go to trial will normally be tried by a judge and jury.
Such a person may, however, be tried by judge alone where:
that person makes an election before the date fixed for trial;
the judge is satisfied that he or she made the election having
sought and received advice about the election from a legal
practitioner;
all other accused persons in the trial make a similar election;
each of the accused persons in the trial make an election with respect to all of the offences with which they have been charged;
the Director of Public Prosecutions consents to the elections.
1.5 An accused person who goes to trial for a Commonwealth offence
following presentation of an indictment in the Supreme Court or
District Court cannot elect for a judge alone trial.
However, there is a substantial body of indictable offences against
both State and Commonwealth laws that can be tried summarily,
with the consent of the accused
or without such consent.
These further reduce the incidence of jury trials.
1.6 In 2005, only 0.4% of criminal cases overall proceeded to a defended hearing in the Supreme Court and District Court.
This is consistent with the findings in our Report on majority verdicts
by juries that, in 2003, only 0.5% of criminal cases overall
to a defended hearing in the Supreme Court and District Court.
Although there has been no refinement of the statistics to identify the
percentage of cases tried by a judge and jury, it would appear
juries continue to determine the question of guilt in less than 0.5% of
all criminal trials in NSW.
Coroner’s inquests and inquiries
1.7 Coroners are empowered to conduct inquests into deaths or suspected deaths
and inquire into fires and explosions.
Such inquests or inquiries are usually held before a coroner without a jury.
However, they must be held before a coroner with a jury where directed by the Minister or State Coroner,
or where requested by a relative of the person who has died or is
suspected of having died, or the secretary of any organisation
the person was a member immediately before the death or suspected death.
1.8 It is understood that juries are rarely used in
Coroner’s inquests or inquiries. Recent cases of the use of 6
person coronial
juries include: in 2000, an inquest into the death of a
man at the Star City casino;
in 2002, an inquest into the shooting death of a man during a police siege,
and an inquest into the death of a camper from a falling tree;
and in 2005, an inquest into the death of an employee in a mining accident at Broken Hill.
Civil trials
1.9 Juries are not available for civil matters in the Local
Courts and are now used very infrequently in the Supreme Court and
1.10 Until 1965 all actions for personal injuries could be
tried by a judge and jury. During that year, legislation was passed
that right in proceedings where the plaintiff claimed damages
for personal injuries arising out of the use of a motor vehicle.
Prior to this, trial by a jury had become the norm for disputed issues
of fact in common law trials, being supported both by those
represented plaintiffs and those who represented the insurers of
defendants, although it was open to the parties to dispense
with a jury
by consent. A statutory and inherent power in the Court to dispense
with a jury was also recognised but it was not often
1.11 In most instances the trial was by a jury of four people, although a power did exist, and continues to exist,
to order that there be a jury of twelve.
1.12 In 1970, the
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) provided,
as a general principle, that proceedings in civil cases should be tried
without a jury unless the Court otherwise
There were several exceptions or qualifications to this general rule in the Common Law Division in that:
a prima facie entitlement to have issues of fact tried by a jury
was established where a party filed a requisition for a jury and
the prescribed jury fee;
running down cases were not to be tried by a jury unless all
the parties consented or unless the Court, on the application of one
party so ordered;
where there were issues of fact on a charge of fraud, or a
claim in respect of defamation, malicious prosecution, false
imprisonment,
seduction or breach of promise of marriage, the trial was
to be by jury;
where issues of fact arose in relation to a defence under
certain workers’ compensation provisions they were to be tried
1.13 In 1988, the Court of Appeal held that the onus was on the
applicant, who sought an order dispensing with a jury, to show that
party who requisitioned the jury, should be deprived of that mode of
trial. It also held that, in exercising the discretion to
dispense with
a jury, the Court was not permitted to apply criteria which were of
universal application to jury trials (for example,
efficiency, brevity
and costs) without considering their specific application to the facts,
necessities and justice of the particular
case, or to have regard to
the consequences of the trial proceeding with a jury for other cases
waiting in the Court’s list.
1.14 The effect of this decision was to limit the number of common
law cases where applications were made, or orders successfully
to dispense with juries in work injury cases or defamation cases which,
by 1988, represented the bulk of litigation in the
Supreme Court.
1.15 In 2001, amendments introduced a presumption in both the
Supreme and District Courts of trial without a jury unless “the
Court is satisfied that the interests of justice require a trial by
jury in the proceedings”.
This followed upon a jury
decision in which a plaintiff was awarded $2.5m in damages for injuries
received as the result of corporal
punishment administered to him while
a school pupil.
Following this amendment, the use of
civil juries in the Supreme Court and District Court has all but
ceased, save for proceedings
for defamation.
1.16 The limited use of juries in civil trials can be
demonstrated by reference to the following statistics provided by the
Court for the years 2004-2006:
s 7A defamation trials
settled on or prior to hearing
other cases (mainly medical negligence claims)
settled on or prior to hearing
s 7A defamation trials
settled on or prior to hearing
other cases
settled on or prior to hearing
(to 30 September)
s 7A defamation trials
settled on or prior to hearing
other cases
settled on or prior to hearing
settled on or prior to hearing
1.17 Although civil juries are routinely used in defamation trials in
the District Court (for s 7A issues and now for the wider purposes
which there is provision in the
Defamation Act
they are all but non-existent for other civil trials. Of the 12 civil
jury trials so far listed in the District Court in the 2006
year, only 4 have proceeded to trial. In 2005, there were 4 jury trials
in the District Court.
1.18 Other developments that have seen a decrease in the use of
juries in civil trials have been the amendments to the workers’
compensation legislation which have substituted modified rights to
common law damages, with various thresholds and ceilings. The
consequent decline in common law claims for work-related injuries has
been substantial and this, combined with the presumption of
without a jury in the Supreme Court and District Court, means that
there will now be very few common law claims, other than
cases, tried by juries.
Defamation proceedings
1.19 The role of juries in defamation proceedings has changed
over the years, as has the extent of their possible commitment. Prior
to amendments in 1994, the jury was required to consider virtually all
of the factual issues.
In 1994 their role was confined to the issue whether the imputations pleaded were conveyed and whether they were defamatory,
with the result that jury trials in relation to these issues seldom
lasted more than one or two days. The introduction of uniform
means that juries will now be required to determine
all factual issues other than damages. This has expanded the potential
involvement
of juries in defamation proceedings.
1.20 The incidence of jury trials in these cases will now
increase, although plaintiffs may seek to avoid this consequence by
proceedings in the Supreme Court of the ACT, where trials will
continue to take place without a jury.
1.21 By reason of the limited use of juries other than in
criminal trials, this Issues Paper and the reference will largely
concentrate
on juries in the criminal jurisdiction.
Cost of jury service
1.22 The Sheriff has provided the following estimate of jury costs for the 2005-2006 financial year:
Jury fees and travel ……………
Staffing for jury management ..
Meals and refreshments ………
Supplies (including jury views)
Postage and stationery ………...
TOTAL…………………………....
1.23 For the period 1 July 2005 to 12 May 2006,
$4,840,135 was paid in fees to jurors who were empanelled to serve, and
$945,635 was
paid to those who reported for service and were held in
reserve or were kept waiting at court for more than 4 hours pending
empanelment. The Sheriff has expressed concern that there is a
degree of wastage in relation to this group of people who are summoned
but not required to serve that could be overcome by better court
management procedures.
UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES AND THEMES
1.24 It is not the purpose of this reference to question the
merits or desirability of trial by jury. However, it is important to
consider some of the underlying principles and themes that relate to
juries and jury service.
Rights and duties of citizenship
1.25 Jury duty is an important civic duty and those who become
involved in criminal trials have an expectation that they will be
by a judge and jury. Trial by jury is said to be “for
the benefit of the community as a whole as well as for the benefit of
the particular accused”.
1.26 Reducing categories of exemption from jury service is seen
as spreading “the obligation of jury service more equitably
the community”.
If a large number of people are
exempted or excused from jury service then a higher burden is imposed
on those who are still eligible.
Representation
1.27 Representation in this context refers to a representative
sample of the whole population. Perfect representation is obviously
possible since the process of jury selection is one involving random
selection from a relatively small pool. Representation is
achieving representation by particular groups on particular juries, but
rather, as the New Zealand Law Commission has suggested:
What is required is that all persons who are eligible to serve on
juries, including those who are younger or older, or from ethnic
minorities, do have an equal
opportunity
1.28 The High Court, in 1993, stated that “the relevant essential
feature or requirement of the institution was, and is, that
the jury be
a body of persons representative of the wider community”.
1.29 In 1965, the UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service stated that:
A jury should represent a cross-section drawn at random from the
community, and should be the means of bringing to bear on the issues
that face them the corporate good sense of that community. This cannot
be in the keeping of the few, but is something to which all
women of good will must contribute.
1.30 Amendments were made in 1977 in NSW because the “outmoded
selection system and the proliferation of persons who may claim
exemption from jury service” meant that jury rolls were then
“not truly representative of the ordinary citizen”.
This was seen as a problem once again in 1993 when the NSW Jury Task
Force declared that “a jury is not really representative
community as a whole” because of the existing categories of
disqualification, ineligibility and exemption as of right.
Other reviews have expressed similar concerns.
1.31 Concerns have sometimes been expressed that “citizens
with better education or in high status employment [are] invariably
excluded from jury duty”.
The Auld review of the
criminal courts in England and Wales saw this trend as a particular
concern in relation to “long and
complex cases” where
“a range of experience and intellect is most needed”.
It may be argued that if those who are exempted represent sections of
the community with particular skills and experience, then the
expectation that trial by jury will involve an informed and careful
consideration of the issues is at risk.
1.32 In a survey conducted in Western Australia in 1983, 88.9%
of respondents felt that “highly educated persons such as
professors,
school teachers, doctors, [and] clergymen,” should
not continue to be exempt from jury service.
People from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds
1.33 There is a danger that the absence of particular minority
groups from juries may render them open to a charge of bias in some
1.34 The Australian Law Reform Commission, in its report on
multiculturalism and the law, considered that the exclusion of people
who are not registered to vote and who have an inadequate command of
English meant that juries were not truly representative of the
community. This was seen as affecting the “perceived
legitimacy” of the jury system. The Commission noted that some
from culturally diverse backgrounds fear that
“jurors’ hostility and suspicion towards people of
non-English speaking
backgrounds may prejudice the chances of a fair
trial where the accused or any witnesses or victims belong to
particular ethnic minorities”.
Indigenous people
1.35 This danger of bias has been further highlighted in the
Australian context by reference to the apparent under-representation
Indigenous people on juries compared with the over-representation of
them as criminal defendants. The NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics
Research has reported that the rate of Indigenous appearances in Court
on criminal charges is 13 times that of non-Indigenous
Australians, and
that their rate of imprisonment is 10 times that of non-indigenous
Australians.
A 1994 Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration review noted that Indigenous people comprise 7% of the
prison population but
less than 0.5% of jurors.
a study conducted by the NSW Law Reform Commission reported that 0.4%
of jurors were of Aboriginal origin, compared with
0.6% of people of
Aboriginal origin in the general population.
More recent figures show that in 2001, Aboriginal people made up 1.9% of the NSW population
and, in 2004, Aboriginal people made up 16.8% of the NSW prison population.
1.36 A number of reasons have been provided for the low proportion of Indigenous jurors in NSW, including:
the greater likelihood that members of transient populations will
not be included in the electoral roll (from which the jury roll
the strict disqualification provisions that apply to people with criminal records;
the fact that, in some regional districts, Indigenous jurors
may be known or related to Indigenous defendants, particularly in light
of their extended concept of family relationships;
lower literacy rates and the ineffectiveness of written communication may mean that some people do not respond to jury notices.
Random selection
1.37 The High Court, in 1993, considered that one of the
“unchanging elements” of the principle of representation is
“the panel of jurors be randomly or impartially selected
rather than chosen by the prosecution or the State”.
In an earlier case, the Court had observed that random selection was
one of the characteristics of a jury that offered “some
that the accused will not be judged by reference to sensational or
self-righteous pre-trial publicity or the passions of
1.38 The principle of random selection is expressly mentioned in the statutes of most Australian jurisdictions, including NSW.
1.39 The right of peremptory challenge is to an extent inconsistent with the principle of random selection.
The alternative is to confine the right of challenge to challenge for
cause or to create a system for jury vetting of the kind seen
States in the US. A certain level of peremptory challenge is generally
considered not to offend the principles of random
selection. There is a
greater risk that the practice of jury vetting may overstep the mark.
It is not, however, the purpose of this reference to question the
existing practice which permits both peremptory challenge and challenge
for cause, or to consider any form of jury vetting which would permit
exploration of the personal histories or attitudes of potential
1.40 Attention will, however, be given to the categories of
people who are disqualified, ineligible or entitled to exemption as of
right, since their exclusion or exemption from service can have a
direct impact on the representativeness of the jury.
Participation
1.41 It has been suggested that “participation by the
community helps to ensure that the justice system remains in touch with
and accountable” to all the citizens of a State.
The NSW Jury Task Force in 1993 considered that jury service gave
members of the community “the opportunity to contribute to
making, in the sense that juries help keep the judiciary in touch with
current community thinking”.
1.42 Jury service is seen as an important point of contact between the court system and the public at large.
In the UK in 1965 the Departmental Committee on Jury Service considered
jury service to be a “valuable social and educational
experience” and agreed with those who argued that “it is
desirable for as many people as possible, from all walks of
play their part in the administration of justice”.
The NSW Law Reform Commission, in its review of the jury in criminal trials, observed:
The jury system is... an important link between the community and
the criminal justice system. It ensures that the criminal justice
system meets minimum standards of fairness and openness in its
operation and decision-making, and that it continues to be broadly
acceptable to the community and to accused people. The participation of
laypeople in the system itself validates the administration
and, more generally, incorporates democratic values into that system.
One English legislator also recently observed:
It gives people an important role as jurors - as stakeholders - in
the criminal justice system. Seeing the courts in action and
participating
in that process maintains public trust and confidence in
Unequal burden on those who cannot be exempted or excused
1.43 Participation can be a burden in some cases. Currently the
burden is unequally shared. Some people may be called upon too
frequently,
although whether this is the case is difficult to ascertain
in the absence of statistics, and in circumstances where prior jury
particularly recent service, can provide a good reason to be
exempted or excused. If it does in fact occur then it is more likely
be the case in regional areas than in metropolitan areas.
1.44 The Auld review in the UK observed that avoidance of jury
service by many in the community “is unfair to those who do their
jury service, not least because, as a result of others’ avoidance
of it, they may be required to serve more frequently and
than would otherwise be necessary”.
1.45 The extent to which citizens may be called upon to perform
jury service will vary according to their place of residence, and
incidence of trials at courts within the prescribed limit of their
residence. In the Sydney metropolitan district in 2004 there
2,200,000 enrolled electors. In that same year 406 criminal matters
proceeded to trial in the Supreme Court and District
Court in Sydney
and South West Sydney, requiring, about 5000 jurors.
every enrolled elector was eligible to be a juror, and if 2004 was
typical, this would suggest that, in any given year, each person
electoral roll would stand an approximate 1 in 450 chance of actually
serving. However, that chance would increase once people
disqualified, ineligible, entitled to exemption or excused for good
cause are removed from the available pool. The situation
course, be different in regional areas.
1.46 Lord Justice Auld considered it possible that, once
patterns emerge following the removal of most categories of exemption,
increases” could be permitted in the period during
which a person may be excused for previous jury service.
Engendering public confidence
1.47 People are more likely to accept jury verdicts if they are
seen as being representative, so the jury has a role in legitimising
the system of which it is part.
For example, the High Court observed in 1986 that the:
essential conception of trial by jury helps to ensure that, in the
interests of the community generally, the administration of criminal
justice is, and has the appearance of being, unbiased and detached.
In an earlier case the High Court observed:
The nature of the jury as a body of ordinary citizens called from
the community to try the particular case offers some assurance that
community as a whole will be more likely to accept a jury’s
verdict than it would be to accept the judgment of a judge
magistrate who might be, or be portrayed as being, over-responsive to
authority or remote from the affairs and concerns of ordinary
1.48 The general opinion in the community is that “normally, the jury trial is the fairest form of trial available”.
However, in order to ensure a fair trial, it is important that a jury
is composed in a way that avoids bias or apprehension of bias.
discussed later in this report this does have a bearing on the
representative nature of the jury and the retention of certain
categories of disqualification or exclusion.
1.49 Some jurisdictions give the judge an express power to
discharge a jury in certain circumstances where its composition might
the trial unfair or appear to be unfair. For example, in NSW, the
presiding judge has the power to discharge the jury if “the
exercise of the rights to make peremptory challenges has resulted in a
jury whose composition is such that the trial might be or
might appear
to be unfair”.
This power is, however, rarely
exercised. In other jurisdictions it is considered that the principle
of random selection is generally
sufficient to ensure fairness and that
any power to discharge should only be exercised where the competence of
the jurors is in question.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
. In, eg, Victoria:
Juries Act 2000
(Vic), and Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996); Tasmania:
Juries Act 2003
(Tas), and Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999); England and Wales:
Criminal Justice Act 2003
(Eng), R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001); New York:
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994).
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993); and M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994).
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Coroners Act 1980
. Civil actions are generally to be tried without a jury unless a jury is required in the interests of justice:
Supreme Court Act 1970
District Court Act 1973
Defamation Act 2005
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Constitution
Brown v The Queen
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 476; and
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 495-496A; and
Crimes Act 1914
. NSW, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
NSW Criminal Court Statistics 2005
, Tables 1.3 and 3.2.
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
Majority Verdicts
(Report 111, 2005) at para 1.6-1.7.
Coroners Act 1980
Coroners Act 1980
Coroners Act 1980
Coroners Act 1980
Coroners Act 1980
. S Gibbs, “Jury shown Star City death video”
Sydney Morning Herald
(9 May 2000) at 8.
. “Jury clears marksman”
Daily Telegraph
(11 May 2002) at 7.
. J Bartlett, “Jury to decide camper inquest”
Herald (Newcastle)
(30 May 2002) at 1.
. “Inquest prompts mine safety recommendations”
ABC Premium News
(11 February 2005).
. These were referred to as “running down cases”. See
Motor Vehicles Third Party Insurance Amendment Act 1965
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1965
Jury Act 1977
Supreme Court Act 1970
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 86, although subject to the Court having the power, save as hereafter mentioned, to dispense with a jury:
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 89(1).
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 87, consent invariably being refused, and orders by the Court rarely being made.
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 88, subject, however,
to the Court having the power to order that any or all of the issues be
tried without a jury where a
prolonged examination of documents or
scientific or local investigation were required and could not
conveniently be made with a jury,
or all parties consent to such an
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 89(2).
Workers Compensation Act 1926
Pambula District Hospital v Herriman
(1988) 14 NSWLR 387.
Courts Legislation Amendment (Civil Juries) Act 2001
(NSW) amending
Supreme Court Act 1970
and repealing s 86-89; inserting
District Court Act 1973
and repealing s 78-79A.
. New appeal granted confined to damages assessment:
Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church v Hogan
[2001] NSWCA 381.
Defamation Act 2005
Under this Act,
a party may elect for trial by jury, unless the Court otherwise orders
(s 21(1)). The Court may, however, order that
such proceedings are not
to be tried by jury if they involve a prolonged examination of records,
or any technical, scientific or
other issue that cannot be conveniently
considered and resolved by a jury (s 21(2)). See para 1.19-1.21.
. Not reached cases and vacated fixtures are excluded.
Defamation (Amendment) Act 1994
Defamation Act 1974
Defamation Act 2005
. Both the ACT and SA have departed from the uniform law in this respect.
Brown v The Queen
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171
at 201 (Deane J).
. Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
House of Assembly, 19 August 2003 at 44. See also Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 4.
. See Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 3.
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 135.
Cheatle v The Queen
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 53.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 24 February 1977, at 4475.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 23. This point was also raised in M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 173.
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation,
Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper,
1999) at ch 2; Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation
Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 3-4.
. D Challinger (ed),
(Australian Institute of
Criminology Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986) at 2. See also Law Reform
Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.36.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 137.
. I M Vodanovich, “Public attitudes about the jury” in D Challinger (ed),
(Australian Institute of Criminology Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986) at 81.
. See England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 133.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992) at para 10.44.
. D Weatherburn, L Snowball, B Hunter,
The Economic and Social Factors Underpinning Indigenous Contact with the Justice System: Results from the NATSISS Survey
(NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research, Crime and Justice Bulletin, No 104, 2006) at 1.
. See M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 5.
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial: Empirical Studies
(Research Report 1, 1986) at para 3.29.
The People of New South Wales: Statistics from the 2001 Census
(Community Relations Commission for a Multicultural New South Wales, 2003) at Table 2.2.
. S Corben,
NSW Inmate Census 2004: Summary of Characteristics
(NSW, Department of Corrective Services, Statistical Publication No 26, 2004) at 3.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 5.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 5. See para 4.9-4.20 below.
. L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
Cheatle v The Queen
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2000
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 1957
. See discussions in Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 6.32-6.41.
. See Queensland, Criminal Justice Commission,
the Honourable W J Carter QC on his Inquiry into the Selection of the
Jury for the Trial of Sir Johannes Bjelke-Petersen
(1993) at 480.
. See England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 133; NSW,
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 24; Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 3-4.
. Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
House of Assembly, 19 August 2003 at 43.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 14.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 13.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 59.
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(DP 12, 1985) at para 2.27.
. United Kingdom,
(House of Lords), 28 September 2000, col 995.
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.39.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 140. See also Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.62.
. Allowing for aborted trials and trials that had a false start.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 150.
. See M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 17. See also R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 135, 139. But see also I M Vodanovich, “Public attitudes about the jury” in D Challinger (ed),
(Australian
Institute of Criminology Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986) at 75; M
Findlay, “Reforming the jury: the common ground”
Challinger (ed),
(Australian Institute of Criminology Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986) at 155.
Brown v The Queen
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
R v Abdroikov
[2005] 4 All ER 869 at 878 (CA).
Jury Act 1977
[1989] QB 868
at 871; New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 158-160.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
2. Identifying qualified jurors
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Enrolment as an elector
Identifying potential jurors
Ability to read or understand English
ENROLMENT AS AN ELECTOR
2.1 In NSW “every person who is enrolled as an elector
for the Legislative Assembly... is qualified and liable to serve as a
This is dependent upon age and citizenship as is the case in most Australian jurisdictions.
Should the principal qualification for jury service be enrolment as an elector for the Legislative Assembly?
Citizenship
2.2 The requirement of citizenship arises from the electoral
qualifications, which includes citizens, as well as British subjects
who were enrolled as electors immediately before 26 January 1984.
Permanent residency does not suffice, although there have been various
proposals in other Australian jurisdictions to extend the
franchise to
permanent residents.
2.3 For example, a 1993 Queensland review argued that extending
the franchise to permanent residents would broaden the group from
jurors are selected and “may facilitate a more frequent
representation of racial and ethnic groups on juries”.
2.4 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee accepted,
as a matter of principle, that there was merit in allowing permanent
residents to serve as jurors. However, the Committee also acknowledged
the current administrative difficulties in establishing an
Reasons given for removing the citizenship limitation included that it:
reduces the representativeness of juries;
encroaches on an accused’s “right to have a trial by his or her peers”;
prevents people who have a sufficient commitment to the
community (that is, permanent residents) from participating in the
administration
of justice.
2.5 In New Zealand a person is eligible to serve if he or she is registered as an elector.
This includes not only citizens but also those who have been permanent
residents of New Zealand and have “at some time resided
continuously in New Zealand for a period of not less than one
In England and Wales resident aliens were
once able to serve as jurors if they had been domiciled in England or
Wales for 10 years
2.6 The Commission recognises that there would be practical
difficulties involved in making non-citizens, such as permanent
qualified to serve as jurors when they are not included on
the electoral roll. For that to work there would need to be a database,
accessible to the Sheriff, that maintains a current record of the
addresses of such people, which would require the co-operation
Commonwealth Department of Immigration. Absent some such system, or
alternatively one that allowed voluntary registration
of permanent
residents, there could be insurmountable problems in locating such
people with an escalation of administrative costs.
Should qualification to serve as a juror be limited to Australian citizens?
Should the qualification be extended to permanent residents or to other classes of people?
2.7 Citizens over the age of 18 are qualified to vote
and are, therefore, qualified to be enrolled as jurors.
2.8 Some jurisdictions specify an upper age limit beyond which
people are not qualified to serve. For example, in SA a person is
if they are “not above the age of 70 years”.
In NSW the qualification is not limited by an upper age, although a
person aged 70 years or above has a right to claim exemption.
Exemptions based on age are dealt with in Chapter 7.
Disqualified from voting
2.9 Under NSW law, a number of people, despite being citizens
and over 18 years of age, are disqualified from being enrolled as
people meeting various classifications under the
Mental Health Act 1958
people convicted of an offence and currently serving a sentence of imprisonment of 12 months or more for that offence;
people holding a temporary entry permit or who are prohibited immigrants.
IDENTIFYING POTENTIAL JURORS
Compiling the jury roll
2.10 The jury roll for a jury district that serves a particular
court is compiled from the names of those people enrolled as electors
for the Legislative Assembly in that district. A jury district usually
comprises such electoral districts or parts or electoral districts
are closest to the court in question. At least once every 12 months,
the Sheriff must select at random from the relevant electoral
number of people who may be included on each jury roll. Each list of
names of people so selected is referred to in the legislation
“supplementary jury roll”. The Sheriff must, when deciding
the number of people to include on a supplementary jury
roll, estimate
the number of people who may be required to serve from time to time,
allowing for people who are not qualified, or
who are ineligible or who
will duly claim exemption from service.
2.11 The Sheriff sends a notice to each person whose name is
included on the supplementary jury roll for a jury district, informing
that person of the intention to include him or her on the jury roll,
and describing the classes of people who are disqualified, ineligible
or entitled to claim exemption as of right.
must contain a questionnaire to be completed by a respondent claiming
disqualification, ineligibility or exemption from
jury service.
2.12 The Sheriff is under a duty to delete from the
supplementary jury roll the names of persons whom the Sheriff
determines are disqualified,
ineligible or who have successfully
claimed exemption from serving as jurors.
appeal lies to a Local Court by any person dissatisfied with the
Sheriff’s determination not to delete his or her
The current practice is that, after 28 days, the names of those who
have not been removed from the supplementary jury roll are duly
included on the roll for the jury district and are thereafter liable to
be summoned to serve as jurors. A person remains on the jury
period of 15 months, or such other period, not exceeding two years, as
may be prescribed by regulation.
Need for a separate jury roll?
2.13 The existence of a separate jury roll arises from the days
when there were no electoral rolls and the list was compiled based
property qualification and posted on church doors. In later years it
served a function whereby every three years those who were
disqualified
or ineligible from the pool of potential jurors were removed from the
roll. However, if the exemptions are largely removed,
then it would
seem just as convenient to use the Electoral roll as it stands on the
day that a summons is issued.
2.14 Summoning directly from the electoral roll may also have
some other administrative benefits. For example, the current practice
of sending out notices of inclusion may confuse some recipients who
mistake the document for a notice requiring their attendance,
result that the Sheriff’s Office must deal with many telephone
inquiries. This process could, therefore, be streamlined
procedure was altered so as to permit summoning directly from the
electoral roll. Also, if the right to claim an exemption
were retained
for some groups of people, the Sheriff’s current practice of
excluding such people when they respond to the notice
of inclusion,
rather than including them and deferring the claim until such time as a
summons is served reduces the number of people
who could potentially
serve, if prepared, at that later date.
2.15 There is precedent for summoning directly from the
electoral rolls. In Queensland, the Principal Electoral Officer
prepares jury
rolls by listing all persons aged between 18 and 70, who
live within a certain distance of the relevant court and who are on the
electoral roll. The Officer then forwards the lists to the Sheriff who
posts notices to randomly selected persons 6 weeks in advance
court sittings for which jurors are required. These notices include a
questionnaire designed to identify those who are ineligible
disqualified from service and also gives the opportunity for others to
claim exemption as of right. A computer then randomly selects
of those who will comprise the jury panels from which the juries will
be selected.
In England and Wales, potential jurors are now also summoned directly from the electoral rolls.
2.16 In the ACT the jury roll is compiled by removing from the
electoral roll those who are dead, not qualified, exempt or excused
from serving.
2.17 The Tasmanian review noted that with the advent of
computers, “there is no reason why panels cannot be drawn
directly from
the whole jury roll”. Although the review also
noted there were advantages in having discrete lists that were active
for specified
periods as this would enable “the Sheriff to
ascertain those potential jurors who will serve during a given
The Tasmanian review also noted that the
practice of notifying people of their inclusion on the jury roll had
the disadvantage of
increasing the administrative workload of the
Sheriff’s office and of adding the costs involved in mailing out
to all potential
2.18 One preliminary submission to the Commission proposed
dispensing with notices of inclusion and summoning directly from the
roll. This would make every person on the electoral roll a
potential juror.
A similar “one-step process for
jury roll creation and summoning” was proposed in NSW in 1995
following a review of the
system by Andersen Consulting. However, the
proposal also involved potential jurors seeking to be excused by way of
an “interactive”
telephone system.
time, concerns were expressed about the ability to administer the
telephone aspect of the proposed scheme in a way that ensured
compliance.
The creation of the one-step process, however, was not challenged.
Is it necessary to have a jury roll that is separate from the electoral roll?
Using the electoral roll to identify and locate potential jurors
2.19 NSW uses the Electoral roll as the sole source for identifying
and locating those who are to receive a notice of inclusion on
roll. This excludes those who are entitled to register as electors but
neglect or refuse to do so.
2.20 The English Royal Commission on Criminal Justice in 1993
observed that the electoral roll seemed to be “the best available
means of ensuring that juries reflect the composition of the population
as a whole”. It also commented on the need to encourage
from ethnic minority communities to register to vote.
However, in 2001, Lord Justice Auld noted that the use of the electoral
roll in England resulted in an “under-representation
of those in
their early 20s, ethnic minorities and the more mobile sections of the
community, such as those living in rented accommodation”.
2.21 The extent to which such comments can be applied to the
circumstances in NSW is debatable given that registration as an elector
is compulsory in Australia but not in England. A sample audit
undertaken by the Australian Electoral Commission in March 2006 showed
that 93.6% of the eligible population were enrolled for the correct
electoral division. However, the Electoral Commission has also
that the estimated participation of eligible 18 to 25 year olds at 30
June 2006 was only 76.7%.
The use of the electoral roll
as the source for identifying and locating potential jurors has also
given rise to concerns in NSW
transient communities, for example, Indigenous people who do not
register as electors.
2.22 Problems also arise as the result of eligible voters not
reporting changes of address promptly, raising for consideration the
possibility of the Sheriff being able to cross check personal details
and addresses with other databases to identify those who are
disqualified, and to ascertain current addresses.
Supplementing the roll by reference to other sources
2.23 Including people on the jury roll identified from sources
other than the electoral roll could broaden the group from which jurors
are selected and “facilitate a more frequent representation of
racial and ethnic groups on juries”.
The extent to
which this is achieved may depend on whether or not people other than
eligible but unregistered voters could be added
as a result.
2.24 Lord Justice Auld proposed supplementing or cross-checking
the existing jury roll, so as to include persons who were entitled
registration as an elector,
by reference to other sources
such as the authorities responsible for driver licensing and motor
vehicle registration, social security
and revenue collection and
telephone directories.
2.25 New York has followed this approach and now allows its
commissioner of jurors to refer to a wide range of sources in selecting
citizens to serve:
The commissioner of jurors shall cause the names of prospective
jurors to be selected at random from the voter registration lists,
from such other available lists of the residents of the county as the
chief administrator of the courts shall specify, such as
utility subscribers, licensed operators of motor vehicles, registered
owners of motor vehicles, state and local taxpayers,
persons applying
for or receiving family assistance, medical assistance or safety net
assistance, persons receiving state unemployment
benefits and persons
who have volunteered to serve as jurors by filing with the commissioner
their names and places of residence.
Such provisions may be necessary in the US because of low voter
registration rates. In 2004, 72% of voting-age citizens were registered
to vote and only 58% of citizens aged 18-24 were registered.
2.26 Proposals to supplement the pool of potential jurors derived
from the electoral roll have also been made in Australia, including
adding holders of driver licences
as well as names obtained from the Department of Social Security and the Taxation Office.
However, unlike the proposals of the Auld review and the system in New
York, some of these appear to envisage the possibility of
going beyond
entitlement to vote as a qualification by including permanent residents
and others as well as those citizens who are
eligible to register but
have not done so. Otherwise adding only those currently entitled to
vote but who are not registered would
produce a smaller increase in
Australia because of the high levels of voter registration.
Cross-checking the roll
2.27 The potential sufficiency of a jury pool can be affected by
the fact that the addresses on the electoral roll are very often
to date, with the consequence that many potential jurors do not receive
the notice of inclusion, or a jury summons. In the
2005/2006 financial
year, 172,000 notices of inclusion were sent to prospective jurors and
102,390 summonses. Of these, 13,000 were
returned to sender,
representing approximately 5% of all notices of inclusion and summonses
sent out. This compares with figures
in South Australia where, in 2002,
approximately 5.5% of jury summonses were returned to sender.
2.28 This also occasions practical difficulty in the
administrative costs of the Sheriff and the enforcement of what may
be a non-compliance with the summons. The problems could be
reduced if the Sheriff’s Office had the authority to match data
against the records of other bodies, such as the Roads and Traffic
Authority since changes of address could be identified before
Sheriff’s Office sends out notices of inclusion or summonses. At
present the RTA database is only consulted when the State
Debt Recovery
Officer is enforcing the penalty for non-attendance.
Information about criminal records and charges.
The ability to cross-check against information held by Corrective
Services, the Courts and NSW Police in relation to criminal records,
pending trials and bail is also desirable so that people disqualified
from jury service are not given a notice of inclusion in the
place or subsequently summoned to serve.
There have been reported incidents where people with convictions have been empanelled despite their disqualification,
since the current system depends on self-disclosure or, less commonly,
on the potential juror with a criminal history being identified
counsel or by a police officer associated with the trial.
2.30 In the ACT the Sheriff can give any police officer a copy
of the list of prospective jurors so that he or she may determine if
any people are disqualified.
In SA there is a provision
compelling the Commissioner of Police, at the request of the sheriff,
to investigate and report on any
matter relevant to determining whether
a person is disqualified or not.
Similar provisions are in place in Tasmania and Victoria,
except that, in Tasmania the Commissioner of Police must also furnish a
report, at the request of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
people who have committed, or are alleged to have committed,
“non-disqualifying” offences in Tasmania or elsewhere.
In Victoria there was formerly also an informal system whereby the
Police Commissioner passed a list including acquittals and
non-disqualifying
criminal convictions to the Director of Public
Prosecutions to assist in exercising the right of peremptory challenge.
Should it be possible to use other sources of information to:
(a) cross-check entries in the electoral roll, for example as to their current address or possible disqualification;
(b) supplement the names of potential jurors derived from the
electoral roll by including those who are entitled to register as
but have not done so?
What other sources of information should be used to identify potential jurors?
ABILITY TO READ OR UNDERSTAND ENGLISH
2.31 Adequate ability to communicate in and/or understand the English language is a ground of ineligibility
or disqualification
in all jurisdictions, including NSW.
Questions of degree arise as to what is involved in an ability to read or understand or communicate in English.
2.32 The 1965 UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service
recommended that “no one should be qualified to serve on a jury
cannot read, write, speak and understand English without
difficulty”.
2.33 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee considered
that the question of literacy levels was best dealt with by making
people ineligible who are unable to read or understand English,
a test which currently reflects the ineligibility provision in NSW.
2.34 In other jurisdictions, for example, in the US, the ability
to communicate in English is expressed as a ground of eligibility.
Should an ability to read or understand English be a qualification for jury service?
What should the level of ability be?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Jury Act 1977
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 1963
(NT) s 9(1);
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 1(1)(a).
Parliamentary Electorates and Elections Act 1912
(NSW) s 20(1)(b).
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 6.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.9-3.11.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.7.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.7.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.9.
Juries Act 1981
Electoral Act 1993
(NZ) s 74(1).
Juries Act 1870
Parliamentary Electorates and Elections Act 1912
(NSW) s 20(1)(a).
Juries Act 1927
. Para 7.20-7.27.
. This does not include the Commonwealth provisions which
exclude from Commonwealth electoral rolls people who are members of
“unlawful” organisations:
Crimes Act 1914
Parliamentary Electorates and Elections Act 1912
(NSW) s 21.
Jury Act 1977
. See para 3.7, 3.11, 3.14.
Jury Act 1977
s 13(1)(c).
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1995
See Queensland, Criminal Justice Commission,
The Jury System in Criminal Trials in Queensland
(Issues Paper, 1991) at 10.
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 2, s 3.
Juries Act 1967
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 5.
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 5.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. D Lennon, “Changes to the NSW Jury System”, paper presented at the
4th Biennial National Sheriff’s Conference
(Brisbane, 3-5 July 1995) at 14.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 5.55-5.57.
. England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 131.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 137; see also at 144.
. Australian Electoral Commission,
Annual Report 2005-2006
. See para 1.35-1.36.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 6.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 144-145.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 144. See also NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
. New York, Consolidated Laws - Judiciary § 506.
. US Census Bureau,
Voting and Registration in the Election of November 2004
(2006) at 1-4.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian
Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 6 and 172-173;
Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 6.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 6.
. South Australia, Sheriff’s Office,
South Australian Jury Review
(2002) at 16.
. L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
; NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. NSW Police,
Preliminary Submission
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 2003
Such information is presumably used to allow challenges to particular jurors.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 5.17. But see
Katsuno v The Queen
[1999] HCA 50.
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 10;
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 3(f);
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 1957
s 5(b)(iii)
Juries Act 1963
(NT) s 10(3)(c);
Juries Act 1967
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 Item 11.
. See para 7.3-7.6 below.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 80.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at 3.13.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 Item 11.
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 26-27.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
3. Current structure of exemption
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Disqualification
Ineligibility
Right to be exempted
Exemption for good cause
Issues arising
3.1 In NSW there are currently two categories of people who cannot
serve as jurors because they are either disqualified or ineligible,
two categories who can be excused from service, namely those who are
entitled to be exempted as of right, and those who may be
excused for
good cause.
3.2 In 1994 it was reported that, in the most recent draft jury
roll for the Sydney district, 42% of those selected were removed on
basis of disqualification, ineligibility and exemption as of right.
This can be compared with South Australia where, in 2002, approximately
55% of persons summoned for jury service applied to be excused,
their service deferred or successfully claimed an ineligibility to
3.3 The model adopted by the UK Departmental Committee on Jury
Service in 1965 became the basis for the regime established in NSW
1977 as well as in various other Australian jurisdictions.
The earlier position in England and Wales was that “every person
whose name is included in the jurors book as a juror…
liable to serve as such, notwithstanding that he may have been entitled
by reason of some disqualification or exemption
to claim that he ought
not to be marked in the electors list as a juror”.
Only female members of vowed religious communities were “not liable to serve on any jury”.
3.4 In NSW it is an offence for a potential juror not to inform
the Sheriff that he or she is disqualified or ineligible to serve.
It is also an offence to provide false or misleading information to the
Sheriff when claiming to be disqualified or ineligible or
entitled to
be exempted as of right.
3.5 However, a jury verdict is not invalidated only by reason of
the fact that a member of the jury was disqualified from serving
juror or ineligible to do so.
3.6 Exemption as of right or excusal for good cause depends upon
self-disclosure to the Sheriff or to the Court, as, in a practical
sense, does deletion from the jury roll by reason of disqualification
or ineligibility.
DISQUALIFICATION
3.7 In NSW a person is disqualified from serving as a juror
if he or she is:
A person who at any time within the last 10 years in New
South Wales or elsewhere has served any part of a sentence of
imprisonment
(not being imprisonment merely for failure to pay a fine).
A person who at any time within the last 3 years in New
South Wales or elsewhere has been found guilty of an offence and
in a detention centre or other institution for juvenile
offenders (not being detention merely for failure to pay a fine).
A person who is currently bound by an order made in
New South Wales or elsewhere pursuant to a criminal charge or
conviction, not
including an order for compensation, but including the
(a) a parole order, a community service order, an apprehended
violence order and an order disqualifying the person from driving a
motor vehicle,
(b) an order committing the person to prison for failure to pay a fine,
(c) a recognizance to be of good behaviour or to keep the peace,
a remand in custody pending trial or sentence and a release on bail
pending trial or sentence.
3.8 The principal reason for disqualifying people who have been
defendants in the criminal justice system is the belief that their
criminal behaviour, and its consequences through the justice system,
may impact upon their ability to be impartial.
3.9 Undischarged bankrupts are still excluded in Victoria and the ACT,
but that reason for disqualification has been removed from the list in other jurisdictions.
3.10 In 1993, the Criminal Procedure Division of the Queensland
Litigation Reform Commission recommended that there be only one
of automatic exemption that encompasses both disqualification
and ineligibility.
INELIGIBILITY
3.11 In NSW a person is ineligible to serve as a juror
if he or she is:
The Governor.
A judicial officer (within the meaning of the
Judicial Officers Act 1986
A member or officer of the Executive Council.
A member of the Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly.
Officers and other staff of either or both of the Houses of Parliament.
An Australian lawyer (whether or not an Australian legal practitioner).
A person employed or engaged (except on a casual or
voluntary basis) in the public sector in law enforcement, criminal
investigation,
the provision of legal services in criminal cases, the
administration of justice or penal administration.
The Ombudsman and a Deputy Ombudsman.
A person who at any time has been a judicial officer (within the meaning of the
Judicial Officers Act 1986
or a coroner, police officer, Crown Prosecutor, Public Defender,
Director or Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions or Solicitor
Public Prosecutions.
A person who is unable to read or understand English.
A person who is unable, because of sickness, infirmity or disability, to discharge the duties of a juror.
3.12 A person is also ineligible if he or she is exempted under the
Jury Exemption Act 1965
which, in general, excludes various Commonwealth office holders.
3.13 The UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service recommended that
ineligibility should apply to those connected with the administration
of law and justice.
The principal concern appeared to be
the desirability of preserving the system’s appearance of
impartiality. Sometimes the
question of impartiality of a particular
juror would seem best dealt with in the context of an application to be
excused in a particular
trial since the mere holding of a particular
office within a broad range of ineligible occupations, may have no
bearing whatsoever
for that trial.
RIGHT TO BE EXEMPTED
3.14 In NSW the following people may be exempted from jury service as of right:
Vowed members of any religious order.
Persons practising as dentists.
Persons practising as pharmacists.
Persons practising as medical practitioners.
Mining managers and under-managers of mines.
A person employed or engaged (except on a casual or
voluntary basis) in the provision of fire, ambulance, rescue, or other
services, whether or not in the public sector.
Persons who are at least 70 years old.
Pregnant women.
A person who has the care, custody and control of
children under the age of 18 years (other than children who have ceased
school), and who, if exempted, would be the only person
exempt under this item in respect of those children.
A person who resides with, and has full-time care of, a person who is sick, infirm or disabled.
A person who resides more than 56 kilometres from the place at which the person is required to serve.
A person who:
(a) within the 3 years that end on the date of the person’s
claim for exemption, attended court in accordance with a summons
served as a juror, or
(b) within the 12 months that end on the date of the person’s
claim for exemption, attended court in accordance with a summons
who was prepared to, but did not, serve as a juror.
A person who is entitled to be exempted under section 39 on account of previous lengthy jury service.
3.15 The UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service saw the entitlement
to be excused as of right as being available for “persons
while well fitted to be jurors, should, because of the importance of
their other duties to the community, be entitled to decline
The duties of some, but not all, of these professions, are so
important that it would be against the public interest to compel them
to give up their work temporarily in order to act as jurors
equally, individual members of these professions who on particular
occasions are able to spare the time should not be prevented, as
are now, from doing so.
3.16 The Committee also noted the extreme difficulty in drawing a line
between those whose work necessitated them being excused as
and those whose work did not. Two grounds were identified where it
considered it appropriate for a person to be excused
as of right,
mainly where that was in the public interest because of:
“the special and personal duties to the state of the individual members of the occupation”; and
“the special and personal responsibilities of individual
members of the occupation for immediate relief of pain or
suffering”.
The Committee noted that any right to be excused effectively gave
certain people “a statutory right to choose to contract out
one of the ordinary responsibilities of citizenship”.
3.17 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee observed that
the initial hopes of the Departmental Committee that members of
group with the right to be exempted might nevertheless elect to serve,
were not realised. The Victorian experience was that “persons
have a right to be excused from jury service almost always exercise the
In that State it was observed, in 1996,
that the right to be excused was the “main cause of
under-representation within the
jury system”.
This is likely also to be the case in NSW.
3.18 The Auld review of the criminal courts of England and Wales
considered that while there may be “good reason” for
excusing people when they must perform “important duties over the
period covered by the summons”, there was no reason
should be entitled to be excused as of right “simply by virtue of
their position”.
Obviously the removal of a right of exemption would greatly increase the number of eligible people available for jury service.
EXEMPTION FOR GOOD CAUSE
In New South Wales a person may be excused from attendance for jury
service, at any time before being summoned, for good cause
“any matter of special importance or any matter of special
A person who has been summoned for jury
service may also be excused from attendance for jury service on the
grounds of good cause.
Most jurisdictions have a
provision allowing a person to be excused from attendance for jury
service on the grounds of “good
cause”, “reasonable
cause”, or “good reason”.
3.20 Commonly applications to be excused are dealt with by the
Sheriff, although where there is any doubt over the genuineness of
claim or its strength, the issue is usually reserved for the trial
judge or the coroner holding the inquest. The Sheriff’s
are assisted by guidelines in exercising the discretion to excuse.
There are many potential grounds for such an application including, for
example, the fact that the potential juror has booked and
holiday during the period of the trial, or is suffering a temporary
illness, or has university or TAFE commitments or
examinations, or
cannot be replaced in their employment because of staff shortages or
other exigencies of business. The Sheriff may
require the request to be
supported by a statutory declaration annexing, for example, a medical
certificate or travel itinerary,
while a judge can require the person
seeking to be excused to give evidence on oath.
3.21 The justification for permitting people to be excused for good cause, and the process involved, are discussed below.
ISSUES ARISING
Merging the categories
3.22 In some other States, the categories are somewhat more
confined than they are in NSW. For example, Tasmania only has
of disqualification and ineligibility. Only people over the
age of 70 may be excused as of right,
although they may be excused for “good reason”.
The same situation applies in Victoria.
In Queensland, there is a single category of those who are ineligible to serve,
but there is also a list of criteria for excusing potential jurors.
In England and Wales there are no categories of exemption as of right
or ineligibility, only a relatively short list of qualifications,
including that a juror not be a “mentally disordered
person” and a list of disqualifications based on criminal charge
or conviction.
3.23 A question arises whether there is any point in maintaining
some of the categories as separate. This is particularly the case
respect to the categories of disqualification and ineligibility which
appear to have the same consequence. It is, therefore,
difficult to see
why they should be separated unless the ineligibility criteria are
clearly and directly linked to additional criteria
relating, for
example, to current office or substantial connection with some aspect
that may have a direct bearing on a potential
Should there continue to be separate grounds of disqualification and ineligibility?
Reducing the grounds
3.24 In the following chapters we examine more closely the various
categories of people within the grounds of disqualification,
ineligibility
and entitlement to exemption as of right as well as the
rationale for their exclusion.
3.25 Some are excluded simply because they are persons
“whose professional or expert duties are so important to the
and so exacting that they ought not to be permitted to
However, the 1993 report of the NSW Jury
Task Force observed that, while few would argue with some exclusions,
it was “difficult
to understand why a number of these groups
should continue to be ineligible to serve as jurors”.
3.26 The 1994 Australian Institute of Judicial Administration
review of jury management in NSW also noted that the list of exemptions
appeared “far too wide” and that some were “difficult
to reconcile”. It noted that the existing categories
ineligibility “may not only create a non-representative jury
roll, but also reduce the franchise in such a way that the
jury service, and its challenges, are not evenly shared among the
citizens of New South Wales”.
3.27 The trend has clearly been to reduce the number of
exemptions that are available. For example, Tasmania and SA have
substantially
reduced the categories of those who are ineligible or
entitled to claim exemption.
Reviews have consistently
questioned the assumptions underlying many of the categories of those
who are ineligible or entitled to
exemption as of right
and recommended a reduction in the categories.
3.28 The NSW Jury Task Force in 1993 considered that the
“maintenance of the present system is likely to encourage more
interest groups to claim an entitlement to exemption as of
right in the future”.
It may be observed that the
Victorian provisions relating to ineligibility, which were enacted in
2000, have already been subject
to five separate sets of amendments.
3.29 The State of New York and England and Wales provide a
precedent for the removal of most or all categories of exemption and
substitution of a system permitting potential jurors to be excused
for good cause, with or without deferral.
Civil juries
3.30 Not all of the categories of exemption listed above would
be strictly relevant to civil trials. For example, there would be fewer
reasons for exempting those associated with the administration of the
law and justice from jury service in the case of civil trials.
question of impartiality that may apply when people with criminal
records serve as jurors in criminal cases may not apply
so readily in
civil cases. One possible approach might be to make people who are
unable to serve on criminal juries available to
serve on civil juries.
This would, however, be subject to concerns about representativeness
and random selection.
3.31 Conversely, there may also be some categories of exemption
that are appropriate to juries in civil trails which would not be
strictly relevant for juries in most criminal trials. There is at least
one precedent for treating civil juries differently from
juries. In Victoria people associated with the business of liability
insurance were previously ineligible to serve on any
civil jury.
An equivalent provision is not included in the current Act. This
followed a recommendation by the Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform
Committee which surmised that the category was originally intended to
“prevent juries becoming tainted with knowledge about
and insurable risk”. The Committee considered that the
availability of insurance is now “quite well known in
community and that a judge’s direction to disregard matters
relating to insurance will be acted upon by the jury”.
Should the categories for excluding, exempting or excusing jurors be the same for civil juries as they are for criminal juries?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 38.
. South Australia, Sheriff’s Office,
South Australian Jury Review
(2002) at 15.
. For example, in Victoria: Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) Vol 1 at para 3.2. See also Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.7.
Juries Act 1922
(Eng) s 2(1).
Juries Act 1922
(Eng) s 8(2)(b).
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 1.
. See Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.15-3.16.
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 1 cl 8;
Juries Act 1967
. See Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.62-3.64; and Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at 32.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 3-4. See para 3.22-3.23 below.
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2.
. See below at para 5.51-5.53.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 101.
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 100.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 148.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 151.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.146.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.147.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 150.
. See NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
. See para 8.4, 8.12.
. See Chapter 6.
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2003
, Sch 1 and Sch 2.
Juries Act 2000
, Sch 1 and Sch 2.
Jury Act 1995
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 1, Sch 1.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 24 February 1977, at 4478, quoting United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 93.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 22. See also at 24.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 173.
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 1 and Sch 2;
Juries Act 1927
(SA) Sch 3.
. See United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 98; NSW,
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 23-25; Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at para 2.5-2.11.
. See M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 173; Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.149; R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at para 34, para 40.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 25.
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2. See
Juries (Amendment) Act 2002
(Vic) s 10;
Major Crime (Special Investigations Monitor) Act 2004
(Vic) s 18;
Major Crime Legislation (Office of Police Integrity) Act 2004
(Vic) s 29;
Public Administration Act 2004
, Sch 3 [108.2];
Legal Profession (Consequential Amendments) Act 2005
(Vic) s 18, Sch 1 [54.2].
Juries Act 1974
(Eng); New York, Consolidated Laws - Judiciary Art 16. See also M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 173, footnote 4.
Jury Act 1967
(Vic) s 5. See Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.200-3.201.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.201.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
4. Disqualification on the grounds of criminality
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
General reasons for disqualification
People who have been charged or convicted
People awaiting trial or sentencing
Identifying people with criminal histories
4.1 In NSW a person may be disqualified on various grounds of past criminal conduct or alleged criminal conduct.
GENERAL REASONS FOR DISQUALIFICATION
4.2 In NSW it has been suggested that this category of
disqualification is justified because people who have “come into
with the law, particularly those who have served gaol
sentences, could bear some ill will towards the Crown and so increase
the probability
of disagreement in criminal proceedings”.
This justification may lose some of its strength now that majority verdicts are available in most criminal trials,
as has been the case for many years in civil trials.
4.3 In addition to resentment arising from their treatment by
the criminal justice system, it has also been assumed that criminality
and dishonesty will make such people unsuitable candidates for jury
One review simply referred to excluding those
“whose recent criminal record indicates that they may not be
fitted to pass judgment
on their fellow citizens”.
Another review observed that a person who had been convicted and
sentenced might “find it difficult to regard the police
dispassionately”.
In Queensland it has been
additionally suggested that the defence might object to people who are
under probation or community service
orders serving on the grounds they
might “have a stake in trying to please the authorities”.
In more general terms, it has been suggested that confidence in the
administration of justice may suffer if “a person with
and serious criminal record is allowed to serve as a juror”.
The New Zealand Law Commission considered that the appearance of
justice was probably the strongest argument in favour of excluding
people with criminal records from jury service.
4.4 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee considered
that the disqualification of anyone who has served a prison sentence
any time within the previous 5 years was justified “because of a
probable community expectation that these persons have
attributes which
are incompatible with jury service”.
4.5 In England, the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice raised
the question whether, “contrary to general belief, the role
played by jurors with prior criminal convictions is indistinguishable
from the role played by any other category of juror”.
However, it
considered that any changes to the law could only take place after a
proper study into the possible influence of such
people on jury
Some anecdotal evidence considered by the UK
Departmental Committee on Jury Service suggested that around 1965, a
time when only
those convicted of “infamous” crimes were
excluded from juries, the presence of jurors with known criminal
records did
not apparently result in perverse verdicts.
4.6 It has also been suggested that a large proportion of the Indigenous population of NSW may be excluded by such provisions.
4.7 The question has been asked whether the availability to the
Crown of a right of peremptory challenge might not be an additional
of ensuring that those with a criminal background do not serve as
jurors “in the interests of justice”.
such a right to be exercised, the prosecution would need access to the
personal details of the potential jurors, which is presently
One preliminary submission to this Commission
suggested the adoption of a more subjective test, so that people who
were not “fit
and proper” to serve as jurors could be
it being argued that the term “fit and proper” is already being applied in numerous pieces of legislation in NSW.
4.8 Queensland formerly had a provision that disqualified any person “of bad fame or repute”.
Such a test would, however be very subjective, and could require some
form of inquiry akin to that which is seen in the US, and which
be the cause of delay and dispute. The Queensland Supreme Court’s
Litigation Reform Commission rejected this provision
“arbitrary and subjective” category of exclusion.
PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN CHARGED OR CONVICTED
Custodial sentences for adult offenders
4.9 Disqualifications of people who are sentenced have generally
been based on length of sentence and time since conviction, and these
differ from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. For example, some
bar on serving.
Some, like NSW, make no such
provision. Other jurisdictions are very strict. For example, Queensland
maintains an absolute ban on
people who have ever been convicted of an
indictable offence or sentenced to imprisonment.
4.10 Some specify that a person must have served a particular period of imprisonment within a certain number of years.
For example, in NSW any term of imprisonment served in the previous 10 years will disqualify a person from jury service.
4.11 Two substantially competing principles need to be balanced:
allowing people who have served their time, undertaken
rehabilitation, and become eligible voters to become fully functioning
of society;
ensuring that the jury system is impartial.
For example, in 1965 the UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service asked:
Is society justified in branding a person who has been punished and
must be presumed to have expiated his offences, as irresponsible
not to be trusted to carry out one of the duties of citizenship?
4.12 The New Zealand Law Commission considered the current emphasis on
the “reintegration” of offenders and observed:
Legal barriers to social and civic participation, such as
disqualification from jury service, not only serve as a constant
to offenders that they are not permitted to truly
re-integrate, but may help to persuade them that any efforts to do so
are wasted.
The Queensland Criminal Justice Commission also raised the question whether:
given the emphasis of modern penological theory on rehabilitation
and recent legislation which provides that criminal records shall
expunged after a certain time, it may be that people who have served
their sentence or paid their fine should not now have their
serve on a jury taken away from them altogether.
The Commission observed that the disqualification of people who have
“committed only minor criminal offences which have resulted
non-custodial penalties may now be particularly harsh”.
4.13 The question then becomes at what point to draw the line in
terms of seriousness of the offence and the length of time since
sentence was served. The UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service
concluded that “any disqualification should be as limited
consistent with the proper administration of justice and the
maintenance of public confidence in the jury system”.
In Victoria, different periods of disqualification apply dependent on
the sentence served: for example, 2 years disqualification
sentenced for any offence; 5 years disqualification for anyone
sentenced to imprisonment for an aggregate of less than
3 months; 10
years disqualification for anyone sentenced to imprisonment for an
aggregate of 3 months or more; and disqualification
for life for anyone
convicted of treason or of an indictable offence and sentenced to an
aggregate of 3 years or more.
Other Australian jurisdictions also stipulate different periods of disqualification for different sentences.
4.14 Questions arise as to whether the fact of sentencing or the
length of sentence imposed should be the appropriate measure for
determining if a person is disqualified. For example, it has been
suggested that “disqualification should not be determined
reference to the period of imprisonment, but instead should take into
account the nature of the offence committed”.
However, there would be formidable difficulties involved in identifying
all of the offences which ought to disqualify a person from
Should people who have been subject to custodial sentences continue to be disqualified from jury service?
What level of penalty ought to disqualify a person from jury service?
How long after the termination of the sentence should a person continue to be disqualified?
Custodial sentences for young offenders
4.15 As the legislation is currently structured, the
disqualification period for young offenders is less than that for adult
and is defined in somewhat different terms in that it
depends on the person having “been found guilty of an
an expression which is potentially ambiguous. Moreover
it is a definition that may not adequately reflect the available
discretion and practice in relation to young offenders.
4.16 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee considered
that a disqualification period of 5 years was too long for young
offenders, preferring instead a period of 2 years from the end of the
sentence. The Committee weighed up the competing considerations
the “law’s concession to youth” so that young
offenders “especially should be allowed to put their former
offending into the past”; and
the fact that young people “sentenced to detention are often guilty of quite serious criminal conduct”.
Should separate provision be made for the disqualification of young offenders?
Should there be any modification of the disqualification
criteria for those people who have been dealt with as a juvenile, but
have now attained their majority?
Non-custodial orders
4.17 NSW currently disqualifies people bound by orders of a court in
criminal proceedings including parole orders, community service
apprehended violence orders, orders disqualifying a person from driving
and recognizances.
Most other Australian jurisdictions
include a similar range of non-custodial orders as a ground for
disqualifying people from jury
4.18 As noted earlier, the current wording of this head of
disqualification does not embrace all of the potential sentencing
that are available which do not involve a term of imprisonment.
Nor does it provide for those who are subject to preventative detention
and other similar orders
or for those who might be
excluded from the Commonwealth electoral roll by virtue of membership
of a declared unlawful association.
Similarly no mention is made of those who may be the subject of child protection orders
or the subject of a registration requirement
or the subject of extended supervision or continuing detention orders.
Such people might otherwise fall outside the earlier criteria
disqualification.
4.19 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee
recommended the repeal of provisions that disqualified people who were
to a recognizance or a community based order. One reason for
doing so was that “most people would accept that persons in these
categories in general should be permitted to serve... unless there is
some specific reason for their exclusion”.
Committee preferred to rely on the trial judge’s ability to
exclude people in individual cases where the interests of justice
require. However, the Committee recommended the disqualification (for a
period of 5 years) of those who were subject to an “intensive
corrections order” or a suspended sentence.
review by the Tasmanian Department of Justice questioned whether it was
fair that a person subject to a probation order without
should be disqualified, when a person who is convicted but fined is not
disqualified.
4.20 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee also
considered a suggestion that people subject to an intervention order
Crimes (Family Violence) Act 1987
(Vic) should be
disqualified. The Committee concluded that such people should not be
disqualified because the orders “do not
result from a criminal
proceeding and they do not constitute a criminal sanction”.
What non-custodial or other orders should disqualify a person from jury service?
Orders not specifically covered
4.21 The current grounds of disqualification were formulated prior
to later legislation which has provided for additional sentencing
options such as home detention, compulsory drug treatment detention,
and which also provided for a different regime for the enforcement
fines, and for the use of community service, and of imprisonment as a
final sanction. These are not listed specifically in the
list of orders that may be made “pursuant to a criminal charge or
conviction”, although most would probably
fall within the general
category. The current grounds also do not specify the nature of the
charge or conviction or offence which
should trigger their application.
Should the grounds be amended so as to reflect in a more precise and currently relevant way, the criteria for disqualification?
PEOPLE AWAITING TRIAL OR SENTENCING
4.22 In NSW a person is disqualified who has been remanded “in
custody pending trial or sentence” or released “on
pending trial or sentence”.
Some other jurisdictions also disqualify from service those who have been remanded in custody or released on bail.
South Australia disqualifies those who have been charged with an
offence punishable by imprisonment but the charge has not yet been
determined.
4.23 The English Royal Commission on Criminal Justice in 1993
expressed concern that it was “possible for a person to sit on
jury while on bail for an offence that is similar to the one for which
the defendant is to be tried” and recommended that
people on bail
should be disqualified from jury service.
A subsequent
government report considered that a pending trial might
“improperly affect” such a juror’s attitude
proceedings.
4.24 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee, however,
considered that the presumption of innocence required that those
with offences not be disqualified from jury service.
This was also the view adopted by the New Zealand Law Commission.
4.25 One submission received by the Commission has suggested
that the omission from this category of people who are awaiting trial
or sentence, but for whom bail has been dispensed with, appeared to be
“inadvertent”, citing an occasion on which such
charged with dangerous driving had served on a District Court jury.
Should people who are awaiting trial or sentencing be disqualified from jury service?
Should this category be varied so as to include those
awaiting trial or sentence, who have been released unconditionally or
IDENTIFYING PEOPLE WITH CRIMINAL HISTORIES
4.26 As noted earlier, there is no foolproof system for vetting the
electoral roll to exclude those people who fall within this category
disqualification. Cross-checks with police and court records, with
adult and juvenile correctional systems, or with the Probation
Parole Service or Juvenile Justice are not made, and the Sheriff does
not have on-line access to the records of these bodies.
accordingly depends substantially on truthful self-reporting in
response to the questionnaire that the Sheriff sends with
the notice of
inclusion on the jury roll.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Jury Act 1977
; Sch 1. See para 3.7 above.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 24 February 1977, at 4478-4479.
Jury Amendment (Verdicts) Act 2006
. Queensland, Criminal Justice Commission,
The Jury System in Criminal Trials in Queensland
(Issues Paper, 1991) at 11. See also New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 179.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 99.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 134.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 5.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 134.
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 179.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.43.
. England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 132.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 132.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 22; Redfern Legal Centre,
Preliminary submission
. See Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) at ch 2.
. See the juror confidentiality provisions:
Jury Act 1977
. NSW Police,
Preliminary submission
Firearms Act 1996
Security Industry Act 1997
Passenger Transport (Taxi-cab Services) Regulation 2001
(NSW) cl 5; and
Passenger Transport (Bus Services) Regulation 2000
(NSW) cl 5A.
Jury Act 1929
(Qld) s 7(1)(e).
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 5.
. 3 years in Tasmania and Victoria:
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 1 cl 1;
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 1 cl 1. 2 years in WA and SA:
Juries Act 1927
s 12(1)(b).
year in the ACT:
Juries Act 1967
Jury Act 1995
. 3 months or more for an indictable offence in the past 5 years in Tasmania:
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 1 cl 1(3); 3 months or more for any offence in the past 10 years in Victoria:
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 1 cl 2.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 1 item 1. 5 years in WA:
Juries Act 1957
s 5(b)(ii).
7 years in the Northern Territory:
Juries Act 1963
(NT) s 10(3)(a)(ii).
. See Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.23; Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) at ch 2.
. See Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.23; Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) at ch 2.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 131.
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 181.
. Queensland, Criminal Justice Commission,
The Jury System in Criminal Trials in Queensland
(Issues Paper, 1991) at 11.
. Queensland, Criminal Justice Commission,
The Jury System in Criminal Trials in Queensland
(Issues Paper, 1991) at 11.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 140.
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 1 cl 1-5.
Juries Act 1927
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.29.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.30. See also United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 141.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.55.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 1.
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 1 cl 2;
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 1 cl 3 and cl 4;
Juries Act 1957
s 5(b)(ii)(III).
. Under the
Terrorism (Police Powers) Act 2002
(NSW) and reciprocal legislation.
Crimes Act 1914
Child Protection (Offenders Prohibition Orders) Act 2004
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act 2000
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.49.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.52-3.53.
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 2.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.61.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 1 item 3(c).
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 1 cl 4;
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) Sch 1 cl 5.
Juries Act 1927
s 12(1)(f).
. England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 132.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.56, citing Scottish Office, Home and Health Department,
Firm and Fair: Improving the Delivery of Justice in Scotland
(Cm 2600, 1994) at 15-16.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.59.
. The NZ Commission considered that the bias against the
criminal justice system that might be held by such a person could
be held by their close family members, but these people could
not sensibly be excluded: New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 184.
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
5. Ineligibility based on occupation
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Involvement in the administration of law and justice
Other government officials
People exempt under Commonwealth provisions
INVOLVEMENT IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF LAW AND JUSTICE
5.1 Certain categories of people who are associated with the
administration of law and justice in NSW are currently ineligible,
those who have been “at any time” a judicial
officer, a coroner, police officer, Crown Prosecutor, Public Defender,
or Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions or Solicitor for
Public Prosecutions. Also ineligible are people who answer the somewhat
imprecise description of an “Australian lawyer (whether or not an
Australian legal practitioner)”, as well as those “employed
or engaged (except on a casual or voluntary basis) in the public sector
in law enforcement, criminal investigation, the provision
services in criminal cases, the administration of justice or penal
administration”.
5.2 In NSW in 1977 it was suggested that people within this kind
of group should be ineligible to serve because their “presence
juries would, in view of their close association with the
administration of law and justice, be inconsistent with the concept
juries as a distinct element in the process of law, drawn from the
community at large”.
5.3 A number of reasons have been offered as to why such persons
should not be eligible to serve on juries. They include the following:
excluding those “whose work is concerned with the
administration of justice or the enforcement of the law” is
“in order completely to preserve the lay character of
jury service”;
people “with knowledge or experience of a legal or
quasi-legal nature might, if on a jury, exercise undue influence on
fellow jurors”;
jurors with a background in crime detection and law
enforcement, for example, police officers, might undermine the
jury’s appearance
of impartiality;
judicial officers may have “special knowledge which should not enter into a jury’s deliberations”.
5.4 On the question of risk of bias, Lord Justice Auld questioned
whether there was any greater risk of prejudice from criminal justice
system professionals than there was from other jurors who were expected
to “put aside any prejudices they may have” including:
shopkeepers or house-owners who may have been burgled, or car
owners whose cars may have been vandalised, many government and other
employees concerned in one way or another with public welfare and
people with strong views on various controversial issues, such
legalisation of drugs or euthanasia.
He suggested that the question of bias of individual jurors was one for the trial judge:
Provided that the judge was so satisfied, the over-all fairness of the tribunal and of the trial should not be at risk.
Upon that basis it might be expected that those who are directly
involved in law enforcement or as prosecutors or public defenders,
would be excused from service as jurors in criminal trials. They could
be seen as having a direct or personal interest in the outcome
prosecution. The same considerations would not apply to a civil jury
Australian lawyers
5.5 In NSW, “an Australian lawyer (whether or not an
Australian legal practitioner)” is ineligible to serve as a juror.
Although a somewhat imprecise definition,
it is assumed that it is intended to embrace any person admitted to the
legal profession in NSW, or any other Australian jurisdiction,
or not they currently hold a practising certificate.
so, it would not include a lawyer who holds an academic position as a
teacher of law, who has never been admitted to the legal
profession,
even though such a person might teach criminal law or criminology and
have much greater relevant knowledge than a practising
lawyer whose
specialty is conveyancing or corporate law.
5.6 While Victoria has a similar provision to the one in NSW,
in all other Australian jurisdictions the restriction is limited to practising lawyers.
Some jurisdictions include articled clerks,
and employees of practising lawyers.
5.7 The Victorian Law Department, in 1967, based the wider
ineligibility of “duly qualified” legal practitioners on
fact that they held “legal knowledge and experience”
that could possibly have an “undue influence” on other
The Department observed that if this view was valid:
it would apply as much to academic lawyers as to practising lawyers. Accordingly no distinction is made between them.
On the other hand, the Law Reform Commission of WA, in 1980,
acknowledged that there was a risk that people with legal knowledge
are not practising lawyers, such as “articled clerks, teachers of
law at tertiary institutions, law graduates and, possibly,
students” might unduly influence the other jurors, but added
“equally, however, he or she may be of benefit
in helping them to
clarify the issues”.
5.8 In Queensland, new provisions in 1995 removed lawyers from the list of exceptions.
This was contrary to the recommendation of the Supreme Court’s
Litigation Reform Commission, in 1993, that “members of
profession (admitted to practice and in fact engaged in legal
work)” be automatically exempt from service.
However, the new provision did not commence before a 1996 amendment saw
the reintroduction of the exemption of lawyers “actually
in legal work”.
The second reading speech
considered the possibility that a lawyer might influence the other
members of the jury and perhaps lead
to a perceived (or actual) tainted
verdict. It was also suggested that jury service could lead to
conflicts of interest as the result
of ethical and professional
responsibilities arising from the status of barristers’ and
solicitors’ as officers of the
court. The preferred approach for
lawyers was “to put the situation beyond conjecture and make them
ineligible for jury service”.
5.9 Lord Justice Auld considered it “unlikely” that
lawyers would exercise undue influence on their fellow jurors because
of their status or position, suggesting that “people no longer
defer to professionals or those holding particular office in
they used to do”.
One Queensland Member of Parliament put it so:
This provision is based on the proposition that lawyers, if allowed
into the jury room, would be so convincing, so persuasive and
overwhelming in their presence that mere mortals in the jury room could
not possibly arrive at a verdict without being overawed
by the presence
and contribution of a practising lawyer... some may say, “Oh for
the good old days when that may have been
so.” I am sure that my
colleagues at the Bar Association would rejoice in a situation where
their mere presence in a jury room
would have such a persuasive effect.
5.10 Lord Justice Auld suggested that in a number of US States, where
judges, lawyers and other relevant professionals have served
experience has shown that “their fellow jurors have not allowed
them to dominate their deliberations”.
In England and Wales, the provisions making law and justice professionals ineligible to serve have since been repealed.
Members of the judiciary and those involved in the administration of
justice must now seek to be excused or deferred. The current
suggest that an application on the basis that such a juror may be known
to one of the parties in the trial should normally
result in the
juror’s service being deferred or in the juror being moved to a
trial in “an alternative court where the
excusal grounds may not
5.11 Other reasons for excluding lawyers from juries, whether
practising or not, which have been identified, include the contentions
jurors must apply “their common sense, general knowledge and
their life experience rather than any expert knowledge gained from
position within the justice system”;
jurors should obtain the information necessary to their
verdict through the trial process and the directions of the judge, not
referring to the specialist legal knowledge of one or other of their
5.12 One submission to the Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform
Committee’s review suggested that the ineligibility of lawyers
was originally based on the fact that lawyers in the 19th century were
a “fairly small group with a good network of communication”.
This is certainly not the case today in a profession that is
characterised by widely divergent areas of practice and specialisation
where many members do not practice in the criminal law and where, for
many, obtaining a qualification as a lawyer provides little
more than a
background to their employment in government service or in the
corporate business world. This raises a potential question
whether the
ineligibility should be confined to those who have particular
experience or a substantial practice in the criminal law,
or to those
who are currently in practice as a lawyer.
5.13 The limitation to practising lawyers in some jurisdictions is seen by some as a “sensible compromise”.
Some preliminary submissions to this review have, however, questioned the continuing ineligibility of lawyers as a class.
Should lawyers or a particular group of lawyers, continue to be ineligible to serve on juries?
Under what conditions, if any, should lawyers be ineligible to serve on juries?
Past and present judicial officers and coroners
5.14 Judicial officers are ineligible in all Australian jurisdictions,
although not so in some overseas jurisdictions. Their position is
somewhat different from that of people who are directly or principally
engaged in the investigation, prosecution or defence of criminal cases,
by reason of the obligations of independence and impartiality
attach to their office.
5.15 Lord Justice Auld gave special consideration to the
position of judges as potential jurors. He considered that their
could contribute “both to the work of individual juries
and to improvement of the jury system as a whole”
noting particularly that “it would be good for them and the
system of jury trial if they could experience at first hand what
have to put up with”.
It was suggested that
problems associated with a judge who is a juror being known to the
trial judge or lawyers in the courtroom
could be dealt with by excusing
the judge on a discretionary basis in particular circumstances.
5.16 It must be recognised that judicial officers and coroners
could influence other jurors if their office was known, and that, if
they chose, they could supplement or explain any directions of law
given by the trial judge. That would not occur if they were subject
some statutory obligation not to disclose their office or to correct or
supplement the summing up.
5.17 The New York Jury Project observed that allowing serving
judges to be jurors ran the risk of conflicting with the Code of
Conduct which requires that a judge “should regulate
[his or her] extra-judicial activities to minimize the risk of conflict
with [his or her] judicial duties”.
Such a conflict
could possibly arise if the judge realised that a particular jury
direction was erroneous yet, consistent with the
judge’s charge to the jury, felt bound to give effect to it.
Should judicial officers continue to be ineligible for jury service?
Under what conditions, if any, should judicial officers be ineligible for jury service?
Administration of justice and corrections
5.18 In NSW former and serving police officers, Crown Prosecutors,
Public Defenders, Directors or Deputy Directors of Public Prosecutions,
or Solicitors for Public Prosecutions are ineligible; as are persons
currently “employed or engaged (except on a casual or
basis) in the public sector in law enforcement, criminal investigation,
the provision of legal services in criminal cases,
the administration
of justice or penal administration”.
provisions replace a more specific list which formerly made employees
of certain government departments ineligible to serve,
for example,
employees of the Department of Corrective Services, the Department of
the Attorney-General and of Justice, and the Police
Department.
Such provisions were too broad in some respects and too narrow in
others. The current formulation is potentially broad enough to
those who are engaged but not employed in the public sector to provide
some of the services previously provided exclusively
by government. In
Victoria this category is limited to those employed “in the
public sector within the meaning of the
Public Administration Act
5.19 The trend towards a functional description is being adopted
in other jurisdictions. For example, in Tasmania ineligibility extends
to “a person whose duties or activities, whether paid or
voluntary, are connected with the investigation of indictable offences,
the administration of justice or the punishment of offenders”.
This formulation is broader than the NSW provision in that it extends
to volunteers, for example, prison visitors. The Victorian
Parliamentary Law Reform Committee noted that Prison Fellowship
volunteers might have a conflict of interest in some cases or be
to bring an impartial mind to the case being tried. However, it
considered that their ineligibility was not justified on the
that such people could seek to be excused if the circumstances of the
case required it.
5.20 In SA, government employees (or other prescribed employees)
whose duties “are connected with the investigation of offences,
the administration of justice or the punishment of offenders” are
ineligible to serve.
5.21 Police officers are expressly ineligible in some jurisdictions, including NSW.
In some jurisdictions this extends to former police officers.
5.22 In 1965, the UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service
considered it essential to the public confidence in the impartiality
lay character of the jury that all “those whose work is
connected with the detection of crime and the enforcement of law and
order must be excluded”.
The Committee also went so
far as to state that civilian employees of the police service should
also be ineligible on the grounds
that, if they are employed for some
time, “no matter in what capacity” they will:
become identified with the service through their everyday contact
with its members. As such they become influenced by the principles
attitudes of the police, and it would be difficult for them to bring to
bear those qualities demanding a completely impartial
approach to the
problems confronting members of a jury.
5.23 The NSW Department of Corrective Services has noted that some
officers of the Department are now being summoned and required
attend court in order to seek exemption. The Department reported that
“they are invariably granted exemption when it is
explained to
the court that they are involved in either law enforcement, the
administration of justice or penal administration and
therefore likely
to have contact with inmates and offenders in the course of their
employment”. The Department has, therefore,
proposed that its
officers be once more included in the list of those who are ineligible
to serve as jurors and that the exclusion
should not be confined to
those employed or engaged in “penal administration”,
a term which it has assumed, perhaps incorrectly, is confined to those who hold administrative office within the Department.
Should ineligibility for jury service continue to apply to people
currently employed or engaged (except on a casual or voluntary basis)
in the public sector in law enforcement, criminal investigation, the
provision of legal services in criminal cases, the administration
justice or penal administration?
Should this ineligibility apply to civil trials as well as criminal trials?
Retirees previously involved in the administration of law or justice
5.24 There is also a question whether the categories of people
listed above, or some of them, should continue to be ineligible to
serve even when they have retired from the relevant positions.
5.25 At present in NSW, judicial officers, coroners, police
officers, Crown Prosecutors, Public Defenders, Directors or Deputy
of Public Prosecutions or Solicitors for Public Prosecutions
are permanently ineligible, while those who are “employed or
(except on a casual or voluntary basis) in the public sector in
law enforcement, criminal investigation, the provision of legal
in criminal cases, the administration of justice or penal
administration” are ineligible only for the term of their
employment.
Similarly it would seem that, once a person has been
admitted to the legal profession, there would be a lifetime
ineligibility, even
though he or she did not have a current engagement
or involvement in any activity involving the law.
5.26 The UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service while
considering it desirable that some restriction ought to be placed on
associated with the administration of law and justice who have
retired, highlighted the problem of a person who, at 18, was employed
by the police service as a shorthand typist but never subsequently
worked for the service.
Rather than introducing a
permanent bar for some occupations but not others, the Departmental
Committee recommended that such people
should be ineligible only for a
period of ten years after ceasing to follow the occupation in question.
This is the approach that has been adopted in Victoria and Tasmania.
It has also been adopted in the Northern Territory but only applies in relation to judicial officers.
5.27 WA has adopted a system of excluding holders of judicial
office and legal practitioners for life, while imposing a 5 year
ineligibility
on various others involved in the administration of law
or justice. This went against the recommendation of the Law Reform
of WA which concluded that there was no need to exclude
certain people after retirement because they would be near the age of
ineligibility
in any case.
5.28 One preliminary submission to this Commission suggested
that there could be a period of ineligibility of 2 years from the date
resignation or retirement.
Should any categories of people who have retired from positions
associated with the administration of law and justice continue to
ineligible for jury service and, if so, which of these categories?
Should there be a period of ineligibility and, if so, what should it be for any or all of those categories?
Spouses of ineligible people
5.29 A question has been raised as to whether the spouses of
ineligible people should also be ineligible to serve. This restriction
was removed in NSW in 1996. The ineligibility is still in place in
South Australia.
It also exists in the Northern Territory but is limited to judges, and includes de facto partners as well as spouses.
5.30 The exclusion of spouses, where it exists, is apparently
based on a belief that “these people are so influenced by their
partners that they would be unable to remain impartial as jurors”.
The UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service, in 1965, concluded that
“the fact that someone is married to, or is some other
relation of, a member of an ineligible occupation, is no reason why he
or she should for that reason also be ineligible”.
This position was endorsed by the Law Reform Commission of WA in 1980
and the Tasmanian Department of Justice’s review in 1999.
5.31 The South Australian Sheriff’s Office, in 2002,
suggested that the practice of excluding spouses may be a safe practice
to adopt and was justified in less populated areas.
5.32 A separate question arises as to the desirability of
spouses or partners removing themselves from certain cases, for
where their spouse or partner, or others known to them, have
some connection with the prosecution case.
One submission
suggested that “it would be a rare accused who would accept with
equanimity the fact that the spouse of his/her
prosecutor is sitting in
Several law reform bodies have
considered that the question of spouses being excused should be dealt
with on a case by case basis
when a spouse considers that his or her
status may cause difficulties.
This could arise following a request to be excused for good cause, or possibly by way of a challenge for cause.
Should the spouses or partners of any categories of people who
hold or have held positions associated with the administration of law
and justice be ineligible for jury service?
OTHER GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
5.33 In NSW, the Governor, members and officers of the Executive
Council and Members and officers and other staff of the NSW Parliament
are ineligible to serve as jurors.
The Governor and Lieutenant Governor
5.34 The Governor is ineligible in most jurisdictions.
This could be justified by reference to the numerous official duties
attaching to that office, and by reference to the fact that
Governor represents the Head of State on whose behalf, or in whose
name, criminal prosecutions are brought. While the exclusion
directly refer to the Lieutenant Governor, it is invariably the case,
under the present system, that the holder of such
office would be
ineligible by reason of their holding office as Chief Justice or
President of the Court of Appeal. This would change
ineligibility of judicial officers were to be removed.
Members of parliament
5.35 Members of parliament are generally ineligible in all Australian jurisdictions.
Some jurisdictions also ban former members of parliament from jury service for certain periods of time, such as 5 or 10 years.
5.36 The 1965 UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service
recommended that members and officers of both Houses of Parliament
only be entitled to be excused as of right because of their
“special and personal duties to the state”.
5.37 In Victoria, members of parliament and the Governor were
previously entitled to exemption as of right. The Victorian
Parliamentary
Law Reform Committee recommended they should be
redesignated as ineligible because of the need to maintain the
separation of powers
between the executive, legislative and judicial
branches of government.
In Victoria, ineligibility now applies to anyone who has been a member of parliament at any time within the preceding 10 years.
5.38 The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia considered
that members of parliament should be ineligible because it is
“inappropriate
that a person who is involved in the making of
laws should be able to serve on a jury which may be called upon to
decide whether
there has been a breach of any such law”. The
Commission also considered that members of parliament should be
excluded because
the parliament’s power to punish for contempt
meant that members could be called upon to exercise a judicial or
quasi-judicial
5.39 Other reasons for exempting members of parliament which have been identified include the circumstances that:
“being elected representatives, they could feel inhibited during jury deliberations for a variety of reasons”;
“jury service has the potential to lead them to be in conflict with their constituency”.
Some of these concerns could be overcome by the secrecy provisions
which apply to jury deliberations, while others appear to rest
dubious notions of potentially conflicting interests.
5.40 It is recognised that the adoption of a public position in law
and order debates could give rise to an apprehension of bias in
particular cases. Peremptory challenges, or challenges for cause,
could, however, deal with this.
5.41 The continued ineligibility of members of parliament has been questioned.
Moreover, their direct involvement in the criminal process could be an
informative experience that might be of assistance in the
performance
of their parliamentary duties. While it would be undesirable for
members of parliament to be required to serve while
the parliament was
sitting, the same demands do not necessarily arise between sittings,
except for ministers and shadow ministers.
Again, the availability of
an application to be excused for good cause or deferred could
accommodate most situations.
Should members of the NSW Parliament, or some members (for
example, ministers or shadow ministers) continue to be ineligible for
Officers of the Parliament
5.42 In NSW ineligibility applies to “officers and other staff of either or both of the Houses of Parliament”.
It is the broadest exemption available in this context of all the Australian jurisdictions.
5.43 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee
recommended that some officers of the Parliament should continue to be
“in order that they may freely attend to their
parliamentary duties”, but considered that the category should be
to “senior officers whose attendance is necessary for the
proper functioning of the Parliament”. These senior officers
“the Clerks of each House, the Usher of the Black Rod and the
Serjeant-at-Arms”.
5.44 Questions do arise as to the justification for the
ineligibility of the other staff members whose position is not
from that of the personal staff of ministers or of public
servants who are eligible to serve. In particular, it is most unlikely
that more than one or two staff members would ever be summoned at the
one time, and if particular problems or emergencies arose,
the right to
apply to be excused would normally suffice. The ineligibility of
officers of the Parliament has been questioned.
Should officers and/or other staff of the NSW Parliament continue to be ineligible for jury service?
Senior public servants
5.45 Senior public servants were once included among the exemptions
available in NSW. Permanent heads of departments and members of
Public Service Board were ineligible
and members and secretaries of all statutory corporations, boards and authorities were entitled to be excused as of right.
These no longer appear in any of the lists of exemptions, although some
senior public servants will still be ineligible if they are
employed in
“the public sector in law enforcement, criminal investigation,
the provision of legal services in criminal cases,
the administration
of justice or penal administration”.
This position
is consistent with the 1994 Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration review which recommended amendment or removal
exemptions relating to particular members of the public service, and
statutory authorities, unless the exemptions could be
justified in
terms of occupation or duties.
5.46 Some jurisdictions, for example, the Commonwealth, continue to offer an exemption for higher ranking public servants.
The Queensland Supreme Court’s Litigation Reform Commission
observed that the Commonwealth’s jury exemption provisions
“a good example of regulations instigated by bureaucrats for
their own comfort”.
The Commission recommended that
submissions be made to the Standing Committee of Attorneys to remove
the “anomaly” of
exempting such a great number of
Commonwealth employees.
5.47 The UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service agreed with
this approach when it decided not to include “members of the
higher civil service” in the category of those who should be
excused as of right. The Committee considered that some such office
holders might “on occasions have very strong claims upon the
discretion of summoning officers if they ask to be excused on
of their duties”.
A similar approach was taken by the Tasmanian Department of Justice’s 1999 review.
Should any public servants be ineligible to serve as jurors?
If so, what should be the relevant criteria for ineligibility?
Supervisory bodies
5.48 In some jurisdictions, including NSW and Victoria, the
Ombudsman and Deputy Ombudsman are both listed as people who are
In Victoria, employees of the Ombudsman are also ineligible.
It is not clear on what basis they continue to be exempt, save possibly
because of the importance of their duties, or because of
specialised knowledge gained through performing their functions
concerning complaints against the police.
5.49 The inclusion of the Ombudsman and Deputy Ombudsman raises
the question of whether officers of other similar organisations ought
also to be ineligible to serve. These could include the Commissioner of
the Independent Commission Against Corruption, the Commissioner
Police Integrity Commission, the employees of those organisations and
their relevant inspectors. Most of these officers would
currently be
ineligible either as Australian lawyers or because of their law
enforcement background. Victoria currently lists the
Director or Acting
Director of Police Integrity, the Special Investigations Monitor or
acting Special Investigations Monitor and
their employees as being
ineligible for jury service.
5.50 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee
recommended the repeal of the exemption for the Ombudsman and his or
her officers.
Should the Ombudsman or Deputy Ombudsman continue to be ineligible for jury service?
Should officers of other supervisory bodies, such as the
Independent Commission Against Corruption and the Police Integrity
Commission,
also be ineligible for jury service?
PEOPLE EXEMPT UNDER COMMONWEALTH PROVISIONS
Jury Exemption Act 1965
(Cth) exempts the following
people from jury service: the Governor General, Justices of the High
Court and other Courts established
by the Commonwealth, members of the
Parliament and Federal Executive Council, members of the Australian
Industrial Relations Commission
and Fair Pay Commission, members of the
Australian Federal Police, Defence Force members and Reserves who are
rendering continuous
full-time service.
Regulations also
exempt Commonwealth employees above a certain salary level and there
are other exemptions relating to the “administration
justice”, “public need” (quarantine) and
“public administration” (including ministerial staff and
advisers and parliamentary officers).
5.52 It is not easy to identify any particular reason why a
special category of exemption should apply to Commonwealth Public
or to members of the Defence Forces who are not required to
be available for current operations, where no such exemption applies
many of those who hold comparable positions within the States and
Territories.
5.53 Other reviews have commented on the broadness of the
exemptions and have recommended an approach be made to the Commonwealth
government with a view to the repeal of many of them.
This has a relevance in that Commonwealth agencies look to the State
and Territory courts to litigate both criminal and civil cases
they have an interest, both in relation to the prosecution of offences
under Commonwealth law and civil cases when the Commonwealth,
instrumentalities, is a party.
Should NSW request that the Commonwealth repeal any or all of the exemptions under the
Jury Exemption Act 1965
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 Items 2, 3, 8 and 10.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 24 February 1977, at 4478, quoting United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 93.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 99 and 103. See also Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.75-3.76.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 99 and 104; Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.76. See also Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 2.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 103.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.76.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 147.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 147.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 7.
. As it is in the context of legal professional privilege: see NSW Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
(Report 112, 2006) at para 14.82-14.100.
Legal Profession Act 2004
. See New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 188.
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(e). See
Legal Profession Act 2004
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 3;
Juries Act 1927
(SA) Sch 3;
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7;
Juries Act 1967
(ACT) Sch 2
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7.
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 2(c);
Juries Act 1967
(ACT) Sch 2
. See also the New Zealand Law Commission’s concern
that jurors who are lawyers might usurp the role of the judge on both
and factual issues: New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 189.
. Victoria, Law Department,
Jury Service in Victoria:
(Joint paper presented to the Honourable the Attorney-General by the
Secretary and Assistant Secretary to the Law Department, 1967)
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.19.
Jury Act 1995
as originally enacted.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 8.
Jury Amendment Act 1996
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 16 May 1996 at 1192.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 147.
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 5 December 1996 at 5026.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 147.
Criminal Justice Act 2003
. England and Wales, “Guidance for summoning officers
when considering deferral and excusal applications” Item 18.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.85.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.85-3.86.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.83.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.88.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
at 2. See also Legal Aid NSW,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 2;
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 2;
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(b);
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1957
cl 1(a)-(ea);
(SA) Sch 3;
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7;
Juries Act 1967
(ACT) Sch 2
items 2, 13, 16.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 148.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 147.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 148.
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 29-30.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 8, an exclusion which
does not, however, extend to person who previously were so employed or
engaged, but no longer
have that status.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 items 5, 7, 8 (as originally enacted). See also
Jury Act 1995
, (h), (i).
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(f).
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 4.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.122-3.123.
Juries Act 1927
(SA) Sch 3.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 10;
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 5;
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(g);
Juries Act 1957
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7.
. That is, those that have held such an office at any time:
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 10,
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(g); within the past 10 years:
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 5.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 103.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 110.
. NSW Department of Corrective Services,
Preliminary submission
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 113.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 115.
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 1 cl 1;
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2.
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7.
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.25. In NSW, however, age does not give
rise to automatic ineligibility, rather it can be relied
exemption as of right from the age of 70.
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
Juries Act 1927
(SA) Sch 3.
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 37. See also United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 116.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 117.
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.29; Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 2.
. South Australia, Sheriff’s Office,
South Australian Jury Review
(2002) at 14.
. See United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 117.
. N R Cowdery,
Preliminary submission
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.76; Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.30. See also para 9.29-9.31 below.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 items 1, 4, 5.
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 1;
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(a);
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1927
(SA) Sch 3.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 5;
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 6;
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(i);
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 1927
(SA) Sch 3;
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7;
Juries Act 1967
(ACT) Sch 2
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(i).
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 148.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.154.
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(i).
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.12.
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 16 May 1996 at 1192.
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 16 May 1996 at 1192.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 6.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.155.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 items 9 and 10 (since amended).
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 item 11 (since amended).
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 8.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 173-174.
Jury Exemption Regulations 1987
(Cth) reg 4.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 6.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 5.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 151.
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 2.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 9;
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(k).
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(l).
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.130.
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 1(la), (lb), (lc), (ld).
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.131.
Jury Exemption Act 1965
and Schedule.
Jury Exemption Regulations 1987
. See Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.205; Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 5-6.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
6. Right to exemption based on occupation
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Health professionals
Emergency services
Clergy and religious
Mining managers and under-managers of mines
Groups not included
6.1 There are a number of professions and callings to which an
entitlement to be excused as of right attaches. The categories have
been reduced over time and some of those previously listed can now only
apply to be excused for good cause. Some of these professions
included in the Sheriff’s guidelines as examples where a person
may be excused for “good cause”, for example,
marine pilots
(who are still included in some jurisdictions) and nurses.
6.2 The 1994 Australian Institute of Judicial Administration
(“AIJA”) review recommended the removal of categories of
exemption as of right based only on professional qualification or
occupation.
A similar question to those mentioned above in
relation to ineligibility arises as to whether certain people should be
entitled to
be excused simply because they are practising within a
certain profession or calling the importance or value of which
justifies an
The alternative is for them to
seek to be excused on the basis that they need to be available to
perform their duties during the
proposed period of jury service,
which may depend upon the expected length of the trial, their
commitments during that period and the availability of a replacement.
6.3 The New York Jury Project observed that some occupational exemptions were a source of public discontent about jury service:
Ordinary wage earners do not understand why they must disrupt their
lives periodically to serve on juries, while highly-paid professionals
need not endure the same burden. Working people who must use vacation
time to serve on juries are justifiably upset that medical
and lawyers can be spared by their patients and clients for a month or
more of vacation every year, yet don’t have
to sit on juries.
6.4 The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia considered that it
would be a simple matter for most occupations to accommodate
Because of the entitlement in most occupations of annual leave,
long service leave and sick leave, provision is made as a matter of
course for the duties of a particular employee to be performed
temporarily by a substitute. It would seem to be a small additional
step to make adequate provision for a replacement during jury service.
Should the members of any profession or calling be entitled to claim an exemption as of right from jury service?
HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
6.5 People practising as pharmacists, dentists and medical practitioners are entitled to claim an exemption as of right in NSW.
This accords with the recommendation of the UK Department Committee on
Jury Service that practising medical practitioners, dentists
pharmaceutical chemists should be entitled to claim exemption because
of their “special and personal responsibilities...
immediate relief of pain or suffering”.
The UK recommendations also included practising nurses, midwives and veterinary surgeons in this category.
These are not included in the NSW list, although nurses are currently
listed in the Sheriff’s guidelines as persons who can
for “good cause”.
This raises a question whether other health professionals should be dealt with in a similar way.
6.6 In Queensland and Victoria, medical practitioners are not
entitled to exemption. Other jurisdictions, however, continue to grant
exemptions to health professionals, some in quite broad terms. For
example, in Western Australia, in addition to practising medical
practitioners, dentists and pharmacists, practising veterinary
surgeons, psychologists, nurses, chiropractors, physiotherapists and
osteopaths are also entitled to exemption as of right.
6.7 The 1994 AIJA review recommended that the exemption of
doctors and dentists should not be retained “without explanation
of duties”.
Some preliminary submissions received
by this Commission questioned whether dentists and pharmacists should
be entitled to exemption
as of right,
as distinct from
applying to be excused for good cause. The exemption of medical
practitioners was also questioned in some preliminary
submissions.
Should members of any of the health professions be entitled to claim exemption as of right from jury service?
If so, which categories should have that right?
EMERGENCY SERVICES
6.8 In NSW people “employed or engaged (except on a casual or
voluntary basis) in the provision of fire, ambulance, rescue,
emergency services, whether or not in the public sector” have a
right to be exempted from jury service.
Until recently such people were ineligible for service,
presumably on the ground that their jobs were essential to the
well-being of the community in emergency situations. It seems odd
individuals within this category are now given the right to determine
for themselves how essential their job is.
6.9 Only one submission received by this Commission so far has questioned the continuation of this exemption.
Should members of any of the emergency services be entitled to claim exemption as of right from jury service?
Should any conditions be attached to that right?
CLERGY AND RELIGIOUS
6.10 Clergy and vowed members of any religious order currently have a right to claim exemption in NSW.
Only three other Australian jurisdictions have an express provision granting a right to exemption to clergy or religious.
6.11 The UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service in 1965
considered that members of the clergy and religious orders should be
since certain aspects of jury service could be considered
incompatible with their calling. In particular it was noted that
calling would incline them to compassion and they might
feel it difficult to consider the claims of justice alone”. It
also considered that members of religious orders, particularly
monks and nuns in enclosed orders, “would almost certainly lack
the necessary experience for service on a jury”.
6.12 The English Royal Commission on Criminal Justice in 1993
could not identify any reason why clergy or members of religious orders
should not be eligible for jury service. It recommended, however, that
practising member of a religious sect should be excused where
would be seen as “incompatible with their tenets or
This option has been implemented in Tasmania and Victoria.
6.13 The conclusions of the English Royal Commission were
supported by Lord Justice Auld who observed that the reasons offered by
the 1965 review were inadequate since aspects of the “pastoral
role and compassionate instincts” attributed to the clergy
religious were shared by many others in the community.
6.14 Likewise, the New York Jury Project observed:
while a small number of religious sects believe that their members
are forbidden to sit in judgment of others, there is no basis to
all clergy from jury service; rather, this exemption reflects some
generalized (and demonstrably erroneous) notion that clergy
unable to apply temporal law or are more likely to be lenient or biased
in a particular fashion than are other citizens.
The 1994 AIJA review also recommended amendment or removal of the exemption of members of the clergy and religious orders.
6.15 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee, in its 1996
review, identified some practical considerations. For example,
noted that clergy in small communities may well be in receipt of
confidential information that will bear directly on the case
It was also noted that some clergy have a calling which requires 24 hour availability to their congregations.
However, these concerns could be overcome by practical measures
including the right to be excused for good cause if there is a personal
conflict arising from past contact with a defendant or victim in a
criminal trial and/or by a full time pastor arranging a
for the duration of the jury service or otherwise
by the availability of an application to be excused where this is not
practicable.
6.16 The Law Reform Commission of WA suggested that clergy
“should be available at all times to give comfort to the sick or
dying and to carry out their pastoral responsibilities”.
This view presumably influenced the retention of the WA provision that
allows exemption to “persons in holy orders, or who
teach in any religious congregation, but only if they follow no secular
occupation except that of a schoolteacher”.
6.17 Some preliminary submissions to this Commission supported
allowing clergy the right to claim an exemption from jury service.
reasons given included assertions that:
clergy “by virtue of their pastoral responsibilities, can at
times be conflicted in their responsibilities to provide compassionate
care to those in need, in a confidential and sensitive
environment”;
jury service may, for individual clergy, impair future
pastoral ministry to both victims and offenders as well as to their
and other supporters;
some clergy and religious may be seen as biased because they
undertake “advocacy work for the less privileged and marginalised
in society... as a necessary condition in service to the wider
community”;
conscientious grounds can exist which should be capable of exercise in the discretion of individual clergy.
6.18 One preliminary submission questioned whether there was any theological basis for the right to exemption.
Indeed, it can be argued that jurors do not sit in judgment on
defendants, but rather determine whether the facts exist to support
particular finding.
6.19 Another submission raised the question of whether the
exemption should be limited to clergy in “active ministry”,
a requirement that applies to the health professionals listed above.
6.20 Another submission considered that the exemption for clergy ought to be reviewed,
while other preliminary submissions considered that vowed members of
any religious order should not be entitled to exemption as of
Under what circumstances, if any, ought clergy and/or religious be entitled to claim an exemption as of right from jury service?
MINING MANAGERS AND UNDER-MANAGERS OF MINES
6.21 Mining managers and under-managers of mines
were first granted a right to exemption in 1918.
The exemption was granted “in the interests of the men whose
lives these managers have in their charge”, it being noted
“mining accidents cannot be regulated to suit the convenience of
the sittings of the courts”.
At the time a manager or under-manager was required to exercise daily personal supervision of their mine.
Coal Mines Regulation Act 1982
now allows for the appointment of deputy managers who have “full
charge and control” in the absence of the mining
Under-managers also have “full charge and control” in the absence of the mining manager or deputy manager.
6.22 In WA, mining managers were removed from the list of those
entitled to claim an exemption, following recommendations by the Law
Reform Commission.
6.23 Some preliminary submissions questioned whether mining
managers and under-managers of mines should be entitled to exemption as
Given the possibility of appointing deputy
managers, there would appear to be no compelling reason for granting
mining managers and
under-managers of mines a blanket right of
exemption. Staffing issues for particular mines or particular safety
concerns could be
dealt with by an application to be excused for good
Should mining managers and under-managers of mines continue to be entitled to exemption from jury service?
GROUPS NOT INCLUDED
6.24 The trend has been against expanding the categories of
exemptions as of right, although other potential categories can be
by reference to identifiable groups of people who routinely
seek to be excused for good cause.
6.25 Teachers are no longer exempt in NSW.
However, teachers and lecturers will generally be excused for good
reason if they are scheduled to supervise or assess an approaching
examination, if they are scheduled to supervise or assess an HSC
assessment task, or if the service is to take place in the first
weeks of a term or semester.
6.26 In the ACT, professors, lecturers, schoolmasters and
schoolteachers “engaged in full-time teaching or organised
at a university, college or school” are entitled to claim
exemption as of right.
Formerly teachers and lecturers were exempt in Tasmania,
as was the case in Queensland.
6.27 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee, in the
face of submissions from various educational and teachers’
associations,
recommended the repeal of the teachers’ exemption
in that State, preferring to rely on individual applications to be
in appropriate cases.
Should the teaching staff at schools, universities and colleges be entitled to exemption as of right from jury service?
If so, under what conditions?
6.28 Students do not fall within any of the categories of
ineligibility or exemption in NSW. However, the Sheriff’s
recognise that a student can be excused when jury service is
likely to occur at a time when he or she is required to attend his or
her educational institution or when examinations or assessments are
Evening and weekend students would, therefore,
generally not be entitled to seek to be excused. Previously they were
only excused
if they were preparing for exams or compulsory projects.
6.29 Higher School Certificate students who have attained the
age of 18 years and are otherwise qualified to serve as jurors are
excused for good cause, as are other students where service is
likely to interfere significantly with their studies or examination
prospects. This has particular significance for those students who are
faced with the compulsory levy attaching to the Higher Education
Contribution levied by the Commonwealth government.
Should students be entitled to exemption as of right from jury service?
If so, under what conditions?
Small business owners and employees
6.30 The plight of small business owners, especially sole traders, is raised formally from time to time,
and is frequently raised in support of an application to be excused for
good cause. For example, in NSW in 1993 the State Chamber
of Commerce
applied for business-owner operators and sole traders to be included in
the list of those entitled to exemption as of
6.31 One preliminary submission to this Commission has observed
that removing even one person from a small operation may have adverse
consequences, especially “in regional areas, where the business
involves key personnel with specialist skills that are difficult
replace at short notice, particularly in the current climate of acute
skill and labour shortages”. Consequences include
the inability
to make up lost revenue, the failure to fulfil contracts and the
resulting loss of future business and the risk of
occupational health and safety requirements if key personnel are absent.
This could have additional weight at present if there is an
identifiable shift from employment to self-employment particularly in
the service industries.
6.32 In a survey conducted in Western Australia in 1983,
however, 46.7% of respondents considered that “loss of
should not be “an acceptable excuse to avoid jury
service, for a private employer, partner in a firm etc”.
Their exclusion from jury service potentially denies the input of
experienced business professionals who might better understand
issues and evidence in certain types of trials.
6.33 The New York Jury Project put a similar point of view about an exemption based on ownership of a small business:
If persons who work for hourly wages can be compelled to spend time
on jury service, then sole proprietors of businesses can do so,
particularly where the sole proprietor employs others in his or her
business establishment.
This is generally dealt with by the person seeking to be excused for
good cause. In Tasmania and Victoria, for example, the statutory
of “good reasons” includes “substantial financial
hardship” resulting from a person’s attendance.
In NSW, the Sheriff’s guidelines allow consideration to be given
to excusing sole traders or private contractors who can demonstrate
that they would be “significantly financially
disadvantaged” by being required to serve as a juror and that
they “cannot
be replaced by another person in the conduct of
their business”.
6.34 A question does arise as to whether there should be a system
for providing some measure of compensation for the owners of small
businesses, or sole traders so as to permit them or their key employees
to serve as jurors. Otherwise, a potentially large group
of people is
likely to be excluded from service, with adverse effects for the
objective of securing a representative jury. An alternative
possibly is
to ensure that the system allows people within this group to defer
their service, or to be excused from lengthy trials
and allocated short
How should the concerns of small business owners and employees be met?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 173-174.
. See para 5.42-5.53.
. See R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 150.
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 33.
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.39.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 items 3, 4, 5.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 148 and 149.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 150.
. Sheriff’s Office of NSW,
Jury Act, 1977
: Policy and Practice Guidelines
(November 2005) at para 3.4.2.
Juries Act 1957
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 173.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
at 1; NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
at 3-4; UnitingCare NSW.ACT,
Preliminary submission
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
at 4; UnitingCare NSW.ACT,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 item 7.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 former items 13-15.
. UnitingCare NSW.ACT,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 items 1 and 2.
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 1963
(NT) s 11, Sch 7;
Juries Act 1967
(ACT) Sch 1
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 120.
. England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 132.
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2000
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 148.
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 32.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 173.
. See also Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney,
Preliminary submission
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.94-3.95. See also UnitingCare NSW.ACT,
Preliminary submission
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.40.
Juries Act 1957
cl 3. The qualification in WA derives originally from
Juries Act 1870
(Eng) s 9 and Sch.
. Churches of Christ in NSW,
Preliminary submission
. Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney,
Preliminary submission
. Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney,
Preliminary submission
. Lutheran Church of Australia,
Preliminary submission
. UnitingCare NSW.ACT,
Preliminary submission
. UnitingCare NSW.ACT,
Preliminary submission
. See para 6.5.
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
at 1; NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 item 6.
Jury (Amendment) Act 1918
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 1 October 1918 at 1831.
Coal Mines Regulation Act 1912
(NSW) s 5(1). See also NSW,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 26 November 1918 at 3004.
Coal Mines Regulation Act 1982
(NSW) s 38.
Coal Mines Regulation Act 1982
(NSW) s 39.
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.43.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
at 1; NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
at 4; UnitingCare NSW.ACT,
Preliminary submission
. School teachers were previously exempt under
Jury Act 1912
(NSW) s 5(n).
. Sheriff’s Office of NSW,
Jury Act, 1977
: Policy and Practice Guidelines
(November 2005) at para 3.45. See also M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 42.
Juries Act 1967
(ACT) Sch 2
Jury Act 1899
(Tas) s 7A, Sch 1 Item 5.
Jury Act 1929
(Qld) s 8(1)(h). See Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 3.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.159, 3.161.
. Sheriff’s Office of NSW,
Jury Act, 1977
: Policy and Practice Guidelines
(November 2005) at para 3.4.5.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 42.
. See eg, Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
House of Assembly, 19 August 2003 at 47.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 24.
. Australian Business Ltd,
Preliminary submission
. I M Vodanovich, “Public attitudes about the jury” in D Challinger (ed),
(Australian Institute of Criminology Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986) at 81.
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 33.
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2000
. Sheriff’s Office of NSW,
Jury Act, 1977
: Policy and Practice Guidelines
(November 2005) at para 3.4.3.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
7. Other grounds of exemption
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Inability to read and understand English
Miscellaneous conditions
Carer responsibilities
Distance from court
Previous jury service
Conscientious objection
INABILITY TO READ AND UNDERSTAND ENGLISH
7.1 In NSW a person is ineligible to serve as a juror if he or she is “unable to read or understand English”.
This category seems to have general acceptance,
and has been considered by this Commission in its Report concerning deaf or blind jurors.
7.2 The Tasmanian Department of Justice’s review noted
that this category may have the potential to reduce the number of
from non-English speaking backgrounds. The review considered
that the alternative, of allowing people to serve irrespective of their
ability in English, would be impractical and expensive if interpreters
were to be required.
Assessing ability
7.3 The definition of the requirement varies between
write and speak English
whereas, in others the test turns upon whether the juror can communicate in or understand the English language adequately.
Questions sometimes arise as to whether any more stringent test of
literacy or comprehension should be adopted. In this respect it
be overlooked that some people who have become Australian citizens, but
who have come from communities adopting a different
alphabet or writing
style, may be able to speak and communicate in English but have only a
limited ability to read it.
7.4 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee considered
that any more stringent test of ability in English, than an ability
communicate in and understand the English language, as a qualification
for service was undesirable, on the grounds that, by excluding
from non-English speaking backgrounds and groups with literacy
difficulties, it would make juries less representative of the
as a whole.
Likewise, in the UK, the 1965 Departmental
Committee on Jury Service rejected the adoption of any mechanism for
the assessment of
the literacy of jurors or of their ability to
comprehend English.
7.5 The English Royal Commission on Criminal Justice did not
identify any particular problem in this respect but recommended that
there be further research on the question.
7.6 Judges currently have the ability to stand jurors aside in
the interests of justice and could do so if they were not satisfied
their ability to read or understand English.
What should be the requirement for eligibility concerning a juror’s ability to read, understand or communicate English?
MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS
7.7 The next paragraphs consider a number of physical conditions
including disability, sickness and infirmity which give rise to
ineligibility
and pregnancy which gives rise to a right to claim
7.8 In NSW and in a number of other jurisdictions, a disability
which impacts upon a person’s ability to discharge the duties
a juror is expressly a ground of ineligibility.
different from the other criteria of ineligibility in that it requires
an assessment of whether or not the disability will
impact upon the
particular individual’s ability to act as a juror.
7.9 At present NSW makes no distinction between a person with
a disability who is unable to perform the role of a juror, even with
assistance, and one who could perform the role with some form of
assistance or accommodation. Accommodation has been provided in
NSW court houses for jurors with physical disabilities, including
provision in the jury box for an elevator and room for a wheelchair.
7.10 In some jurisdictions, people who are mentally or
intellectually incapable of performing the duties of a juror are
excluded by way of a separate ground of either
disqualification or ineligibility.
implication, it is accepted that they fall within the category of those
who are unable to discharge the duties as a result
of “infirmity
or disability”.
7.11 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee proposed
that people should be ineligible for jury service if “their
intellectual or mental disability or disorder makes them
incapable of effectively performing the functions of a juror”.
One submission to the Victorian review suggested that the idea of
providing reasonable assistance should be included in the criterion.
The Tasmanian Department of Justice’s review considered that,
while some people with a disability may actually be unable to
as a juror, “in most cases, a person with a disability will be
capable of performing the functions of a juror”.
The NSW Law Reform Commission has already considered this issue in respect of jurors who are deaf or blind.
7.12 Listing people with physical disabilities among those who
are ineligible follows the recommendation of the UK Departmental
on Jury Service which was swayed by evidence “showing
that many such persons... undergo a good deal of apprehension and
embarrassment
when they are told that as the law now stands they cannot
be exempted but must apply for excusal if actually summoned”.
7.13 With respect to those with mental or intellectual
disabilities, the UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service noted that
disabilities varied widely, were often not permanent and
“many of those who are mentally disordered may not be fully aware
of the fact”. The review therefore recommended only that those
receiving certain types of mental health treatments should be
ineligible.
7.14 One submission to this Commission has asserted that, in
NSW, people with intellectual disabilities were being summoned for jury
service. This gives rise to a number of concerns, including the
sufficiency of the procedures for identifying and excusing such people
and the distress and confusion often caused by receipt of a summons.
Absent the assistance of near relatives, or the provision of a
certificate from a treating medical practitioner, or actual evidence
behaviour that is indicative of a psychiatric condition or intellectual
disability, it is difficult to detect those who might
fall within this
Should disability which impacts upon a person’s ability to
discharge the duties of a juror continue to be a ground of
ineligibility?
Should such disability be more precisely defined?
Sickness or infirmity
7.15 In NSW and some other jurisdictions, a person is ineligible to
serve as a juror if he or she is unable, because of sickness or
infirmity, to discharge the duties of a juror.
qualify as a “good cause” for which the person
excused from attendance for jury service.
7.16 It has been reported that sickness or infirmity is one of the more common grounds for removal from the roll in NSW,
although inevitably this can give rise to questions of degree and as to
whether the condition is of an ongoing or permanent nature.
addition, where the condition is temporary it is commonly encountered
on an application to be excused made following receipt of
a summons, or
on the day of the trial.
Should inability to discharge the duties of a juror because of
sickness or infirmity continue to be a ground of ineligibility or
it be dealt with as an application to be excused for good cause?
7.17 The entitlement of pregnant women to be excused as of right
was first introduced in NSW in 1977 when a woman’s general entitlement to be excused as of right was removed.
7.18 The NSW Jury Task Force questioned why pregnant women
“irrespective of the stage of the pregnancy” should have a
right to be excused.
The 1994 AIJA review recommended amendment or removal of the pregnancy exemption.
The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee considered that most
women in the early stages of pregnancy would be capable of
The Committee considered that anyone unable to perform jury service on
account of pregnancy could apply to be excused on an individual
7.19 In the ACT, pregnant women are entitled to be excused on the grounds of “good cause”.
Should pregnancy continue to be a ground of exemption as of right from jury service?
7.20 In NSW, people who are at least 70 years old have the right to claim exemption.
Until 1997, the age for a right to exemption was set at 65.
The Law Reform Commission recommended a change in the age in 1986
because of concerns about the serious under-representation of jurors
aged 65 and over.
7.21 Exemptions based on age still represent a substantial proportion of the exemptions claimed in NSW.
This has also been the case in other jurisdictions.
Some jurisdictions have seen an increase in the age limit for jury
service where age has been a precondition to eligibility. In some
7.22 For example, in Tasmania in 2003, the age limit of 65 was
removed and substituted by a provision allowing those over 70 to elect
not to serve.
In Queensland, where previously males between 65 and 70 could opt out of jury service,
people over 70 are now ineligible unless they elect to be eligible.
In Western Australia, people over 70 are ineligible to serve, while those between 65 and 70 may elect not to serve.
In the ACT, people over 60 are eligible to serve but are entitled to claim exemption as of right.
7.23 The NSW Jury Task Force questioned the earlier restriction allowing persons over 65 to claim exemption.
The extension to 70 years in NSW does not address the underlying
concern that a large number of people who may otherwise be physically
and intellectually capable of serving, can seek exemption on the ground
of age alone. In Victoria, there is no exemption based on
age, however,
“advanced age” amounts to a good reason to be excused.
7.24 In Queensland it has been suggested that the age of 70 is
appropriate as a cut off as it is the retirement age already
established
for judges.
In NSW, the retirement age for judges is 72 years,
however, the age for acting judges has been extended to 75 years.
7.25 Arguments in favour of retaining reasonable age limits include:
the difficulties of old age that may accompany such activities as
sitting in court for protracted periods, or travelling to and from
avoidance of the administrative difficulties that will arise
if a large number of elderly people are summoned and then seek to be
avoidance of the “unfair” burdens on elderly
people involved in seeking to be excused on a discretionary basis and
distress caused to them and their relatives;
the belief that jury service is a duty that ought not
“be demanded of people at an age when they are entitled to the
that comes in retirement”.
7.26 Reasons for not imposing a restriction based on age include the fact that:
age bears little relation to the ability of a person to serve as a
juror, especially if the grounds of illness or disability are retained;
excluding the elderly will make juries less representative of the community;
the older age group will generally be retired (and, therefore,
available) and may come from those groups that have previously been
exempted or excused from jury service
yet could bring particular skills and experience to the task.
7.27 It has been noted that many people above the age of 70 may be
perfectly capable of carrying out jury service and perfectly willing
It could be argued that the current exemption as of right unnecessarily
encourages people within this group who are still capable
of serving to
seek exemption. It may, therefore, be more appropriate to allow elderly
people to be excused for good cause, for example,
on the grounds of
illness or other incapacity, or the likely length of the trial, rather
than relying on a presumptive right to exemption
based on age alone.
Lord Justice Auld, in his review of the criminal courts in England and
Wales, took a rather more limited approach,
in relation to people
within the lower age group of 65 to 70 to show “that they are so
physically or mentally unfit as not
to be able to act effectively as
No suggestion was made of extending this provision to people aged more than 70.
Should age be a ground of ineligibility or exemption from jury service?
What conditions should attach to any requirement of ineligibility or right of exemption?
CARER RESPONSIBILITIES
7.28 In NSW exemptions as of right are available for people who have
the “care, custody and control of children under the age
years (other than children who have ceased attending school) and who,
if exempted, would be the only person exempt... in respect
children” as well as people who reside with, and have full-time
care of, a person who is “sick, infirm or disabled”.
7.29 A sizeable number of otherwise eligible people are deleted from the NSW roll by reason of these rights to exemption.
This is also the case in other jurisdictions.
The consequence is to exclude a large number of women from serving as jurors in the 25-50 year age group.
7.30 Other jurisdictions, for example the ACT, have made care of
children a ground to be excused for good cause rather than a ground
exemption as of right.
7.31 One suggestion that could encourage such people to serve
would be to allow jurors to claim fees paid for substitute carers who
were engaged during the period of the jury service.
Care of people under 18 years
7.32 Unlike NSW, most other jurisdictions that retain the care
of children as a ground for exemption or to be excused make no
to the age of the children. However, in WA the age limit for
having children under care as a ground of exemption is 14 years.
7.33 In other jurisdictions, such as SA, NT, ACT, Queensland,
Tasmania and Victoria, care of children no longer entitles a person
exemption, although in some of these jurisdictions it is an express
ground for excusing a person from service. In Victoria, for
one of the grounds for excusing a person is that “the person has
the care of dependants and alternative care during
the person’s
attendance for jury service is not reasonably available for those
dependants”.
7.34 One preliminary submission to this Commission questioned
whether the right of exemption for the care of a person under 18 should
continue to be available.
Another submission considered this exemption to be particularly “unacceptable”.
Care of people in need of full-time care
7.35 It may be noted that the right of exemption for carers of
persons who are sick, infirm or disabled is not qualified by the
provision attaching to the care of children, which it would
seem was intended to apply to sole carers. One preliminary submission
to this Commission questioned the exemption.
Should the care of children or of others continue to be a ground of exemption as of right?
What, if any, conditions should attach in order for it to be exercised?
DISTANCE FROM COURT
7.36 Currently a person who resides more than 56 km from the place
where he or she is required to serve is entitled to claim an exemption.
The distance from the Sydney CBD to the nearest part of the Blue Mountains National Park is 56 km.
7.37 This distance requirement may cause problems. For example,
Nelson Bay has 20,000 people who are in the habit of commuting to
Newcastle to work, but who can claim the 56 km exemption on the ground
of distance alone. On the other hand, there are people from
Point and Scotland Island who are within the 56 km zone for Sydney but
for whom transport is very difficult.
7.38 One submission to this Commission has suggested that the
right to exemption on the ground of distance is particularly
“unacceptable”.
Its origin is unclear, but it
is arguably an arbitrary provision which does not take into account
modern transport or work patterns,
or the availability, or
non-availability, in particular regions, of public transport. It is
also likely, in rural districts, to place
a greater burden on town
residents and to exclude those from outlying districts, even though
they are very much part of the local
community, and will normally
conduct their business and shopping in those towns.
7.39 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee, in
considering the Victorian limit of 32 km, proposed an extension to 50
for the Melbourne jury district and 100 km for the rest of Victoria.
The 100 km radius from a courthouse was proposed on the basis
would represent a drive of about one hour each way, which was not
considered unreasonable, at least for short trials.
7.40 One preliminary submission to this Commission suggested
that the distance should be increased to 100 km, but questioned what
impact that might have on people in regional areas who did not have
access to transport.
Another submission also pointed to
the unavailability of public transport for some people in rural areas
who might otherwise be within
the 56 km limit.
Each objection could be resolved by way of an application to be excused for good cause.
7.41 In England and Wales, there is no exemption based upon
distance from the court. However, in summoning jurors, the Lord
is to have regard to the “convenience of the persons
summoned and to their respective places of residence, and in particular
to the desirability of selecting jurors within reasonable daily
travelling distance of the place where they are to attend”.
What geographical criteria, if any, should be applied in
determining whether a person should be exempted or excused from jury
PREVIOUS JURY SERVICE
7.42 In NSW a person may be excused as of right who:
served as a juror at any time within the preceding 3 years; or
within the preceding 12 months, was summoned, attended court and was willing to serve as a juror but was not required to do so.
A person may also be excused as of right if he or she served as a juror
in a trial or coronial inquest and the judge or coroner,
at the end of
the trial or inquest, made an order that the jurors who attended the
trial or inquest “for a lengthy period”
were entitled to be
exempted as of right from serving as jurors for a period specified in
that order.
7.43 Such provisions, which are duplicated in some forms in most jurisdictions,
are aimed at ensuring that the burden of jury service is shared as evenly as possible among those who are liable to serve.
A possible area of uncertainty, however, arises in relation to what
constitutes attending a trial or inquest for a “lengthy
On what terms, if any, should people be exempted or excused from
jury service on the grounds of previous jury service or attendance
jury service?
CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTION
7.44 Currently conscientious objection to jury service is not a
ground of exemption in NSW. As a general ground of exemption,
conscientious
objection is only specifically provided for in SA.
The Sheriff’s Guidelines in NSW recognise conscientious objection
on the grounds of religious belief in so far as they allow
consideration to be given to excusing Christadelphians, Seventh Day
Adventists, Jehovah’s Witnesses and Brethren from jury
7.45 In a previous report this Commission recommended that
conscientious objection to jury service should be recognised as a
of exemption as of right as follows:
A person who objects on the grounds of conscientious belief to
serving on a jury whether the grounds of that belief are or are not
a religious character and whether that belief is or is not part of the
doctrine of any religion.
7.46 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee, in considering
the possibility of giving people with a conscientious objection
service a right to be exempted, noted the concern that such a ground
could be abused by people lacking a genuinely held belief.
Committee, however, preferred that it be available as a good cause for
a person to be excused from service.
7.47 Tasmania has recognised that a “good reason” to be
excused from service is that “the beliefs or principles
religious society or body of which the person is a practising member
are incompatible with jury service”.
A similar provision exists in Victoria.
7.48 The issue which potentially arises is the extent to which
the genuineness of such a belief should be explored, and whether it
sufficient for the claim to be made without further support, or whether
proof is required of membership of some organisation or
religious group
which maintains such a tenet as part of its doctrine. The practical
reality, however, is that if a juror unsuccessfully
invokes this as a
ground to be excused, then the same result will be achieved by counsel,
most probably the prosecutor, exercising
a right of peremptory
challenge to avoid having a reluctant and potentially non-participating
juror empanelled, with the likely consequence
of a hung jury. While
this could be overcome in most cases, by a majority verdict, that would
not be so in a murder trial.
What provision, if any, should be made for people who have a conscientious objection to jury service?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 Item 11. See also para 2.31-2.34.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.141-3.142. See also
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 10.
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
Blind or Deaf Jurors
(Report 114, 2006).
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 2.
Juries Act 1963
(NT) s 10(3)(c);
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 3(f);
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 10.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.12.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 78-79.
. England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 135.
. See Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.13.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 12;
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 9;
Juries Act 2000
(Vic) Sch 2 cl 3(a);
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7.
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 9.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.140. This was adopted in Tasmania:
Juries Act 2003
(Tas) Sch 2 cl 9. This Commission has given consideration to this question: NSW Law Reform Commission,
Blind or Deaf Jurors
(Report 114, 2006).
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.136.
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 2.
. See NSW Law Reform Commission,
Blind or Deaf Jurors
(Report 114, 2006).
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 127.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 128.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 2 item 12;
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 1963
(NT) Sch 7.
Juries Act 2000
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1957
(WA) Sch 3;
Juries Act 1927
s 16(2)(c).
See also para 8.7-8.8.
. L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
; M Wilkie, “Inside the Jury” in D Challinger,
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986) at 188.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 item 9.
Jury Act 1912
(NSW) s 3(3) inserted by
Administration of Justice Act 1968
(NSW) s 10.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 23.
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 174.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.172-3.173. See also NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.172-3.173.
Juries Act 1967
See also para 8.7.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 item 8.
Jury Amendment (Qualifications) Regulation 1996
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986) at para 4.35. See also M Wilkie, “Inside the Jury” in D Challinger,
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986) at 189.
. L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.147.
Juries Act 2003
Jury Act 1929
(Qld) s 3, s 6(1)(b) and s 8(3). At the time women under 70 were entitled to claim exemption irrespective of age:
Jury Act 1929
(Qld) s 8(3).
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 1967
(ACT) Sch 2
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 23.
Juries Act 2000
See also para 8.7.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 5.
Judicial Officers Act 1986
Supreme Court Act 1970
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 68.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 5; Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 16 May 1996 at 1192.
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 16 May 1996 at 1192; Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.166.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 68.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.165.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.165.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.165.
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 16 May 1996 at 1192.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 150.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 items 10, 11.
. See L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
. See also M Wilkie, “Inside the Jury” in D Challinger,
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986) at 188; and NSW Law Reform Commission,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial: Empirical Studies
(Research Report 1, 1986) at para 4.4.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.147.
Juries Act 1967
See also para 8.7.
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
at 4. See para 9.76 below.
Juries Act 1957
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 1967
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 item 12.
. However, it should be noted that people living near the
centre of Sydney will only be required to serve in the Sydney jury
This is because the South Sydney jury district consists of
postcodes in the electoral districts surrounding the courthouses in the
centre of Sydney. There are also jury districts for Penrith,
Campbelltown and Parramatta each of which consist of the postcodes in
the electoral districts surrounding the courthouses in Penrith,
Campbelltown and Parramatta respectively. There is no overlap between
the jury districts. Under current arrangements it is, therefore, not
possible for a person living near the Blue Mountains to be called
jury service in the Sydney jury district.
. L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.177.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
. UnitingCare NSW.ACT,
Preliminary submission
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 2(2).
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 item 13.
Jury Act 1977
and Sch 3 item 14.
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2000
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 1963
(NT) s 18AB;
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1974
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.181.
Juries Act 1927
s 16(2)(c).
. Sheriff’s Office of NSW,
Jury Act, 1977
: Policy and Practice Guidelines
(November 2005) at para 3.4.7.
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
Conscientious Objection to Jury Service
(Report 42, 1984) at para 5.21.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.195, 3.198-3.199.
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2000
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
8. Excused for good cause
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Reasons in other jurisdictions
Right of appeal
8.1 Most jury statutes include a provision allowing a person to be
excused from attendance for jury service on the grounds of “good
cause”, “reasonable cause”, or “good
In New South Wales the Sheriff may excuse a person from attendance for
jury service, at any time before being summoned, for good
cause because
of “any matter of special importance or any matter of special
A person who has been summoned for jury
service may also be excused by the Sheriff or by the Court or Coroner
from attendance for
jury service on the grounds of good cause for the
whole or any part of the time that his or her attendance is required.
A person does not, however, have good cause to be excused on the ground
that the person is entitled to be exempted as of right if
that person
was entitled but failed without reasonable cause, to claim exemption in
response to the questionnaire earlier sent out
with the notice of
8.3 In many instances the
decision is made on the day of the trial, either by a local officer of
the Sheriff authorised to exercise
that power or by the Judge, usually
by the latter when the claim to be excused is questionable. In the
2005/2006 financial year,
39,896 potential jurors were excused for good
cause before attending, and of those who attended for jury service,
9,490 were excused
by the Sheriff and 2,541 by a Judge.
In Australia, excusal for good cause is dealt with in several ways.
Some jurisdictions provide express legislative guidance for
determining
what constitutes “good cause”. For example, in Tasmania and
Victoria the good causes for which the Sheriff
may excuse a person from
service are listed in the statute and include illness and incapacity,
substantial hardship or inconvenience,
caregiving, religious beliefs,
and “any other matter of special urgency or importance”.
In other jurisdictions such as New South Wales, good cause is not
defined by statute and there is no legislative guidance for determining
what constitutes good cause.
The Sheriff has, however,
developed guidelines for the assistance of the Office of the Sheriff,
and the website of that office provides
some limited guidance as to the
procedure which those who seek to be excused must follow.
8.5 The NSW Jury Task Force in 1993 considered that there was
merit in having a limited automatic class of exclusion leaving those
who would be entitled “as of right” to apply to be excused
on the grounds that “in their particular case there
undue hardship or inconvenience”.
This would involve
a significant change for those who fall within the exemption as of
right category, who could previously elect
to be removed from the list,
but who could serve if they wished. They would now have to serve unless
they could provide a good reason
not to. It might also involve a
substantial change in the work of the jury section of the
Sheriff’s Office.
8.6 In England and Wales, Lord Justice Auld observed that any
applications to be excused would have to be tested carefully according
to “the individual circumstances” of each case
“otherwise there could be a reversion to the present widespread
excusal of such persons by reason only of their positions or
occupations”.
Should those, or some of those, within the present category of
exemption as of right, be required instead to apply to be excused from
jury service by demonstrating a good cause?
REASONS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
other jurisdictions, excuses that qualify as “good cause”
for which the Sheriff may, at his or her discretion,
excuse a person
from attendance for jury service include the following:
illness, poor health or incapacity;
substantial or undue personal hardship (including financial) or inconvenience resulting from attendance for jury service;
excessive time or excessive inconvenience in travelling to court;
substantial inconvenience to the public (or a section of the
public) resulting from the person’s attendance for jury service;
the existence of caregiving obligations in circumstances where suitable alternative care is not readily available;
the person is one of two or more partners from the same
business partnership, or one of two or more employees in the same
establishment,
who have been summoned to attend as jurors on the same
the existence of religious or conscientious beliefs of the person that are incompatible with jury service;
having already performed jury service within the previous 3 years;
the advanced age of the person;
any matter or circumstance variously described as being of special or sufficient weight, importance or urgency.
8.8 In Tasmania several of these grounds may justify a person being
permanently excused from jury service, namely, continuing poor
disability or religious belief.
A number of these reasons are treated as grounds for a person to be
excused as of right in some jurisdictions but as excuses qualifying
good cause in others. For example, in New South Wales a person with the
caregiving duties previously mentioned is eligible to
claim exemption
as of right whereas in Tasmania, where all categories of exemption as
of right have been removed, a caregiver may
only claim excusal on the
grounds of good cause.
8.10 The Victorian
Parliamentary Law Reform Committee suggested an additional ground on
which a person could be excused for good cause,
namely “whether
in the opinion of the sheriff or judge there are factors personal to
the prospective juror which would justify
excusal on the grounds that
he or she may be unable to properly and impartially fulfil the duties
of a juror”.
This ground would deal with situations where, for example, a spouse of a lawyer engaged in the trial is empanelled.
8.11 The New York Jury Project simply proposed two grounds on which a potential juror could be excused for good cause, namely:
(a) the individual has a mental or physical condition that causes
him or her to be incapable of performing the duties of a juror;
(b) the individual asks to be excused because his/her service would
be a continuing hardship to the individual, his/her family, or
Should there be a statutory list of “good
reasons” for excusing a person from jury service or should the
power to excuse
be left at large to be exercised at the discretion of
the Sheriff or of the trial judge or coroner?
If the former, what reasons should be included on that list?
8.12 The absence of
legislative guidance has led some jurisdictions to establish jury
summoning guidelines setting out the criteria
governing excusal for
good cause. Because determining whether a person has good cause to be
excused from attendance for jury service
requires an exercise of
discretion by the Sheriff, guidelines are of assistance in ensuring
that the Sheriff or the Sheriff’s
delegate exercises the
discretion in a consistent manner, particularly in jurisdictions where
good cause is not statutorily defined
such as New South Wales. The use
of guidelines also acts as a safeguard against the Sheriff using the
discretion to “pack the
jury”. In New South Wales, jury
summoning guidelines have been developed by the Sheriff’s Office
but they are informal
in nature and are not made publicly available or
routinely provided to the Courts. In other jurisdictions, such as
England and Wales,
where the statute merely requires a “good
reason” for a person to be excused,
guidelines are formalised and made publicly available.
8.13 If the present categories of ineligibility and exemption as
of right from jury service in NSW are reduced, it is likely that
number of applications by persons summoned for jury service to the
Sheriff for excusal for good cause will increase. If this
occurs, there
is a danger that this will shift the burden of excusal to the Sheriff
or to the Courts. Further should the good causes
for which the Sheriff
or the Courts may excuse a person from service be listed in
legislation, as is the case in Tasmania and Victoria,
there is a risk
that this list may become a de-facto list of categories of people who
may be exempted as of right. There is a similar
risk where the good
causes for which the Sheriff may excuse a person from service are
listed in published guidelines.
8.14 Concerns have been expressed in NSW about the exercise of
the discretion to excuse people for good cause. One preliminary
to this review suggested that “good cause” needs
to be stated more clearly so that employers and employees could be more
certain of their rights. The statutory lists of grounds in Victoria,
Queensland and Tasmania are seen as providing better grounds
than the current system in NSW.
Should there be published guidelines for excusing people from jury service?
Should they be in addition to or instead of any statutory list of reasons?
What reasons should the guidelines identify as constituting good cause?
RIGHT OF APPEAL
8.15 In some jurisdictions, such as Victoria, South Australia and
the United Kingdom, there is express statutory provision for an
to the court from a decision of the Sheriff (or equivalent officer)
refusing to grant a claim to be excused for good cause.
At present, there is no express provision in New South Wales permitting
such an appeal, although there is a de facto appeal in that
applicant who has been denied excusal by the Sheriff can always renew
the application before a judge. However, a person who claims
disqualified, ineligible or exempt as of right may appeal to a Local
Court from a determination of the Sheriff not to exclude
that person
from the jury roll, or to amend the jury roll so as to have that effect.
Should there be a right of appeal against a decision not to excuse a person for good reason?
8.16 It is worth considering whether people who are excused for good
reason may also defer their jury service either to a specified
unspecified future date, and whether the granting of any application to
be excused could, or should, be made conditional on deferral,
ensure that such people are not unreasonably or irresponsibly avoiding
their civic duty which is important for the preservation
institution of trial by jury.
8.17 The English Royal Commission on Criminal Justice in 1993
recommended that “every effort” be made to “offer
alternative dates at a time that will be more convenient if that gives
an applicant an adequate opportunity to rearrange his or her
order to leave time for the jury service to be performed”.
Lord Justice Auld similarly proposed that applications to be excused
could be dealt with by deferral of service, citing the New York
In England and Wales it is now the case that a
person’s attendance may not be deferred if he or she has already
been granted
a deferral of attendance under the same summons.
8.18 The New York Jury Project proposed a tightly controlled
system whereby a juror who is not entitled to be excused should be
to only one deferral as of right and required to nominate a
date or dates on which he or she could serve within the following 6
This Project observed that a discretionary system
allowing for deferral relies on the ability of officials to distinguish
“situations where a citizen can make alternate
arrangements if allowed to defer service to a more convenient
those where a more general or lengthier release from
service is appropriate.
For example, there are many
circumstances in the guidelines for England and Wales, where the
relevant officer is encouraged to grant
a deferral in the first
instance. These include MPs who should be offered deferral to a time
when parliamentary duties permit and
students and teachers who should
be offered deferral to a period outside of term time. Those seeking to
be excused on the grounds
of work commitments should be offered a
deferral unless exemption is clearly necessary.
8.19 The New Zealand Law Commission has also recommended the
adoption of a deferral system preferring it to the adoption of a
set of guidelines for excusing jurors. The Commission expected
that under such a system “the existing criteria for excusal
be interpreted much more strictly, because many people who claim that
‘attendance on that occasion would cause or result
hardship or serious inconvenience’ will be able to defer to a
more convenient time rather than be excused altogether”
8.20 Several Australian jurisdictions allow a person to apply for deferral to another specified period.
In Victoria, for example, this is supported up by a computer system
that allows potential jurors to record their preferred dates
service. In SA, the Sheriff or Judge may excuse a person upon condition
that his or her name is included among the jurors to
be summoned at a
“specified subsequent time” or that he or she attend in
compliance with the summons as directed by the
8.21 There may, however, be problems with managing a system
whereby people are offered alternative times that are more suitable. It
has been suggested that a system of recording preferred times did not
work previously in NSW. Often people who deferred came up with
excuse when the deferred date arrived.
In the Australian
enforces a person’s subsequent choice of
date. The New York Jury
Project observed that allowing multiple deferrals “does not
foster public respect for the jury system”.
8.22 One submission to this review supported the possibility of
deferring service until a time that is more convenient to a prospective
juror. It envisaged swapping a person who has been summoned onto a
panel for a future date in order to overcome the problems of short-term
illness or work commitments.
8.23 Another alternative is to ensure that there is flexibility
in the system to excuse jurors for whom service in a lengthy trial
would occasion hardship or otherwise ground an application to be
excused, on condition that they be available and moved to a panel
allocated to a short trial.
What provision, if any, should be made for potential jurors to defer jury service?
Should it be possible to reallocate potential jurors to serve
in a trial that would avoid or limit the hardship that may be
by requiring them to serve in the trial to which their panel
is allocated?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Juries Act 2000
. See M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 41 and 175.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 25.
. L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 151.
Juries Act 2000
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1957
(WA) Sch 3;
Juries Act 1927
s 16(2)(c).
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 2000
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1957
(WA) Sch 3.
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 2000
Jury Act 1995
s 21(1)(c).
Juries Act 2000
Jury Act 1995
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1927
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 1927
s 16(2)(c).
Juries Act 1927
s 16(2)(a).
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 1967
Juries Act 1957
(WA) Sch 3;
s 16(2)(c).
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 items 10 and 11;
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 3.192.
. See N R Cowdery,
Preliminary submission
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 34.
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 9(2).
Juries Act 1974
s 9AA. See England and Wales, Department for Constitutional Affairs,
“Guidance for summoning officers when considering
deferral and
excusal applications” «
http://www.hmcourts-service.gov.uk/docs/guidance_for_summoning_officers_0405%20.doc
» (accessed 20 October 2006); England and Wales, Department for Constitutional Affairs,
Jury Summoning Guidance
(Consultation Paper, 2003).
. Australian Business Ltd,
Preliminary Submission
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 9A;
Juries Act 1927
Jury Act 1977
. England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 132.
. R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 151.
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 9A(2), (2A).
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 36.
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 35.
. England and Wales, Department for Constitutional Affairs,
“Guidance for summoning officers when considering deferral and
applications” «
http://www.hmcourts-service.gov.uk/docs/guidance_for_summoning_officers_0405%20.doc
» (accessed 20 October 2006).
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 156.
Juries Act 2000
Juries Act 2003
Juries Act 1963
(NT) s 17A.
Juries Act 1927
. L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994) at 36.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
9. Management of jury service
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Selection and empanelment
Accommodating jurors
Enforcement of compliance with jury duty
Jurors’ employment
Compensation to jurors
9.1 The system of jury selection, empanelment and management needs to
be designed with the interests of potential jurors in mind
particularly
bearing in mind the responsible performance of a civic duty that jury
service entails, which can occasion personal hardship,
hardship and a good deal of inconvenience and distress. The more the
system is designed to accommodate the concerns and
needs of jurors, the
less likely it is that some will seek exemption on the grounds of
inconvenience or hardship.
9.2 The 1994 AIJA review of the NSW jury system observed:
When discussing the management of juries we are talking of a
limited and precious resource. The requirement that citizens perform
jury duty is an imposition on the freedom of the individual, and
therefore juror usage not only must be efficient and economical
administrative point of view, but also must recognise the legitimate
concerns, apprehensions, expectations and frustrations
of citizens
participating in jury duty.
9.3 The Tasmanian review of jury service in 1999 observed that the jury
selection processes generally appeared to have been “designed
with the interests of the system in mind”, the interests of
jurors playing “little part in their development”.
9.4 In this section we outline some of the conditions or incidents
of service as a juror that may lessen its attraction to lay citizens
and encourage reliance on rights to exemption or applications to be
SELECTION AND EMPANELMENT
9.5 The current system for selection and empanelment in NSW has
been examined earlier. In this section we identify some of the problems
that arise in implementing that procedure.
Selection boundaries
9.6 In NSW the current practice is to include on the jury rolls
the registered electors resident in the postcode areas from the
districts closest to the relevant courts. Each electoral
district or part of an electoral district serves only one court or
So, for example, in the Sydney South
region, the electorates surrounding the Sydney District Court and
Supreme Court complexes are
used to compile the jury roll for those
courts, while the electorates surrounding Parramatta are used to
compile the jury roll for
the District Court at Parramatta. This
division occurs, notwithstanding the fact that people living in or
around Parramatta would
not be able to claim an exemption as of right
based on the 56km distance criterion if called upon to serve at the
Sydney District
9.7 Basing jury rolls on electoral districts has caused
problems in regional areas, for example, where the roll is drawn from
an electoral
district the boundaries of which do not necessarily
represent a 56 km radius from the location of the courthouse, or the
courthouses at which people on that roll may be summoned to
In some areas the result may be a substantial reduction in the available jury pool for that courthouse.
9.8 We propose to make inquiries to identify what proportion of
State electors, if any, are not included on a jury roll because of
current 56 km limit and as to whether this imposes additional burdens
on those living nearest to some regional courthouses.
9.9 Options other than establishing jury pools based on
electoral districts include using postcode districts, local government
and/or census collection districts. In its submission to the
Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee, the Victorian State
Office preferred the use of census collection districts
(which are smaller than postcode districts) on the basis that postcode
change quite frequently.
The jury districts in Tasmania are defined by census collection districts.
9.10 Questions arise as to the most effective method of
determining the geographic areas from which jurors are to be selected
particular courthouses and whether jurors should be available for
selection for only one courthouse when they are within easy reach
more than one courthouse. This question is relevant not only to
potential jurors in the Sydney region but also to potential jurors
live in electoral districts between major regional centres.
How should the geographic areas from which jurors are chosen for particular courts be selected?
9.11 It is sometimes suggested that interested people could make
themselves available to serve as jurors by registering or notifying
that willingness to the Sheriff.
It is believed by some that this would get around the problem of those who are unwilling to serve.
9.12 This approach would be undesirable for a number of reasons, since:
it tends to undermine the general principle of representativeness of the jury that is achieved by random selection;
volunteer jurors, in their own way, would be as “exclusive” a group as the judiciary is sometimes claimed to be;
volunteer jurors may have particular personal agendas that they wish to pursue through jury service; and
regular volunteers, as “old hands”, might come to
exercise an undue influence on less experienced randomly selected
What provision, if any, should be made for people to volunteer for jury service?
Matters impacting upon the convenience of jurors
Sufficient notice of attendance
9.13 Currently in NSW a juror need only be given 7 days notice
of the date when they are required to attend unless a judge of the
court “otherwise orders”.
The usual notice
period is 4 to 5 weeks. However, a court may require a jury to be
empanelled at much shorter notice, sometimes of
even a day or two. Such
short notice may be given when, for example, a trial judge wishes to
recommence an aborted trial. In these
cases Sheriff’s officers
deliver the jury summonses in person.
9.14 One submission to this review has drawn attention to
instances of summonses being given at short notice of only two weeks or
less. The short notice is said to involve considerable inconvenience to
some businesses, the more so when final confirmation that
a person is
required to attend is given only within one or two days preceding the
This may lead unnecessarily to jurors seeking to be excused, who, if given more time, would have been prepared to serve.
9.15 In Tasmania, potential jurors must be given at least 14 days notice of attendance.
The Tasmanian review of jury service in 1999 considered that three
weeks notice was “totally inadequate”, observing that
was “far too short for a person to reorganise their business and
personal affairs”.
9.16 One preliminary submission received by the Commission
suggested that “a system which provides more regular and advance
notice for jury duty may mitigate these difficulties somewhat”.
Attendance on the wrong day
9.17 There has been a recent case where a juror attended on the
wrong day and was mistakenly empanelled. An appeal to the NSW Court
Criminal Appeal was upheld quashing the conviction on the basis that
the empanelment of the jury was invalid and ineffective.
It has been suggested that the Act should be amended to meet this
situation when jurors attend the court in response to a summons.
Case management
9.18 There has been a perennial complaint that jurors are unnecessarily kept waiting around and that their time is often wasted.
That there is always room for improvement in this regard has generally been accepted.
The fact that complaints continue to be made reinforces the point that
the system places less consideration on the needs and interests
jurors than it does on the system itself.
9.19 One preliminary submission identified the problem of
jurors attending court in response to a summons only to be told that
trial is not proceeding, particularly where the parties are not
ready to proceed or where there has been a last minute plea. It has
been suggested that this is one of the principal causes of jury service
being depicted in a bad light.
Not only are individuals
inconvenienced by having to attend when not required, they are also
potentially lost to the system for 12
months because they are entitled
to claim a right of exemption as having attended and been willing to
The submission suggested that some form of penalty as to costs should be imposed.
9.20 Equally problematic and annoying for jurors is the taking
of lengthy breaks during the trial while legal argument takes place
relation to the admissibility of evidence and so on.
proper management a trial judge should take steps to avoid such
interruptions, which do involve a waste of jurors’ time,
dealing, so far as practicable, with all such questions, including
potential questions as to the joinder of co-accused or severance
indictment, pre-trial;
deferring argument on such issues until they can be determined outside normal court hours; or by
similar techniques which would minimise mid-trial interruptions in the orderly flow of the evidence, addresses and summing up.
Attendance on more than one day before empanelment
9.21 There appears to be no provision limiting the period of time which a person must attend in response to a summons,
although in practice there is an expectation that most jurors will be
allocated a trial or discharged on the day of attendance. The
practice in the Sydney District Court is to summon panels of jurors on
Monday for trials commencing on Monday or Tuesday
and to summon panels
of jurors on Wednesday for trials that commence on that day, meaning
that no potential juror has to wait for
more than 2 days before
empanelment.
9.22 A practice also exists whereby separate panels can be
joined where there is an insufficiency of jurors in attendance, even
these panels have been summoned separately for the Supreme and
District Courts.
9.23 Attendance on more than one day without selection can be a
substantial negative aspect for some potential jurors, particularly
they are advised that they are to regard themselves as on call for a
nominated period.
9.24 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee proposed
the introduction of a “one trial or one day” system whereby
people would be required to attend for only one day if they were not
empanelled. This aimed to reduce the inconvenience experienced
persons summoned for jury service.
When individual jurors are discharged
9.25 If, after a jury is empanelled but before the trial proper
has commenced, a juror is discharged, the usual practice is for the
remaining 11 jurors to be discharged. One submission to this review has
suggested that it would be appropriate, in those circumstances,
include the remaining 11 jurors in another panel for that trial to be
supplemented from a waiting pool
or to return them to the general pool for potential selection in another trial.
Length of trial
9.26 It has been generally observed that people may be
particularly unwilling to attend for jury service because of the danger
being allocated a lengthy trial. One preliminary submission noted
that some prospective jurors panic prematurely because of their
knowledge of some notoriously long trials. Many prospective jurors do
not understand that they may not even be empanelled, for example,
because defendants plead guilty at the last minute, or because their
names are not called, or because they become subject of a peremptory
9.27 The Sheriff’s Office currently has a system of
identifying the lengthier trials and of giving potential jurors the
opportunity
to elect to serve on a shorter trial. However, it remains
the fact that for lengthy trials, and particularly those which involve
controversial or notorious issues, panels of up to 100 jurors are often
required, so as to allow for jurors to be excused, and for
peremptory challenges which are often extended by consent in these
9.28 One preliminary submission suggested that it might be
useful to examine whether it would be possible for key personnel who
otherwise be excused for good cause, to be allocated to panels
for short trials.
What additional strategies could be adopted to make jury service more convenient for jurors?
Dealing with bias and conflicts of interest
9.29 The possibility of jurors being affected by actual or
ostensible bias can arise from time to time as a result of the juror
some interest in the proceedings or some relationship with the
participants. This is likely to occur more frequently if the
traditional
categories of ineligibility are abolished or reduced. The
issue may arise before the trial commences or once the trial is under
Before or at the commencement of proceedings
9.30 The current practice in NSW is for counsel to inform the
panel of jurors in waiting, at the commencement of proceedings, of the
names of the parties in civil proceedings or of the defendants in
criminal proceedings, as well as the names of the principal witnesses
that will be called and the general nature of the case.
The trial judge will then call upon the jurors on the panel to apply to
be excused if they consider that they are not able to give
consideration to the case. Where a juror makes that application he or
she is usually invited to state briefly the reason
for the application
so as to avoid abuse of the system. A similar procedure applies in
proceedings before a Coroner.
The reasons given at this
stage could include, for example, that the juror was recently a victim
of a similar offence to the one
being tried, or knows one of the
witnesses or one of the parties. Any application that is made at this
time is dealt with as an application
for good cause.
9.31 The Law Reform Commission of WA observed that such
concerns were best dealt with by the potential juror disclosing the
circumstances
of this kind to the appropriate authorities in advance of
the hearing. In this context the Commission recommended that examples
potential conflicts be brought to the attention of each jury panel,
such as relationships (either personal or by reason of employment)
the judge, any legal practitioners in the case or the accused.
After the commencement of proceedings
9.32 If, after empanelment, circumstances emerge that may affect
an individual juror’s ability to give the case an impartial
consideration, then the judge has the power to discharge that juror and
to determine whether to continue the trial with the remaining
of the jury.
9.33 The Queensland
has a provision that allows a juror
to report to the Attorney-General or Director of Public Prosecutions
any suspicion which that
juror has concerning the existence of bias or
fraud on the part of any other juror, or the commission by that juror
of an offence
related to his or her membership of the jury or the
performance of his or her functions as a member of the jury.
In NSW there have been instances where jury misconduct has been reported in relation to private views
or in relation to private inquiries by jurors designed to obtain additional information about the accused on trial.
If these came to light during the trial, the jury would normally be
discharged without proceeding to a verdict. If they are not discovered
until after the trial, this may well constitute grounds for a
successful appeal leading to a retrial.
ACCOMMODATING JURORS
9.34 It has been suggested, from time to time, that improving
the conditions for the physical accommodation of jurors during the
might make jury service more palatable and result in potential
jurors being less inclined to seek exemption.
9.35 Generally, juror accommodation both before empanelling and during deliberations is seen as sub-standard.
This appears to be a trend in jury reviews across all jurisdictions.
The problems apply particularly to the assembly or waiting stage, for
which the accommodation provided is either cramped or non-existent
arranged on an ad hoc basis away from the courthouse. Additionally many
jury rooms are very small with only limited privacy for
facilities or for exercise.
9.36 There have been some proposals for flexible sitting hours
to allow jurors to go about essential business or see to other personal
Such arrangements involve a difficult balancing exercise in that providing breaks in sittings,
while convenient or desirable for some jurors, may prolong trials
unnecessarily and impose “avoidable” costs on jurors
their employers.
9.37 The provision of business facilities like facsimile
machines and computer terminals which could be used during breaks in
sittings has also been suggested as a means of reducing the
inconvenience of jury service, as could some relaxation of the current
practice of discouraging jurors from bringing mobile telephones to
There would, however, be a need to achieve some
certainty as to their proper use so as to discourage the kinds of
external inquiries
that jurors may make about the accused and the trial
that are forbidden by law. While it would be impractical, and unduly
for substantial improvement to be made to many of the
physical facilities reserved for jurors in many of the existing court
in NSW, there would seem to be merit in ensuring that the need
for comfortable facilities is built into future planning, both in
relation to assembly and waiting rooms and also in relation to the jury
rooms themselves.
9.38 Several reviews have emphasised a more general sensitivity
to the needs of jurors, not only in terms of physical accommodation,
but also in terms of communication and general efficiency of the system.
What strategies could be adopted to accommodate jurors and potential jurors better?
ENFORCEMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH JURY DUTY
Failure to attend
9.39 In the 2005/2006 financial year, of the approximately 40,000 people who were finally required to attend,
12,202 failed to attend.
9.40 The New Zealand Department for Courts, in 2001, confirmed
that only 15-25 per cent of jurors who are summoned in New Zealand
actually attend for service.
Note that in New Zealand,
all reasonable steps are taken to ensure that any person who is
disqualified or ineligible is removed from
the jury list before
summonses are issued.
Procedure and penalties
9.41 The Act imposes a penalty not exceeding 20 penalty units on anyone who fails to attend for jury service.
However, the Act also allows the Sheriff, in the first instance, to
serve a notice on a person who fails to attend for jury service
requiring payment of 10 penalty units ($1,100).
9.42 The current practice is for the Sheriff’s Office to
write to a person who fails to attend, requesting an explanation. At
this stage the person may provide a good reason for failure to attend,
choose to pay the fine of 10 penalty units, or choose to have
matter heard before a Local Court. The Sheriff’s Office tries to
clarify the contentious issues with the person who failed
before the matter goes to a Local Court. Approximately 10 matters per
month go before a Local Court. In the four years,
April 2002-March
2006, 64 people were fined in the Local Courts for failure to attend
for jury service. Fines imposed ranged from
$25 to $2,000. Charges were
dismissed for a further 45 people and one person was dismissed subject
to a good behaviour bond.
9.43 If the person fails to respond to the initial letter or to
a reminder, the Sheriff will issue a penalty notice for failure to
attend for jury service.
This replaced an earlier system for summary disposal before a Magistrate.
A penalty notice for failure to attend imposes a fine of 15 penalty units.
Some 2,000 penalty notices are issued for failure to attend in each
year. Many of these are withdrawn because the electoral roll
correctly record the person’s address. In the 2005/2006 financial
year only 165 penalty notices were eventually paid.
9.44 A question arises whether fines or penalties of this order
actually achieve deterrence or are regarded as an acceptable cost
avoiding service. It has been suggested that the number of people
making penalty payments in response to the initial notice has
reduced since the penalty was increased to $1,100.
It is not clear, at this stage, whether this has also resulted in increased compliance.
9.45 One preliminary submission raised concerns that the current
effective penalty of $1,100 may still not be sufficient to deter
who are on a “reasonable income”. However, it also
suggested that stricter enforcement or harsher penalties might
“self-defeating” as matters that could alienate the
Are the current procedures and penalties for enforcing jury service adequate?
JURORS’ EMPLOYMENT
9.46 There are two related concerns, namely protecting a
juror’s employment during service, and preventing, where
the continued employment of some juror’s during the
period of jury service.
Protecting jurors’ jobs
9.47 An employer in NSW cannot dismiss an employee, or injure
him or her in employment or prejudicially alter his or her position
the reason that the person has been summoned to serve as a juror, or
threaten any of the above actions. Actions and threats of
this kind constitute offences and each carry a separate penalty of 20
penalty units ($2,200) where an employer is convicted
offence. The court may order that the employer pay compensation and
reinstate the employee.
Failure to give effect to an
order for reinstatement also constitutes an offence, which carries a
similar penalty of 20 penalty units.
The onus is placed on the employer
to show that the dismissal or other detriment was not because of the
juror’s service.
9.48 The NSW provision was first introduced in 1947 at the same
time that the qualification to serve as a juror was extended from
property based franchise to all males who were enrolled to vote.
It was modelled on provisions in the
Industrial Arbitration Act 1940
which offered similar protections to employees who were dismissed or
treated prejudicially as a result of industrial union activities,
long as the activities did not interfere with the performance of the
employee’s duties.
The provision, which was not
introduced in response to any particular incident, was intended to
overcome the problems of proof associated
with citing an employer for
contempt of court.
9.49 Notwithstanding these provisions, there is still evidence
of people complaining that their employment is jeopardised,
particularly
by lengthy jury service, or that they have missed
important career opportunities as a result of jury service.
There has also been at least one very recent report of a juror being dismissed as a result of prolonged jury service.
Consideration may need to be given to the status of these provisions in
the light of recent amendments to Federal workplace legislation,
the extent to which proceedings can be maintained for unfair dismissal.
If they no longer have effect,
then this could provide a
very strong incentive for jurors who are concerned about job security
to seek to be excused from jury service,
or even simply pay the fine
for non-attendance.
9.50 It has been suggested that the current penalty is insufficient and should be substantially increased.
In some other jurisdictions the amount of the fine is already higher
and there is the possibility of a sentence of imprisonment.
In the ACT,
for example, a fine of up to 50 penalty units (that is, $5,000 for
individuals and $25,000 for corporations) can be imposed
imprisonment for 6 months.
9.51 It is understood that during the period April 2002-March
2006 only one employer has been fined in the Local Courts for
an employee who was summoned to jury service. It is unlikely
that there has only been one instance of an employee being dismissed
injured or prejudiced in their employment over this period, but
statistics as to the incidence of such conduct do not exist. It
understood that the Sheriff’s Office deals informally with some
instances of threatened dismissals of employees who
undertake jury
Are the current provisions protecting a juror’s employment during jury service adequate?
Employment during jury service
9.52 The problem has been raised of employers requiring jurors to
work at times when they are not required for jury service, possibly
a condition of having their current salary or wage maintained. In some
cases, this practice is said to have had a negative effect
who have become physically exhausted by the end of a trial of several
weeks. It has been suggested that a provision should
forbidding employers from requiring that jurors work during the times
when they are not required for jury service.
This was the
case under some Federal award provisions that formerly applied to
Victoria, whereby employees on afternoon or night
shifts who were
required to serve as jurors for more than half a day were not required
to report for work until the expiration of
their jury service.
Provisions of this sort could have the effect of reducing the incentive of some jurors to seek to be excused from jury service.
Should employers be prevented from requiring jurors to work at times when they are not required for jury service?
COMPENSATION TO JURORS
9.53 Although the question of compensation in the form of
attendance, travelling and refreshment fees is not identified directly
our terms of reference, it will be covered in this review since the
adequacy of these fees has a direct and significant relationship
willingness of some people to serve as jurors, and accordingly has some
relevance to the categories of exemption or excusal.
9.54 In NSW “a person is entitled to be paid for
attendance for jury service at a court or coronial inquest only if the
attends for service in accordance with the summons and does not
then successfully apply to be excused from service”.
Such payments may include, where relevant, an attendance fee, a travelling allowance and a refreshment allowance.
9.55 The question of compensating jurors for attendance at court
has had a long and controversial history. The modern debate commenced
with the UK Mersey Committee which reported in 1913:
We regard jury service... as one of the duties which every citizen
owes to the State, and we do not consider that the performance
duty should be paid for. But we distinguish between remuneration for
the service, and payment of the out-of-pocket expenses
performance of the service may entail. These out-of-pocket expenses
ought ... [to be] paid to all jurymen summoned (whether
actually called into the jury box or not) according to fixed scales.
9.56 While the NSW attendance fees goes beyond the category of
out-of-pocket expenses, some would argue that they still fall short
being an adequate remuneration for the performance of the service.
9.57 It is generally believed that improvements in the remuneration
and conditions of jury service would encourage more people to
participate in the system and reduce the number of applications to be
excused or of the exercise of claims to exemption as of right.
Such improvements may also be a way of making juries, particularly in
longer trials, more representative than they are at present.
there are self-employed people or proprietors of small businesses who
cannot afford to be away from work for any lengthy
not only because of the loss of income, but also because of the
destructive effects of their absence on the viability of the business.
Such people will generally seek to be excused and the judge will often
grant their application. If the application is refused it
inevitable that there will be a peremptory challenge since no party
wishes a disgruntled juror to be empanelled.
Attendance allowances
9.58 In NSW the attendance fee varies according to the length of the trial as follows:
Attendance fee
Day of attendance
Fee per day
(a) if a person attends for less than 4 hours on that day but is not selected for jury service
(b) if a person attends for less than 4 hours on that day and is selected for jury service
(c) if a person attends for more than 4 hours on that day (whether or not the person is selected for jury service)
11th and subsequent days
If a person attending for jury service
is paid his or her full wage or salary on a day of attendance by his or
her employer (not being
an amount that is the difference between the
person’s full wage or salary and the attendance fee)
The attendance allowance is treated as income for both taxation and social security purposes.
Continuing normal salary or wages
9.59 The final item in the above table provides that employees,
whose employers continue to pay their full salary during the period
the jury service are not entitled to receive any attendance fees. It
also assumes that an employer who elected to continue paying
employee during jury service could make the usual wage or salary
payment less the attendance fee, allowing the juror to claim
attendance allowance from the Sheriff.
A common provision
in many awards and enterprise agreements in NSW required an employer to
make up the difference between the attendance
allowance and the
juror’s normal wage.
Such arrangements would appear
to reflect a recommendation of the NSW Law Reform Commission in 1986
that jurors, whose employers
continued to pay them during jury service,
should not be advantaged over those whose employers did not.
It is also consistent with the NSW Jury Task Force’s
recommendation that any persons being paid a full wage or salary by
employer during the course of jury service should not receive an
additional attendance allowance.
9.60 The current practice of the Sheriff’s office is to
deny the attendance allowance to jurors who are State government
who are entitled to special leave on full pay during jury
and those whose private sector employers are
known to continue paying a full wage or salary for the duration of jury
service. All
other employees may claim the attendance allowance. This
system, however, depends upon the honesty of the employees in reporting
receipt of the allowance and the diligence of the employers in
recouping the allowance if they have paid their employees fully for
period of service.
9.61 Although the
provides that “an
employer shall not dismiss a person in his or her employment or injure
the person in his or her employment
or alter his or her position to his
or her prejudice by reason of the fact that the person is summoned to
serve as a juror”,
it seems to have been assumed
that this provision, the breach of which constitutes an offence, does
not prevent an employer suspending
the payment of the employee’s
wages or salary during the trial.
This assumption does
not sit entirely comfortably with the subsequent provision of the Act
to the effect that, where an employer
is convicted of the offence
mentioned, the Court may order that the employer pay the employee a
specified sum by way of reimbursement
for the salary or wages lost by
the employee, and that the employee be reinstated in his or her old or
a similar position. Having
regard to the interpretation which has been
placed on the primary provision mentioned above, it would seem that
this provision for
reimbursement and reinstatement has been assumed as
applicable only to the circumstance where the employee has been
dismissed, or
demoted, or denied some opportunity for promotion, or
otherwise penalised, in each case, for the sole reason that he or she
required to serve as a juror, and does not of itself require
the employer to maintain the juror’s current salary or wage.
9.62 It is not known to what extent employers require jurors to
use up their annual leave entitlements during their period of service,
nor is it clear whether it would be lawful for them to require that an
employee does this.
Having regard to the reasons for
employees having an annual leave entitlement, it would seem undesirable
for employers to be permitted
to take that course. When such matters
come to the attention of the Sheriff’s Office, the current
practice is to advise employers
that requiring employees to use annual
leave entitlements in order to serve on a jury amounts to prejudice
under the provisions that
protect a juror’s employment during
jury service.
9.63 In Victoria, employees who have been summoned as a juror
and who have attended court are entitled to be reimbursed by their
an amount equal to the difference between the amount of
compensation for jury service and the amount that they would have been
to receive in respect of their ordinary hours of work had they
not been summoned for jury service.
So far as the current
research by the Commission shows, Victoria is the only jurisdiction in
Australia that has an express general
provision which has the effect of
ensuring that the salary or wages of jurors is maintained during their
jury service.
9.64 State government employees in NSW have been given similar protection by way of a regulation
and some NSW awards and work place agreements have achieved a similar protection.
Employers were also required, under Federal awards, to compensate
employees for the loss of pay arising from jury service (that is,
usual wage for the period less any jury attendance allowances).
However, recent amendments to Commonwealth workplace legislation
removed this protection.
It has been suggested that this
amendment, without any change to the law in NSW, may significantly
increase the number of people
seeking to avoid jury service.
It should be noted that the Commonwealth legislation expressly does not
exclude State laws relating to “attendance for service
although the extent to which this extends to
State law granting jurors an entitlement to be reimbursed by their
employers is open
to question.
9.65 The Victorian solution, which involves making employers
bear a substantial part of the costs of jury service, does not command
general support. Some consider that employers ought not to have to bear
the burden of what is essentially a civic responsibility
rather than an
industrial matter:
a citizen’s civic duty to attend jury service is a reflection
of the relationship between a citizen and the community. As such,
individual performing jury service is in no way linked to the
employment relationship with an individual employer. The relationship
is between the individual and the State. If it can be construed that
during the performance of jury duty the individual becomes the
of the State, then it is the state’s responsibility to compensate
the individual appropriately for their service.
9.66 The New Zealand Law Commission in 2001, commented:
Putting the cost onto employers, particularly for long periods of
service, would be a significant burden for them, especially for
businesses. It is possible that this could lead to more employers
seeking to have their staff excused from jury service rather
paying for the leave. Given that jury service is a benefit to the
community, it seems reasonable that the community, through
should pay for that benefit, rather than putting the burden onto
Others, however, would counter that “jury service is a civic duty, and corporate citizens also have a part to play”.
Amount of payment
9.67 In NSW in 1978, the juror allowance for the first five days of a trial was in line with the average weekly minimum wage.
The NSW Jury Task Force in 1993 was unanimously of the view that
attendance allowances were “inadequate” and needed to
Payment for actual loss of earnings was considered and rejected as too administratively costly.
An additional concern with compensating some jurors more than others is
that it could create the appearance of unfairness and suggest
contribution of some jurors is valued more highly than that of others.
The Task Force, however, concluded that the allowances should be set at
the 1985 levels (which were based on the 1982 average weekly
wage with the addition of the National Wage Increase of 8.5%), adjusted
for movements in the CPI (75% only).
In 1995, the scale of juror attendance fees was rationalised and the amounts to be paid were increased.
Since that date the amounts have been increased by regulation on an
annual basis so that the current allowances are now 26% greater
they were in 1995.
9.68 In NSW there have recently been calls to increase the
allowance substantially, pointing out that the maximum payment of
per week (after 10 days’ service) is well below the
average full time adult weekly earnings of $1,035 per week.
9.69 The UK Departmental Committee on Jury Service in 1965 gave
consideration to the practice then in place of compensating jurors
according to the rates set for the attendance of “general
witnesses”. It concluded that the rates should be set at a
realistic level, opting for the scale of subsistence allowances for
members of local authorities.
9.70 The English Royal Commission on Criminal Justice in 1993
observed that the compensation offered in England was “wholly
inadequate to compensate for loss of earnings in most cases, especially
for those who are self-employed”.
This appears to have been a concern from time to time in most Australian jurisdictions.
It has been reported that jurors in a recent five months trial in NSW
requested an additional week’s allowance because of the
their health and well-being.
Another District Court jury
was recently discharged because the jury allowance was insufficient for
one juror to meet her financial
obligations when her employer stopped
her salary for the duration of her jury service.
9.71 The South Australian Sheriff’s Office in 2002
suggested that inadequate compensation to jurors may be “eroding
confidence in the jury system as a fundamental institution of
the criminal justice system”.
It cited the example
of a surgeon summoned for jury service who believed that the low level
of juror payments implied that the court
system did not value the
contribution of jurors. It has also been claimed in that State recently
that increasing numbers of people
are refusing to perform jury service
because it is costing them too much in lost earnings.
South Australia pays a minimum of $20 per day if the juror is paid a
full wage during the jury service together with a further sum
$80 upon proof of loss as a result of jury service.
9.72 The Supreme Court of Queensland’s Litigation Reform
Commission considered the possibility of setting jurors’ fees
within a given range depending on actual economic loss. In this way,
jurors who were not engaged in paid employment and who suffered
actual economic loss would be paid the minimum fee. The Commission
ultimately rejected any such proposal on a number of grounds,
that it was arguably “inequitable to pay people different rates
for performing identical functions.
9.73 The Victorian Parliamentary Law Reform Committee proposed
that the burden of compensation for jury service should be borne by
community rather than by individuals and small businesses. The
Committee, therefore, proposed a daily amount based on the average
weekly salary.
9.74 Some other reviews have considered the possibility that a
juror should be put “in the same financial position as he or
would have been in but for the jury service”, including payments
for overtime.
Compensation to employers
9.75 One preliminary submission raised the possibility of
providing compensation to employers who continue paying employees while
they are performing jury service.
While some may view
the contribution by employers of their staff to jury service as part of
their civic duty, one submission has
been received pointing out that
some employers have had to bear the costs of hiring additional staff or
paying overtime to existing
staff members to cover periods when
employees are absent on jury service, and to this extent they are
subsidising the system.
Recoupment of personal expenses
9.76 One preliminary submission raised the possibility of jurors
claiming for the fees paid for substitute care rendered necessary
the jury service.
In New Zealand, jurors are entitled to
claim for the actual and reasonable costs of childcare incurred because
of attendance for
jury service.
9.77 Such an approach is also possible under the provisions in
England and Wales which make allowance for regulations to prescribe
payment to a juror for financial loss arising from his or her jury
where in consequence of his attendance for that purpose he has
incurred any expenditure (otherwise than on travelling and subsistence)
to which he would not otherwise be subject or he has suffered any loss
of earnings, or of benefit under the enactments relating to
security, which he would otherwise have made or received.
Travelling allowance
9.77 The provisions for the travelling allowance are as follows:
On each day of attendance, for one journey each way between the
place of residence of a person attending for jury service, as shown
the jury roll, and the court or inquest attended, the person is
entitled to be paid at the rate of 28.10 cents per kilometre with:
(a) a minimum payment of $3.95 each way (being a minimum payment for 14 kilometres each way), and
(b) a maximum payment of $28.10 each way (being a maximum payment for 100 kilometres each way),
whether or not public transport is used.
9.79 In 1995 the travelling allowance was based on the “specified journey rate” prescribed by the
Public Sector Management Act 1988
(NSW). The 1995 figure followed recommendations by the Jury Taskforce
which considered that jurors’ travelling allowances should
“reflect, as closely as possible, actual travel costs”.
The travelling allowance has been adjusted every year since 1995 at the
same time that the jurors’ attendance allowances are
However, the increase in automotive fuel prices in the period since
1997 is in the order of 84%,
a substantially larger increase than the 27% increase in the travel allowance in the same period.
The mileage rate would have to be in the order of 40.6 cents per
kilometre in order to reflect changes in the price of fuel since
9.80 The current system, using a single mileage rate, replaced an
earlier arrangement whereby jurors and potential jurors who used
transport rather than private motor vehicles were reimbursed the actual
costs of public transport. The previous system was
inefficient because people had to present their train and bus tickets
to Sheriff’s officers for payment. The Jury
Taskforce preferred a
system based on mileage whereby a computer made all of the necessary
calculations and issued automatic payments.
9.81 In New Zealand, jurors are entitled to claim actual
travelling costs to attend for jury service if travelling by public
If travelling by private motor vehicle,
jurors are entitled to claim a travelling allowance and may also claim
the actual and reasonable
costs of car parking.
Refreshment allowance
9.82 The provision for the refreshment allowance is as follows:
If a juror in either a civil or criminal matter is released by the
trial judge during a luncheon adjournment, the juror is entitled
paid a refreshment allowance of $6.10.
9.83 As a general practice, jurors are not released at lunchtime and
are supplied with lunches without cost. The refreshment allowance
made available to any juror who does not partake of the food provided
by the courts. It is unlikely that this allowance has any
relevance for
the willingness of people to serve, assuming that the meals are
9.84 In 1993, the Jury Taskforce recommended that “jurors not
be locked up at lunchtime in the absence of special
circumstances”
and proposed the refreshment allowance so that
jurors could make their own arrangements for meals.
While the refreshment allowance has been included in the regulation,
the general practice of the courts has been not to release jurors
during the luncheon adjournment.
Are the provisions for the reimbursement and/or compensation of
jurors and potential jurors who attend for jury service adequate?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
. M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 167.
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 6.
Jury Regulation 2004
(NSW) cl 3(1)(a).
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. In Victoria it was suggested that in country towns
“some people may serve on a jury too often”: Parliament of
Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 4.9.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 4.16.
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 5.
. Tasmania,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
House of Assembly, 19 August 2003 at 53; F Weston, “Why am I not on jury list?” (letter to the editor)
(8 October 2006) at 30; M J Stocker,
Preliminary submission
(Ministerial correspondence); G R Williams,
Preliminary submission
(Ministerial correspondence).
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 54.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 54.
Jury Act 1977
. Australian Business Ltd,
Preliminary submission
Juries Act 2003
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 6.
. Australian Business Ltd,
Preliminary submission
at 2. See also NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
. It was also held that the empanelment could not be saved by
Jury Act 1977
which applied where a disqualified or ineligible person was
empanelled or where there had been an irregularity or omission or error
in the relevant jury roll, card or summons prepared or issued in
relation to the trial:
[2004] NSWCCA 324.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. United Kingdom,
The Law and Practice with Regard to the
Constitution
, Qualifications, Selection, Summoning, &c of Juries
(Report of the Departmental Committee, Cd 6817, 1913) Vol 1 at 27.
. See, eg, United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 286-288; R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 218; Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 78; Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 5.2-5.12.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) Sch 3 item 13(b).
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
If there was to be some monetary impost it may be more appropriate that
it take the form of a one day attendance fee equivalent
to that payable
if the members of the jury who attended had been empanelled.
. Particularly where they call for an extensive examination on the voir dire or a Basha inquiry:
(1989) 39 ACrimR 337.
Jury Act 1977
There would appear to
have been a practice in England that jurors were required to serve for
a fortnight and could sit on multiple
trials as required during that
period, and for any additional period that is occupied by the trial for
which they were empanelled:
See England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 136.
. K Shadbolt,
Preliminary consultation
Jury Act 1977
s 51(1)(c).
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 5.12. See also Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 5.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. Redfern Legal Centre,
Preliminary Submission
Jury Act 1977
. Australian Business Ltd,
Preliminary Submission
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
. Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980) at para 3.20 and 3.68-3.70.
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1995
. For example,
[2004] NSWCCA 37.
. Such inquiries are an offence under
Jury Act 1977
although the extent to which a juror might lawfully disclose such
information, within the existing restrictions contained in
Jury Act 1977
Div 3 are somewhat uncertain.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 26-36.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 6.26-6.30.
. See England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 134; NSW,
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 30; M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 175.
. Usually involving half day sittings on Fridays in lengthy trials.
. C Merritt, “It’s time to hurry up”
Weekend Australian
(SA 1st edition) (14 October 2006) at 3.
. See R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at 223.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 77-80; NSW,
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 12-14; R E Auld,
Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales
(HMSO, 2001) at para 214-227.
. Subtracting from those summoned for jury service, the
people who have been excused for cause and those who have been advised
advance that they are not required.
. See New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 284.
Juries Act 1981
(NZ) s 13(2).
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
s 64(2)(a).
Jury Act 1977
. See M Findlay,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994) at 44.
Jury Act 1977
. L Anamourlis,
Preliminary consultation
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
Jury Act 1977
Jury Act 1977
Juries Act 1967
Jury (Amendment) Act 1947
(NSW) s 5(mm) inserting s 84B into the
Jury Act 1912
Industrial Arbitration Act 1940
(NSW) s 95. See NSW,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, Hon R R Downing, Second Reading Speech, 25 November 1947 at 1413.
. At common law, dismissing an employee because he or she
served as a juror is a contempt because it has a tendency to interfere
the administration of justice:
Attorney-General v Butterworth
[1963] 1 QB 696. See NSW,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, Mr Martin, Second Reading Speech, 13 November 1947 at 1124.
. See, eg, “Jury duty a service out of line with modern life”,
Sydney Morning Herald
(29 September 2006) at 14 (letter to the editor).
. C Merritt, “It’s time to hurry up”
Weekend Australian
(SA 1st edition) (14 October 2006) at 3.
New South Wales v Commonwealth of Australia
[2006] HCA 52
at para 948 (Callinan J).
. K Shadbolt,
Consultation
Juries Act 1967
. K Shadbolt,
Consultation
Pastrycooks (Victoria) Award 1999
(AW792620CRV) cl 27.
Jury Act 1977
Jury Regulation 2004
(NSW) cl 5(1).
. United Kingdom,
The Law and Practice with Regard to the
Constitution
, Qualifications, Selection, Summoning, &c of Juries
(Report of the Departmental Committee, Cd 6817, 1913) Vol 1 at 46.
. See, eg, Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 6.21; T Dick, “Crime doesn’t pay, but then neither does jury duty”
Sydney Morning Herald
(28 September 2006) at 2.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 6.25; T Dick, “Crime doesn’t pay, but then neither does jury duty”
Sydney Morning Herald
(28 September 2006) at 2.
Jury Regulation 2004
(NSW) Sch 1 Scale A.
Jury Regulation 2004
(NSW) cl 5(2).
Animal Welfare, General (State) Award
NSW Industrial Gazette
531 (Publication No B9691) cl 24(ii);
Speedibake Enterprise Agreement 2003
(IRC3/6671; EA04/29) cl 18;
Speedo Australia Certified Agreement 2003
(IRC3/5005; EA03/204) cl 5.6(b).
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986) at para 6.41.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 41.
Public Sector Employment and Management (General) Regulation 1996
(NSW) cl 94.
. Terms in many awards and enterprise agreements required
employees to produce proof of receipt of attendance allowances so that
could adjust their pay rates accordingly: see, eg,
Animal Welfare, General (State) Award
NSW Industrial Gazette
531 (Publication No B9691) cl 24(iii);
Speedibake Enterprise Agreement 2003
(IRC3/6671; EA04/29) cl 18;
Speedo Australia Certified Agreement 2003
(IRC3/5005; EA03/204) cl 5.6(b).
Jury Act 1977
. See, eg, the recent case of the discharge of a jury in the
District Court where an employer stopped the salary of a juror: G
“Juror cries poor and halts trial”
Sydney Morning Herald
November 2006) at 1. Note that the UK provisions specify that detriment
does not include a failure to pay remuneration during
the period of
jury service unless such payment is required by the juror’s
employment contract:
Employment Rights Act 1996
(UK) s 43M(3).
. According to the New Zealand Law Commission, some
employment contracts in that country expressly provide that employees
their annual leave entitlement for jury service: New Zealand,
Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at
para 488. Express terms in some NSW awards and enterprise agreements
granted employees leave of absence during
jury service: See, eg,
Animal Welfare, General (State) Award
NSW Industrial Gazette
531 (Publication No B9691) cl 24(i);
Speedibake Enterprise Agreement 2003
(IRC3/6671; EA04/29) cl 18;
Speedo Australia Certified Agreement 2003
(IRC3/5005; EA03/204) cl 5.6.
. See para 9.47, above.
Juries Act 2000
Public Sector Employment and Management (General) Regulation 1996
(NSW) cl 94.
Animal Welfare, General (State) Award
NSW Industrial Gazette
531 (Publication No B9691) cl 24;
Speedibake Enterprise Agreement 2003
(IRC3/6671; EA04/29) cl 18;
Speedo Australia Certified Agreement 2003
(IRC3/5005; EA03/204) cl 5.6.
Workplace Relations Act 1996
s 527(2)(f).
. See Law Society of NSW, “Jury out on IR reforms” (Media release, 30 June 2005).
Workplace Relations Act 1996
s 16(3)(l).
New South Wales v Commonwealth of Australia
[2006] HCA 52
at para 945, 948 (Callinan J).
. See, eg, Commerce Queensland,
Policy Issue - Queensland Government’s Review of Jury Service Up For Comment
(2003) at 2.
. New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 484.
. Law Society of NSW, “Jury out on IR reforms” (Media release, 30 June 2005).
. The Australian Bureau of Statistics stopped compiling statistics on the average weekly minimum wage in 1982: NSW,
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 38.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 39.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 41.
. See New Zealand, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001) at para 485.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 39-40.
Jury Act 1977
- Regulation 1995 No 43
(NSW) cl 2(b).
. S Marsden, “Law pay levels for jurors ‘unacceptable’, NSW barristers say”
AAP General News Wire
(20 October 2006) at 1.
. United Kingdom, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965) at para 294-296.
. England and Wales,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993) at 132.
. See, eg, Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 6.22.
. S Marsden, “Law pay levels for jurors ‘unacceptable’, NSW barristers say”
AAP General News Wire
(20 October 2006) at 1; NSW Bar Association, “Jurors shouldn’t suffer for doing their duty”
(Media Release, 20 October 2006).
. G Jacobsen, “Juror cries poor and halts trial”
Sydney Morning Herald
(29 November 2006) at 1.
. South Australia, Sheriff’s Office,
South Australian Jury Review
(2002) at 18.
. C James, “Call to increase jury pay”
The Advertiser (Adelaide)
(21 August 2006) at 6.
. Supreme Court of Queensland, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993) at 68-70.
. Parliament of Victoria, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996) at para 6.24.
. Tasmania, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999) ch 4.
. NSW, Jury Task Force,
Preliminary submission
. Australian Business Ltd,
Preliminary submission
. NSW, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary submission
Jury Rules 1990
(NZ) r 28(6).
Juries Act 1974
(Eng) s 19(1)(b).
Jury Regulation 2004
(NSW) Sch 1 Scale B.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 42.
. Calculated from the average retail price of 1 litre of unleaded petrol in Sydney: Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Average Retail Prices of Selected Items, Eight Capital Cities
(6403.0, December 1997); Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Average Retail Prices of Selected Items, Eight Capital Cities
(6403.0.55.001, June 2006).
. Calculated from the travelling allowance quoted in
Jury Amendment (Attendance Fees) Regulation 1997
(NSW) Sch 1.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 42.
Jury Rules 1990
(NZ) r 28(4).
Jury Rules 1990
(NZ) r 28(4) and (5).
Jury Regulation 2004
(NSW) Sch 1 Scale C.
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
(1993) at 44.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Appendix A: Preliminary submissions
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Australian Business Ltd, 5 October 2006
Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney, 13 October 2006
Churches of Christ in New South Wales, 25 September 2006
N R Cowdery AM QC, 27 September 2006
Law Society of New South Wales, 29 September 2006
Legal Aid New South Wales, 29 September 2006
Lutheran Church of Australia, 14 September 2006
R Lutton, 7 November 2006 (Ministerial correspondence)
NSW Department of Corrective Services, 9 October 2006
NSW Jury Task Force, 3 October 2006
NSW Police, 4 October 2006
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW), 27 September 2006
Redfern Legal Centre, 21 September 2006 (by telephone)
M J Stocker, 31 October 2006 (Ministerial correspondence)
UnitingCare NSW.ACT, 27 September 2006
G R Williams, 16 October 2006 (Ministerial correspondence)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Appendix B: Preliminary consultations
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Lynn Anamourlis, Manager, Jury Branch, Sheriff's Office, Downing Centre, Sydney, 8 September 2006
His Honour Judge Ken Shadbolt, District Court of NSW, 19 October 2006
Hon Justice G R Barr, Supreme Court of NSW, 23 October 2006
Gary Byles, Sheriff of New South Wales and Lynn Anamourlis, 9 November 2006
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Table of cases
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Attorney-General v Butterworth [1963] 1 QB 696 ... 9.48
Brown v The Queen
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171
... 1.5,1.25,1.47
Cheatle v The Queen
[1993] HCA 44
(1993) 177 CLR 541
... 1.28,1.37
Katsuno v The Queen
[1999] HCA 50
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
... 1.37,1.47
New South Wales v Commonwealth of Australia
[2006] HCA 52
... 9.49,9.64
Pambula District Hospital v Herriman
(1988) 14 NSWLR 387
R v Abdroikov [2005] 4 All ER 869 ... 1.48
(1989) 39 ACrimR 337
[2004] NSWCCA 324
[1989] QB 868
[2004] NSWCCA 37
Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church v Hogan
[2001] NSWCA 381
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Table of legislation
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Commonwealth
Constitution
Crimes Act 1914
... 2.9,4.18
Jury Exemption Act 1965
and Schedule ... 5.51
Jury Exemption Regulations 1987
reg 4 ... 5.46
Workplace Relations Act 1996
s 527(2)(f)
New South Wales
Administration of Justice Act 1968
s 10 ... 7.17
Child Protection (Offenders Prohibition Orders) Act 2004
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act 2000
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
Coal Mines Regulation Act 1912
s 5(1) ... 6.21
Coal Mines Regulation Act 1982
s 38 and s 39 ... 6.21
Coroners Act 1980
... 1.3,1.7
Courts Legislation Amendment (Civil Juries) Act 2001
Crimes Act 1900
s 476 and s 495-496A ... 1.5
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Defamation (Amendment) Act 1994 ... 1.19
Defamation Act 1974
Defamation Act 2005
... 1.3,1.15
District Court Act 1973
... 1.3,1.15
s 78-79A ... 1.15
Firearms Act 1996
Industrial Arbitration Act 1940
s 95 ... 9.48
Judicial Officers Act 1986
Jury (Amendment) Act 1918 ... 6.21
Jury (Amendment) Act 1947
s 5(mm) ... 9.48
Jury Act 1912
s 3(3) ... 7.17
s 5(n) ... 6.25
s 84B ... 9.48
Jury Act 1977
Div 3 ... 9.33
... 3.7,4.1
... 1.38,2.10
... 2.12,8.15
... 3.19,8.2
... 3.19,8.2
... 3.5,9.17
Sch 1 ... 3.7,4.1,4.17
Sch 1 item 1 ... 4.10
Sch 1 item 3(c) ... 4.22,4.33
Sch 2 ... 3.11
Sch 2 item 1 ... 5.33
Sch 2 item 2 ... 5.1,5.14
Sch 2 item 3 ... 5.1
Sch 2 item 4 ... 5.33
Sch 2 item 5 ... 5.18,5.33,5.35
Sch 2 item 6 ... 5.42
Sch 2 item 7 ... 5.5,5.18
Sch 2 item 8 ... 5.1,5.18,5.45
Sch 2 item 9 ... 5.45,5.48
Sch 2 item 10 ... 5.1,5.21,5.45
Sch 2 item 11 ... 2.31,2.33,5.45,7.1
Sch 2 item 12 ... 7.8,7.15
Sch 2 item 13-15 ... 6.8
Sch 3 ... 3.14
Sch 3 item 1 and item 2 ... 6.10
Sch 3 item 3, item 4 and item 5 ... 6.5
Sch 3 item 6 ... 6.21
Sch 3 item 7 ... 6.8
Sch 3 item 8 ... 7.20
Sch 3 item 9 ... 7.17
Sch 3 item 10 and item 11 ... 7.28,8.9
Sch 3 Item 12 ... 7.36
Sch 3 item 13 ... 7.42
Sch 3 item 13(b) ... 9.19
Sch 3 item 14 ... 7.42
Jury Amendment (Attendance Fees) Regulation 1997
Sch 1 ... 9.79
Jury Amendment (Qualifications) Regulation 1996 ... 7.20
Jury Amendment (Verdicts) Act 2006
Jury Regulation 2004
cl 3(1)(a) ... 9.6
cl 5(1) ... 9.54
cl 5(2) ... 9.59
Sch 1 Scale A ... 9.58
Sch 1 Scale B ... 9.78
Sch 1 Scale C ... 9.82
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1965
Legal Profession Act 2004
Motor Vehicles Third Party Insurance Amendment Act 1965 ... 1.10
Parliamentary Electorates and Elections Act 1912
s 20(1)(a) ... 2.7
s 20(1)(b) ... 2.2
s 21 ... 2.9
Passenger Transport (Bus Services) Regulation 2000
cl 5A ... 4.7
Passenger Transport (Taxi-cab Services) Regulation 2001
cl 5 ... 4.7
Public Sector Employment and Management (General) Regulation 1996
cl 94 ... 9.60,9.64
Security Industry Act 1997
Supreme Court Act 1970
... 1.3,1.12
s 86 ... 1.12,1.15
s 86-89 ... 1.12,1.15
Terrorism (Police Powers) Act 2002
Workers Compensation Act 1926 ... 1.12
Young Offenders Act 1997
Australian Capital Territory
Juries Act 1967
s 9 ... 2.1
s 10(a) ... 4.9
s 10(b) ... 3.9
s 10(c) ... 2.31
s 10(e) ... 7.8
s 14(a) ... 7.15,8.7
s 14(b) ... 7.19,8.7
s 14(c) ... 7.30,7.33,8.7
s 14(d) ... 8.7
s 15 ... 8.7
s 18A ... 7.43
s 19(2) ... 2.16
s 24 ... 2.30
s 44AA ... 9.50
s 44AA(2) ... 9.47
item 2 ... 5.14
item 5 ... 5.6
item 13 ... 5.14
item 14 ... 5.35
item 16 ... 5.14
item 3 ... 6.26
item 7 ... 7.22
Northern Territory
Juries Act 1963
s 9(1) ... 2.1
s 10(3)(a)(ii) ... 4.10
s 10(3)(c) ... 7.3,2.31
s 11 ... 6.10
s 17A ... 8.20
s 18AB ... 7.43
Sch 7 ... 5.6,5.14,5.21,5.26,5.29,5.35,6.10,7.8,7.15
Jury Act 1929
s 3 and s 6(1)(b) ... 7.22
s 7(1)(e) ... 4.8
s 8(1)(h) ... 6.26
s 8(3) ... 7.22
Jury Act 1995
... 3.22,5.8
... 5.18,5.21
and (i) ... 5.18
... 2.31,7.3
and (n) ... 4.9
... 7.15,8.7
Jury Amendment Act 1996
s 3 ... 5.8
South Australia
Juries Act 1927
... 7.15,7.44,8.7
Sch 3 ... 3.27,5.6,5.14,5.20,5.29,5.34,5.35
Juries Act 2003
... 3.22,8.4
... 7.15,8.7
... 7.15,8.7
... 6.33,8.7
... 8.7,8.9
... 6.12,7.47
... 3.22,7.22
Sch 1 ... 3.22,3.27
Sch 1 cl 1 ... 4.9
Sch 1 cl 1(3) ... 4.10
Sch 1 cl 2 ... 4.17
Sch 1 cl 4 ... 4.22
Sch 2 ... 3.22,3.27,5.26
Sch 2 cl 1 ... 5.34
Sch 2 cl 2 ... 5.14
Sch 2 cl 3 ... 5.6
Sch 2 cl 4 ... 5.19
Sch 2 cl 5 ... 5.21
Sch 2 cl 6 ... 5.35
Sch 2 cl 9 ... 7.8,7.10
Sch 2 cl 10 ... 2.31,7.3
Jury Act 1899
s 7A and Sch 1 Item 5 ... 6.26
Crimes (Family Violence) Act 1987
Juries (Amendment) Act 2002
s 10 ... 1.38
Juries Act 2000
and (3) ... 3.22
... 4.22,8.20
... 7.15,8.4
-(e) ... 8.7
... 6.33,8.7
... 7.33,8.7
... 7.23,8.7
... 6.12,7.47
Sch 1 ... 3.22
Sch 1 cl 1 ... 4.9,5.26
Sch 1 cl 1-5 ... 4.13
Sch 1 cl 2 ... 4.10
Sch 1 cl 3 and 4 ... 4.17
Sch 1 cl 8 ... 3.9
Sch 2 ... 3.22,3.28
Sch 2 cl 1(a) ... 5.34
Sch 2 cl 1(b) ... 5.14
Sch 2 cl 1(e) ... 5.6
Sch 2 cl 1(f) ... 5.18
Sch 2 cl 1(g) ... 5.21
Sch 2 cl 1(i) ... 5.35,5.37
Sch 2 cl 1(k) and (l) ... 5.48
Sch 2 cl 1(la)-(ld) ... 5.49
Sch 2 cl 2(c) ... 5.6
Sch 2 cl 3(a) ... 7.8
Sch 2 cl 3(f) ... 2.31,7.3
Jury Act 1967
s 5 ... 3.31
Legal Profession (Consequential Amendments) Act 2005
s 18 and Sch 1 [54.2] ... 3.28
Legal Profession Act 2004
Major Crime (Special Investigations Monitor) Act 2004
s 18 ... 3.28
Major Crime Legislation (Office of Police Integrity) Act 2004
s 29 ... 3.28
Public Administration Act 2004
and Sch 3 [108.2] ... 3.28
Western Australia
Juries Act 1957
s 5(b)(ii)(III)
s 5(b)(iii)
... 7.8,7.15
cl 1(a)-(ea) ... 5.14
cl 1(f) ... 5.6
cl 2 ... 5.35
cl 2(h) ... 5.21
cl 2 ... 6.6
cl 3 ... 6.10,6.16
cl 4 ... 7.32
cl 5 ... 7.22
Sch 3 ... 7.15,8.7
New Zealand
Electoral Act 1993
s 74(1) ... 2.5
Juries Act 1981
s 13(2) ... 9.40
Juries Act 1981
s 6 ... 2.5
Jury Rules 1990
r 28(4) and (5) ... 9.81
r 28(6) ... 9.76
New York, Consolidated Laws - Judiciary
Art 16 ... 3.29
§ 506 ... 2.25
United Kingdom
Criminal Justice Act 2003 ... 1.2,5.10
Employment Rights Act 1996
s 43M(3) ... 9.61
Juries Act 1870
s 8 ... 2.5
s 9 and Sch ... 6.16
Juries Act 1922
s 2(1) and s 8(2)(b) ... 3.3
Juries Act 1974 ... 3.29
s 1 ... 3.22
s 1(1)(a) ... 2.1
s 2 ... 2.15
s 2(2) ... 7.41
s 3 ... 2.15
s 8 ... 2.5,7.43
s 9(2) ... 8.12
s 9A ... 8.15
s 9A(2) and (2A) ... 8.17
s 9AA ... 8.12
s 19(1)(b) ... 9.77
Sch 1 ... 3.22
Sch 1 cl 5 ... 4.22
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 28 (2006) - Jury service
Bibliography
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
AULD, R E, Review of the Criminal Courts of England and Wales (HMSO, 2001)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Multiculturalism and the Law
(Report 57, 1992)
CHALLINGER, D (ed),
(Australian Institute of Criminology Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986)
COMMERCE QUEENSLAND,
Policy Issue - Queensland Government’s Review of Jury Service Up For Comment
ENGLAND AND WALES, Department for Constitutional Affairs,
Jury Summoning Guidance
(Consultation Paper, 2003)
ENGLAND AND WALES,
Royal Commission on Criminal Justice
(Report, 1993)
FINDLAY, M, “Reforming the jury: the common ground” in D Challinger (ed),
(Australian Institute of Criminology Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986)
FINDLAY, M,
Jury Management in New South Wales
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 1994)
The Jury Project
(Report to the Chief Judge of the State of New York, 1994)
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
Exemption from Jury Service
(Report, Project No 71, 1980)
LENNON, D, “Changes to the NSW Jury System”, paper presented at the
4th Biennial National Sheriff’s Conference
(Brisbane, 3-5 July 1995)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Blind or Deaf Jurors
(Report 114, 2006)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Conscientious Objection to Jury Service
(Report 42, 1984)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Majority Verdicts
(Report 111, 2005)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(DP 12, 1985)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Jury in a Criminal Trial: Empirical Studies
(Research Report 1, 1986)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Evidence Law
(Report 112, 2006)
NEW SOUTH WALES,
Report of the NSW Jury Task Force
NEW ZEALAND, Law Commission,
Juries in Criminal Trials
(Report 69, 2001)
PARLIAMENT OF VICTORIA, Law Reform Committee,
Jury Service in Victoria
(Final Report, 1996)
QUEENSLAND, Criminal Justice Commission,
Report by the
Honourable W J Carter QC on his Inquiry into the Selection of the Jury
for the Trial of Sir Johannes Bjelke-Petersen
QUEENSLAND, Criminal Justice Commission,
The Jury System in Criminal Trials in Queensland
(Issues Paper, 1991)
SCOTTISH OFFICE,
Firm and Fair: Improving the Delivery of Justice in Scotland
(Cm 2600, 1994)
SHERIFF’S OFFICE OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
Jury Act, 1977
: Policy and Practice Guidelines
(November 2005)
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, Sheriff’s Office,
South Australian Jury Review
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND, Litigation Reform Commission,
Reform of the Jury System in Queensland
(Report of the Criminal Procedure Division, 1993)
TASMANIA, Department of Justice and Industrial Relations,
Review of the Jury Act 1899
(Legislation, Strategic Policy and Information Resources Division, Issues Paper, 1999)
UNITED KINGDOM, Home Office,
Report of the Departmental Committee on Jury Service
(Cmnd 2627, 1965)
UNITED KINGDOM,
The Law and Practice with Regard to the
Constitution
, Qualifications, Selection, Summoning, &c of Juries
(Report of the Departmental Committee, Cd 6817, 1913)
VICTORIA, Law Department,
Jury Service in Victoria:
(Joint paper presented to the Honourable the Attorney-General by the
Secretary and Assistant Secretary to the Law Department, 1967)
VODANOVICH, I M “Public attitudes about the jury” in D Challinger (ed),
(Australian Institute of Criminology Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986)
WEATHERBURN, D, SNOWBALL, L, HUNTER, B,
The Economic and Social Factors Underpinning Indigenous Contact with the Justice System: Results from the NATSISS Survey
(NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research, Crime and Justice Bulletin, No 104, 2006)
WILKIE, M, “Inside the Jury” in D Challinger,
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Seminar: Proceedings No 11, 1986)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter