URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2006/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sentencing and Juries - Issues Paper [2006] NSWLRCIP 27
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
Table of Contents
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for Discussion
1. Introduction
Submissions invited
Structure of this paper
JURY TRIALS IN AUSTRALIA
SENTENCING - GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND CURRENT PROCEDURES
The sentencing hearing
Factors judges may consider
Aggravating and mitigating factors
Victim Impact Statements
Sentencing guidelines
Purposes of sentencing
Constraints on sentencing discretion
Sentencing options
Non-parole periods
Reaching a sentencing decision
Who may have input into sentencing?
The parties
Specialist bodies
The media and the public
2. Juries and sentencing: the current position
INTRODUCTION
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LENIENCY
ASKING JURIES TO DETERMINE SPECIFIC FACTS RELEVANT TO SENTENCING
JURY SENTENCING IN THE UNITED STATES
Current position
Jury sentencing in capital offences
Jury sentencing in non-capital offences
Recent Supreme Court rulings
Ongoing debate
3. A more direct role for juries in sentencing?
INTRODUCTION
PUBLIC PERCEPTIONS AND SENTENCING
The importance of public opinion
Difficulty in ascertaining a “true” indication of public confidence
Research into public perceptions of sentencing
Media and public opinion
JURY INVOLVEMENT IN SENTENCING
Potential impact on public confidence
Potential impact on sentencing decisions
Potential impact on jurors
MEANS OF INVOLVING THE JURY
Clarifying the facts supporting a guilty verdict
Benefits of the proposal
Problems with the proposal
Asking the jury to express opinions following conviction
LOGISTICAL QUESTIONS
Potential for inconvenience and delay
Question of timing
Jurors’ information needs
Procedural issues
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
Terms of reference
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
In a letter to the Commission received on 25 February 2005, the Attorney General, the Hon R J Debus MP asked:
That the NSW Law Reform Commission inquire into and report on
whether or not a judge in a criminal trial might, following a finding
of guilt, and consistent with the final decision remaining with the
judge, consult with the jury on aspects of sentencing.
In conducting this inquiry the Commission should have regard to:
1. the jury decision making process, including the jury's role in
determining guilt or innocence of the accused, and the secrecy
protection of jury deliberations;
2. the judicial sentencing process, and the enhancement of public confidence in the administration of justice.
The Commission may also report on any related matters that arise in the context of its inquiry.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
Participants
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the
purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Associate Professor Jane Goodman-Delahunty
The Hon Greg James QC
Professor Michael Tilbury
The Hon James Wood AO QC (Commissioner-in-charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Ms Donna Hayward
Mr Leslie Katz
Ms Anna Williams
Desktop Publishing
Mr Terence Stewart
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
Submissions
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this
review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy,
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
Postal addresses:
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 2001
or DX 1227 Sydney
Street Address:
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
Telephone (02) 9228 8230
Facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
The closing date for submissions is 1 September 2006.
Confidentiality and use of submissions
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission
will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. If
would like all or part of your submission to be treated as
confidential, please indicate this in your submission. The Commission
will respect requests for confidentiality when using submissions in
later publications.
Copies of submissions made to the Commission will also normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. Any
request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act
Other publication formats
The Commission is committed to meeting fully its obligations
under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination legislation. These
require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices
which may prevent people with disabilities from having full and equal
access to our services. This publication is available in alternative
formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
Issues for discussion
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Should jurors be involved directly in the sentencing process?
What are the benefits and detriments of jury involvement in sentencing?
What would be the likely effect of jury involvement on public confidence in the sentencing process?
Is there a more effective way of addressing the issue of public
confidence in sentencing decisions, and if so, what should it be?
What effect would jury involvement be likely to have on sentencing decisions?
How should consultation between judges and jurors be conducted?
For example, should the consultation be a structured one, where the
jury answers specific questions put to them by the judge, or should
there be more open discussion?
What sort of questions should a sentencing judge be able to ask a jury?
Should jurors be asked to clarify the reasons for their guilty verdict? Why or why not?
Are there other ways that jurors can be involved in the sentencing process?
How can judges protect the secrecy of jury deliberations while consulting with the jury on aspects of sentencing?
Should it be compulsory for jurors to participate in the sentencing process?
What is the minimum number of jurors required to give the judge
a fair and accurate indication of the jury’s views on sentencing?
What should happen if the minimum number of jurors cannot be
assembled for the sentencing hearing within a reasonable period
conviction of the offender?
At what stage following a guilty verdict should the jury be consulted as to their views on sentencing?
Should jurors receive access to all the information that the
sentencing judge would have, including any Victim’s Impact
and sentencing guidelines? In what format should this
information be presented?
To what extent should the judge explain sentencing law and practice to the jury?
Should each juror be consulted regarding his or her views on
sentencing, or should the foreperson convey the jury’s views to
the judge? If there is disagreement among jurors as to the appropriate
approach to sentencing, should all views be presented to the
only a unanimous or majority view?
What should happen if the jurors cannot agree on the questions
left to them by the judge, or on the opinions that they wish to offer?
What should happen if a juror refuses to disclose his or her views?
Do you agree that consultation between the judge and jury should
occur in private without the presence of counsel for both sides?
all aspects of the consultation be kept secret ( eg, the number of
jurors consulted), or only some aspects, and if so, which
Should the defendant be able to request that the jury not be involved in the sentencing process? If so, in what circumstances?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
1. Introduction
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Jury trials in Australia
Sentencing - general principles and current procedures
1.1 On 31 January 2005, his Honour James Spigelman AC, Chief Justice
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, delivered an address
“A New Way to Sentence for Serious Crime”.
that speech, the Chief Justice suggested various improvements to
current sentencing procedures. One of those suggestions was to
investigate the possibility of involving the jury in the sentencing
process. This would enhance the jury’s role beyond that
fact-finders determining the accused’s guilt or innocence.
1.2 The Attorney General saw merit in exploring the Chief
Justice’s ideas further. Accordingly, he referred the matter to
Commission on 25 February 2005. The Terms of Reference require the
Commission to investigate whether the presiding judge in a criminal
trial by jury “might, following a finding of guilt, and
consistent with the final decision remaining with the judge, consult
with the jury on aspects of sentencing”.
Submissions invited
1.3 This is the first publication released by the Commission
during the course of this reference. As an Issues Paper, it is designed
to promote debate, consultation and feedback. We have not yet reached a
conclusion on the issues raised by the Chief Justice in his
invite submissions on the questions asked in Chapter 3 of this paper,
and regarding any other matter related to the role
of the jury in the
sentencing process.
Structure of this paper
1.4 In this chapter, we give an overview of the current
sentencing process to provide a context for the Chief Justice’s
In Chapter 2, we look at the way in which the jury can
currently provide indirect input into sentencing as part of delivering
verdict. We also examine the position in the United States by
way of comparative study, since juries there have had a direct role
determining sentences for well over two hundred years. Finally, we
discuss and pose questions concerning all aspects of the Chief
Justice’s proposal in Chapter 3.
JURY TRIALS IN AUSTRALIA
1.5 In Australia, most cases are dealt with before the Local
Courts, where they are heard by a magistrate sitting alone. In NSW in
2004, 135,497 matters were finalised in the Local Courts, compared with
3,623 matters being finalised in the District and Supreme
Of those matters finalised in the District and Supreme Courts, only 622
were defended hearings, heard either before a judge and jury,
judge sitting alone.
SENTENCING - GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND CURRENT PROCEDURES
1.6 Section 80 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
enshrines the
right of a person charged with one or more offences against
Commonwealth law to have the trial of those offences heard
jury, where they are tried on indictment. However, that right to trial
by jury extends only to the determination of guilt
or innocence.
In all States and Territories of Australia, a judicial officer, and
only a judicial officer, can impose a sentence on an offender
or her guilt has been established.
1.7 A conviction for an offence may occur either through the
accused entering a plea of guilty, or following a trial in which the
accused has been found guilty beyond reasonable doubt. Where an offence
is tried without a jury, the judge or magistrate will determine
the verdict and the appropriate punishment.
offence be tried on indictment before a jury, the jurors will determine
the question of guilt before being discharged.
The presiding judge will
alone determine the sentence, following an examination of relevant
considerations.
The sentencing hearing
1.8 The sentencing hearing will generally be held a few weeks
after the trial has concluded. This gives the Probation and Parole
or the Department of Juvenile Justice,
prepare any reports that have been requested by the court, or are
required by law, concerning the offender’s background,
detention, and prospects of rehabilitation. The hearing is generally
held in open court,
and any member of the public,
including the jurors who decided the verdict, may attend the sentencing
hearing. Both the defence and
the prosecution have the opportunity to
present oral or documentary evidence at the hearing. The defence
counsel may call witnesses
to attest to the offender’s general
good character, psychiatric state, remorse, and prospects of
rehabilitation. These matters
may be tested or contradicted by evidence
called by the prosecution.
Factors judges may consider
1.9 Judges have a wide discretion in determining the appropriate level of penalty in each case.
A judge must have regard to a number of factors, such as the nature of
the crime and the maximum penalty for a particular offence
specified by
Judges also have access to information about
sentencing precedents and statistics through the Sentencing Information
System (“SIS”).
This assists in achieving consistency, and in ensuring that the sentence passed falls within the appropriate range.
1.10 Judges will apply the general principles of sentencing when
determining appropriate penalties in each case. For example, one
factors judges will consider when sentencing is proportionality: that
is, ensuring that the punishment fits the crime.
Consistency between sentences is also an important principle. For
example, judges look to be fair when imposing sentences to avoid
inappropriate disparities between punishments given to co-offenders.
They also endeavour to achieve consistency by ensuring that
sentence is within the range for similar offences.
1.11 Another factor is the totality of the sentence. If an
offender is convicted of more than one offence, he or she will receive
more than one sentence. The judge will determine the appropriate
sentence for each offence, consider questions of cumulation or
concurrence,
and determine whether the aggregate sentence is just and
appropriate for the overall level of criminal behaviour. The approach
making the individual sentences wholly or partially concurrent is
now preferred to that of lowering some or all of the sentences
that which would otherwise be appropriate.
On occasions,
the judge may also be required to take into account any additional
offences that the offender acknowledges and asks
to be considered.
1.12 In addition to these general principles, judges will also
have regard to any aggravating or mitigating factors that may exist
each specific case.
Aggravating and mitigating factors
1.13 The aggravating and mitigating circumstances to which a judge will have regard are set out in the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW). The judge may decide on a penalty at the higher end of the scale
depending on whether the following aggravating factors are
the victim was a police officer, emergency services worker,
correctional officer, judicial officer, health worker, teacher,
worker, or other public official, exercising public or
community functions and the offence arose because of the victim’s
occupation;
the offence involved the actual or threatened use of violence, or of a weapon;
the offender has a record of previous convictions,
or the offence was committed while the offender was on conditional liberty in relation to another offence or alleged offence;
the offence was committed in company, or was part of a planned or organised criminal activity;
the offence involved gratuitous cruelty;
the injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial;
the offence was motivated by hatred for or prejudice against a
group of people to which the offender believed the victim belonged
(such as people of a particular religion, racial or ethnic origin,
language, sexual orientation or age, or having a particular
disability);
the offence was committed without regard for public safety;
the offender abused a position of trust or authority in relation to the victim;
the victim was vulnerable, for example, because the victim was
very young or very old or had a disability, or because of the
occupation (such as a taxi driver, bank teller or
service station attendant); or
the offence involved multiple victims or a series of criminal acts.
1.14 The mitigating factors that may result in a lower penalty are:
the injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was not substantial;
the offence was not part of a planned or organised criminal activity;
the offender was provoked by the victim, or was acting under duress;
the offender does not have any record (or any significant record) of previous convictions;
the offender was a person of good character;
the offender is unlikely to re-offend, or has good prospects
of rehabilitation, whether by reason of the offender’s age or
the offender has shown remorse for the offence by making reparation for any injury, loss or damage or in any other manner;
the offender was not fully aware of the consequences of his or
her actions because of the offender’s age or any disability;
a plea of guilty by the offender (as provided by
the degree of pre-trial disclosure by the defence (as provided by
the offender provided assistance to law enforcement authorities (as provided by
chp1_18" href="#fnLRC_ip27chp1_18">
1.15 A judge may also consider the length of time the offender has
already spent in custody in relation to the offence, and compliance
with obligations under any community service order, good behaviour bond
or intervention program order.
Victim Impact Statements
1.16 In certain circumstances, a judge may consider a victim
impact statement (“a VIS”) in determining an appropriate
sentence. As the name suggests, a VIS is a document prepared by, or on
behalf of, a victim of crime, describing the impact that the
had on the life of the victim or the victim’s family. The court
may only receive a VIS in relation to an offence
heard on indictment
that resulted in the death of, or actual physical bodily harm caused
to, the victim; or an offence resulting
in actual or threatened
violence, including sexual assault.
There is no obligation on the victim to prepare a VIS,
or on the court to receive or consider one.
However, where the victim has died as a direct result of the crime for
which the offender has been convicted, and the victim’s
has prepared a VIS, the court must receive and acknowledge the VIS, and
may make any comment on it that it considers appropriate.
1.17 If the court chooses, it may receive and consider a VIS at any time after conviction and prior to sentencing.
The court may make the VIS available to the prosecutor, the offender or
any other person, subject to any conditions it considers
appropriate.
The victim, or a representative of the victim, may read all or part of the VIS to the court during the sentencing hearing.
Sentencing guidelines
1.18 Judges may also consider any relevant sentencing guidelines.
In NSW, the Attorney General may request the Court of Criminal Appeal
to consider delivering a guideline judgment on a particular
question of
law, without the need for an appeal on that matter to have been brought
before the Court.
Alternatively, the Court may give a judgment of its own motion.
Guideline judgments may indicate appropriate factors to consider when
sentencing for specific offences, but may not be made with
particular offenders.
1.19 Guideline judgments serve as templates for structuring
judicial discretion. They are not binding on judges, but act as an
factor that judges must consider in exercising their
sentencing discretion.
The judgments are intended as a
tool to enhance sentencing consistency, while not detracting from the
need for judges to exercise
discretion when determining penalties based
on the particular facts and circumstances of each case.
In introducing the legislative scheme in 1998, the Government stressed
the balance between sentencing consistency and the free exercise
judicial discretion as being crucial to maintaining public confidence
in the justice system.
Since 1998, guideline judgments have been handed down in relation to seven areas of law.
Purposes of sentencing
1.20 In deciding on an appropriate sentence, a judge would also keep in mind the purposes of the penalty. The
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) provides that the court may impose a sentence on an offender for the following purposes:
(a) to ensure that the offender is adequately punished for the offence;
(b) to prevent crime by deterring the offender and other persons from committing similar offences;
(c) to protect the community from the offender;
(d) to promote the rehabilitation of the offender;
(e) to make the offender accountable for his or her actions;
(f) to denounce the conduct of the offender; and
(g) to recognise the harm done to the victim of the crime and the community.
Constraints on sentencing discretion
Cheung v The Queen
, Justice Kirby set out the four relevant constraints on a sentencing judge’s discretion.
First, a judge must act within, and in accordance with, any applicable
statutory provision. Secondly, an offender may only be sentenced
offence regarding which he or she has pleaded guilty, or been convicted
by a court.
Consistent with this, a judge may only
consider evidence during sentencing that has been agreed upon by both
counsel or proved by
the prosecution,
and may only rely on evidence that has been made known to the offender.
1.22 Next, where the jury has delivered a verdict, a judge must not impose a sentence that conflicts with that verdict.
Where there is more than one possible basis for the jury’s
verdict, the judge must determine the factual basis for the verdict,
by reference to the evidence which is before the Court at the sentencing hearing.
The sentencing judge may form his or her own view of the facts upon
which the jury based their decision, provided this does not conflict
with the jury’s verdict.
1.23 Finally, judges must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
of those facts which are adverse to the accused, upon which any
Judges must also give reasons for the
sentences they impose, setting out the facts they considered to be
aggravating or mitigating
Sentencing options
Following a plea or a finding or guilt, the court determines the
appropriate penalty. In some instances, usually relating to
serious of offences, the court may, without proceeding to a conviction,
direct that the charge be dismissed.
The Court may also make an order discharging the offender on the condition that he or she enters into a good behaviour bond,
or agrees to participate in an intervention program, and comply with that program.
Where the court determines that some form of penalty is warranted, it
must decide between custodial and non-custodial options.
circumstances, that choice may be limited by statute, since
imprisonment is not available as a choice for all offences. Where
custodial sentence is available, the court should only sentence an
offender to prison after having considered all other alternatives.
If the Court determines that no penalty other than imprisonment is
appropriate, it must determine what the length of that sentence
be. Then, the Court must consider any available alternatives to serving
the sentence of imprisonment by way of full-time custody.
Judges determine the nature and length of any custodial sentence having
regard to the subjective and objective factors discussed
Imposing a custodial sentence does not always mean that the offender
must serve that sentence on a full-time basis. Where an
offender is
sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not more than three years,
the court may direct that the sentence be served
by way of periodic
Where the sentence of imprisonment is not more than 18 months, the court may make a home detention order.
1.27 In other cases, non-custodial sentencing options may be available. They include community service orders,
good behaviour bonds,
suspended sentences,
deferred sentences,
and non-association or place restriction orders.
Non-parole periods
When sentencing an offender to imprisonment for an offence, a Court is
first required to set a non-parole period for the sentence.
This refers
to the minimum period for which the offender must be kept in detention
in relation to the offence. The Court must then
set the balance of the
term of the sentence. That balance must not exceed one-third of the
non-parole period, unless the Court decides
that there are special
circumstances for increasing it, in which case the Court must provide
reasons for that decision.
1.29 A Court may not set a non-parole period for a sentence if the term of imprisonment is six months or less.
Where the Court imposes a sentence of imprisonment for a term of three
years or less, being a sentence that has a non-parole period,
make an order directing the release of the offender on parole at the
end of the non-parole period.
1.30 When the
offence is one which falls within the category of offences for which
standard non-parole periods have been prescribed
by statute, then that
is the non-parole period which is to be set. However, the Court may
determine that there are reasons for setting
a non-parole period that
is longer or shorter than the standard non-parole period prescribed for
that offence.
Reaching a sentencing decision
The task of reaching a decision as to an appropriate sentencing option
is a difficult and complex one. Judges in NSW must draw
on a vast body
of accumulated knowledge, including:
the provisions of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) and the
Crimes Act 1914
a significant body of case law illustrating the sentencing principles discussed above;
the sentencing ranges for each offence in respect of which an offender is convicted;
any relevant guideline judgments;
an understanding of sentencing statistics and their relevance; and
awareness and understanding of the significance of any mitigating
factors that may be specifically relevant to the offender (for
the opportunities, or lack thereof, for rehabilitation, potential
hardships that may be faced by offenders with life-threatening
illnesses, etc).
1.32 In determining an appropriate sentence, judges for the most part use one of two competing methodologies.
The first, known as the “two stage” or “two
tier” approach, refers generally to the practice of first
considering
the more objective circumstances of the offence, such as
the gravity of the crime, to determine a notional starting point for
within the allowable statutory range for a particular
offence. Then, that starting point is adjusted following consideration
more subjective factors relating to the particular circumstances
of the offender, resulting in the final sentence determination.
For example, a judge may decide that a certain sentence is appropriate
considering the circumstances of the offence committed, and
discount a proportion of the sentence if the offender has entered a
guilty plea.
1.33 The alternative approach is
known as “instinctive synthesis”, whereby judges consider
all of the relevant factors
simultaneously and arrive at one final
sentence determination. Which of these methodologies is preferred has
long been the subject
Both approaches have
been criticised: the two stage approach for being too mathematically
rigid and more likely to give rise to errors;
and the instinctive
synthesis method for lacking sufficient precision and transparency to
enable the reasons for the sentence to
be clearly understood.
1.34 In the recent case of
Markarian v The Queen
the majority of the High Court stated that much confusion surrounds the
terms and attempts to define and categorise them, and that
there can be
no universal rule stating that one method should always be adopted over
In general, a sentencing court will, after weighing all of the
relevant factors, reach a conclusion that a particular penalty is the
one that should be imposed….
[I]t cannot now be doubted that sentencing courts may not add and
subtract item by item from some apparently subliminally derived
passages of time in order to fix the time which an offender must serve
in prison. That is not to say that in a simple case,
in which, for
example, the circumstances of the crime have to be weighed against one
or a small number of other important matters,
indulgence in
arithmetical deduction by the sentencing judges should be absolutely
forbidden. An invitation to a sentencing judge
to engage in a process
of “instinctive synthesis”, as useful as shorthand
terminology may on occasions be, is not desirable
if no more is said or
understood about what that means. The expression “instinctive
synthesis” may then be understood
to suggest an arcane process
into the mysteries of which only judges can be initiated. The law
strongly favours transparency. Accessible
reasoning is necessary in the
interests of victims, of the parties, appeal courts, and the public.
There may be occasions when some
indulgence in an arithmetical process
will better serve these ends. This case was not however one of them
because of the number and
complexity of the considerations which had to
be weighed by the trial judge.
Who may have input into sentencing?
1.35 While it is the judiciary who ultimately determine penalties in
each case, others also play a role in sentencing. That role may
over-arching one: setting the policies that guide sentencing law and
practice; or may be specifically related to penalty outcomes
particular cases.
1.36 Obviously, the courts, through judicial officers, have the
most direct involvement in sentencing by imposing penalties in each
case where an offender pleads guilty to, or is convicted of, an
offence. As well as sentencing in individual cases, the courts also
establish sentencing precedent, particularly by issuing guideline
1.37 Judicial discretion in selecting appropriate sentences
exists subject to the power of Parliament to enact legislation setting
maximum penalties for criminal offences, and restricting the type of
penalty available for certain offences. Generally in New South
as well as in other Australian jurisdictions, there has been resistance
to the idea of Parliament curtailing judicial discretion
by prescribing
minimum penalties for offences. However, in 1999, Parliament introduced
minimum life sentences for murder and for
serious drug trafficking
offences in certain circumstances,
and standard non-parole periods for certain offences.
The parties
1.38 During the trial, counsel for both sides tender evidence,
much of which will be relevant to sentencing in the event that the
defendant is found guilty. At the sentencing hearing, the prosecution
and defence counsel may present further evidence concerning
offender’s subjective circumstances. This may include evidence as
to character, prior convictions, psychiatric or psychological
potential hardship arising from the manner in which the sentence will
be served, previous performance on parole, etc, with
persuading the judge to hand down either a lenient or more severe
1.39 People who have been the victims of certain crimes, or who
have lost family members as a result of a violent crime, may have
input into the sentencing process by preparing a Victim’s Impact
Statement. The circumstances in which a VIS may be relevant
discussed at paragraph 1.16-1.17 above.
1.40 Victims of crime may also be assisted by groups such as
the Enough is Enough Anti-Violence Movement, the Victims of Crime
League (VOCAL), or the Homicide Victims Support Group.
In addition to providing support for victims, these groups lobby for
recognition of victims’ rights in the criminal justice
Representatives from these groups are members of the Sentencing Council
Specialist bodies
1.41 The Sentencing Council of NSW was established in 2003 to
provide independent advice to the Government on sentencing policy and
practice. Set up under the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
the Sentencing Council is comprised of representatives from the
judiciary, the police, the criminal bar (both prosecutors and
defenders),
community representatives, victims’ rights advocates
and an Aboriginal justice specialist.
The Council’s
main functions are to advise and consult with the Attorney General in
relation to offences suitable for standard
non-parole periods and for
guideline judgments; to monitor, and report annually on, sentencing
trends and practices; and to prepare
reports to the Attorney General
(upon request) on particular aspects of sentencing law.
1.42 The Attorney General welcomed the establishment of the
Sentencing Council, noting the likelihood of it generating robust
and controversial recommendations. He observed that the
Sentencing Council “will provide an invaluable opportunity for
wider community to make a major contribution to the development of
sentencing law and practice”.
To date, the
Sentencing Council has prepared reports on the effect of abolishing
short prison sentences, the application of standard
non-parole periods
to certain offences, and how best to achieve consistency in sentencing
in the Local Courts.
It currently has a reference in relation to fines.
1.43 The Judicial Commission also has input into sentencing. In
addition to organising and supervising the continuing education and
training of judges in NSW, the Judicial Commission assists the courts
in achieving consistency in sentencing.
In carrying out
this task, the Judicial Commission maintains databases (such as the
Judicial Information Research System “JIRS”,
and the SIS)
The Judicial Commission also produces judicial officers’
bulletins and empirical studies of sentencing practice across NSW
courts. Other, more generalist, research organisations, such as this
Commission,
the Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
and the Criminal Law Review Division within the Attorney General’s Department,
have also reported on aspects of NSW sentencing law and policy.
The media and the public
1.44 The media play an important role as a conduit of
information between the justice system and the community. They are in a
to inform the public about sentencing decisions and practices,
and to encourage public debate. As such, they are able to guide and
comment upon public opinion in relation to sentencing outcomes and
practices, and to affect public confidence levels in the criminal
justice system.
Markarian v The Queen
Justice McHugh recently observed:
Public responses to sentencing, although not entitled to influence
any particular case, have a legitimate impact on the democratic
process. Judges are aware that, if they consistently impose sentences
that are too lenient or too severe, they risk undermining public
confidence in the administration of justice and invite legislative
interference in the exercise of judicial discretion. For the sake
criminal justice generally, judges attempt to impose sentences that
accord with legitimate community expectations.
1.46 The positive and negative impact of the media in relation to
sentencing issues is noted by the Chief Justice in his speech,
discussed further in Chapter 3 of this paper.
1.47 Australian jurors play no direct or defined role in
determining an appropriate sentence for the offender whom they have
guilty. However, they may indirectly affect a sentence handed
down to an offender in a number of ways. For example, a jury may return
a guilty verdict with a recommendation to the judge that the offender
be treated with leniency with respect to the sentence he or
given. While the judge must consider the expression of such a view and
treat it with respect, he or she is not bound by it
when determining
the sentence.
Jurors may also have an indirect impact on
sentencing, for example, where they deliver a special verdict, or a
verdict of guilty
on an alternative count. The ways in which jurors can
currently have a peripheral effect on sentencing through their verdicts
discussed in Chapter 2.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
. The Honourable JJ Spigelman AC, Chief Justice of New
South Wales, “A New Way to Sentence for Serious Crime”,
for the Annual Opening of Law Term Dinner for the Law Society
of New South Wales (31 January 2005). See
www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/sc/sc.nsf/pages/spigelman_310105».
. BOCSAR, NSW
Criminal Court Statistics 2004
, Annual Report, Tables 1.3 and 3.6 (see www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/bocsar/ll_bocsar.nsf/vwFiles/ccs04.pdf).
Savvas v The Queen
[1995] HCA 29
(1995) 183 CLR 1.
That right also extends only to offences under Commonwealth law. The
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) is the statutory basis for jury trial procedure in NSW.
. There is a wealth of authority for this point, but see generally
R v De Simoni
[1981] HCA 31
(1981) 147 CLR 383
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
Savvas v The Queen
[1995] HCA 29
(1995) 183 CLR 1
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
. Note that all trials in the Local Courts will be
held without a jury: jury trials occur only in the Supreme and District
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(1992) 25 NSWLR 732.
Exceptions exist where the offender is a child (
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
; or where the Court has directed that the proceedings be
held in camera, eg, in a trial involving a prescribed sexual offence (
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
. The desirability of having broad judicial discretion has been espoused by the courts and elsewhere: see, eg,
[2002] NSWCCA 343
(2002) 55 NSWLR 252
; and New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
(Report 79, 1996) (“NSWLRC Report 79”) at para 1.7.
. For the relevance of the statutory maximum, see
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213
, where the High Court discussed the reasoning
involved in the process of sentencing. See also para 1.34 below.
. See para 1.43 for more information concerning the SIS.
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR 465
[2002] NSWCCA 343
(2002) 55 NSWLR 252
Bugmy v The Queen
[1990] HCA 18
(1990) 169 CLR 525.
For a detailed discussion of proportionality, see New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
(DP 33, 1996) (“NSWLRC DP33”) at para 3.35-3.37.
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
(1984) 154 CLR 606
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
(1993) 70 A Crim R 368
at 371. See also NSWLRC DP 33 at para 3.38-3.40.
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR 610
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
McL and The Queen
[2000] HCA 46
(2000) 74 ALJR 1319.
See also the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
, Division 2.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
, Division 3. See also
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. Although only for the limited purposes noted in
R v Shankley
[2003] NSWCCA 253.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Where the crime involves the death of a victim, a VIS by
a member of the family which deals only with the effect of the death
the family, has been held to be irrelevant to the sentence being
R v Previtera
(1997) 94 A Crim R 76
(1998) 99 A Crim R 510.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. In NSW, guideline judgments are underpinned by formal, legislative requirements: see
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
, Division 4.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
The Court is not required to give a guideline judgment if it considers it inappropriate to do so:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. For a discussion of the function and operation
of guideline judgments, see the Hon JJ Spigelman, “Sentencing
Guideline Judgments”
Australian Law Journal
[2002] NSWCCA 343
(2002) 55 NSWLR 252.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 28 October 1998 at 9190. This was the Second Reading Speech introducing the
Criminal Procedure Amendment (Sentencing Guidelines) Act 1998
(NSW). That Act was subsequently repealed and incorporated into the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
, Division 4.
. Those areas are: Dangerous driving (
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
(1998) 45 NSWLR 209
; reformulated in
[2002] NSWCCA 343
(2002) 55 NSWLR 252
; Armed robbery (
[1999] NSWCCA 111
(1999) 46 NSWLR 346)
; Drug importation (
Wong & Leung
[1999] NSWCCA 420
(1999) 48 NSWLR 340
; overruled in
Wong v The Queen; Leung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 64
(2001) 76 ALJR 79)
; Break, enter and steal (
R v Ponfield
(1999) 46 NSWLR 327)
; Effect of a guilty plea on sentence (
Thomson & Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383); Effect of an admission of guilt relating to other offences (
Attorney General’s Application No 1 of 2002
(2002) 56 NSWLR 46)
; and high range prescribed content of alcohol (
Attorney General’s Application No 3 of 2002
6 NSWLR 305).
A further application by the Attorney General requesting
guidelines relating to assault on a police officer was refused by the
of Criminal Appeal (
Attorney General’s Application No 2 of 2002
[2002] NSWCCA 515).
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
R v De Simoni
[1981] HCA 31
(1981) 147 CLR 383.
R v O’Neill
[1979] 2 NSWLR 582.
Stanton v Dawson
(1987) 31 A Crim R 104.
(1994) 75 A Crim R 398
(1961) VR 326
(1997) 41 NSWLR 374.
. This can often be a difficult task, as noted by
the Chief Justice in his speech. See para 2.9-2.17 for further
discussion on this
R v O’Neill
[1979]2 NSWLR 582;
(1992) 28 NSWLR 593.
Savvas v The Queen
[1995] HCA 29
(1995) 69 ALJR 564
Maxwell v The Queen
[1996] HCA 46
(1996) 184 CLR 501.
. Matters favourable to the accused need only be
proved on the balance of probabilities. For a more detailed explanation
of the role
of fact finding in sentencing, see
Weininger v The Queen
[2003] HCA 14
(2003) 212 CLR 629.
R v O’Neill
[1979]2 NSWLR 582; and
(2003) NSWCCA 220.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. For a period of up to 2 years:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
s 10(1)(b).
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(2005) NSWCCA 455.
. See para 1.9-1.23. The statutory provisions governing sentencing procedures for imprisonment are contained in the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. The court may order an offender complete up to 500 hours of community service:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. A good behaviour bond may extend for up to 5 years:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Division 4.
These are orders preventing the offender from associating with a
specified person, or frequenting or visiting a specified place
district, for a stated amount of time:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
The meaning of “special circumstance” was considered in
R v Simpson
(2001) 53 NSWLR 704 and
[2004] NSWCCA 131
(2004) 60 NSWLR 168.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
, Division 1B. For the application of these provisions, see
[2004] NSWCCA 131
(2004) 60 NSWLR 168
(2004) NSWCCA 319.
. When sentencing offenders convicted of offences against Commonwealth law.
. See para 1.9-1.30.
. These categorisations are general only, and do not otherwise limit the exercise of judicial discretion: see
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Note that legislation sometimes requires judges to take a two step
approach by specifying how much a sentence has been discounted
certain factors: see
Crimes Act 1914
Thomson & Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383 and
[2002] NSWCCA 142
(2002) 54 NSWLR 300
for the effect of a guilty plea on sentencing.
AB v The Queen
[1999] HCA 46
(1999) 198 CLR 111
Wong and Leung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 64
(2001) 207 CLR 584
Cameron v The Queen
(2002) 209 CLR 339;
[2002] NSWCCA 142
(2002) 54 NSWLR 300
[2002] NSWCCA 343
(2002) 55 NSWLR 252
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213.
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213.
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213
and [39] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
. See discussion at para 1.18-1.19 above.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
R v Merritt
[2004] NSWCCA 19
(2004) 59 NSWLR 557.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
, Division 1A.
. Although these groups would not normally be allowed to participate in the sentencing procedure themselves.
For information concerning the
Sentencing Council’s functions, membership and publications, see
«www. lawlink.nsw.gov.au/sentencingcouncil».
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
. New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), Legislative Assembly, C
rimes (Sentencing Procedures) Amendment (Standard Minimum Sentencing) Bill 2002
(NSW), Second Reading Speech by the Hon RJ Debus MP, Attorney General (23 October 2002) at 5818.
. See «www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/sentencingcouncil»
for details.
. See «www.jc.nsw.gov.au».
. Dealing with sentencing principles and practice.
. Dealing with sentencing statistics.
. See, eg, NSWLRC Report 79; NSWLRC,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
(Report 96, 2000); NSWLRC,
Sentencing: Corporate Offenders
(Report 103, 2003). The Commission has also recently delivered
Sentencing: Young Offenders
(Report 104, 2006).
. Examples of fairly recent BOCSAR publications
dealing with sentencing issues include S Moffatt, D Weatherburn and J
Fitzgerald,
“Sentencing Drink Drivers: The Use of Dismissals and
Conditional Discharges” (2004) 81
Crime and Justice Bulletin
; J Fitzgerald, “Trends in Sentencing in the New South Wales Criminal Courts: 1990-2000 (2001) 62
Crime and Justice Bulletin
and J Baker, “Are the Courts Becoming More Lenient? Recent Trends
in Convictions and Penalties in NSW Higher and Local Courts
Crime and Justice Bulletin
. For a full list, see «www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/bocsar».
. See «www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/clrd» for further details.
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213.
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213
Whittaker v The King
[1928] HCA 28
(1928) 41 CLR 230.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
2. Juries and sentencing: the current position
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Introduction
Recommendations for leniency
Asking juries to determine specific facts relevant to sentencing
Jury sentencing in the United States
INTRODUCTION
2.1 This chapter discusses the role the jury currently plays in
determining sentences in criminal trials. As noted in the previous
chapter, there is no formally defined role for the jury in the
sentencing process.
On the contrary, it is has long been
considered fundamental to the fair and effective administration of
justice in Australia that
the jury’s role be limited to finding
the facts that support their verdict, and that it is the responsibility
of the judge
to determine the appropriate sentence.
2.2 However, there are currently a number of ways in which the
jury might provide indirect input into sentencing in the course of
their role as fact finders during the trial. This chapter discusses
three of those ways in detail: namely, the jury’s ability
recommend mercy or leniency; and the situation whereby jurors return a
verdict on an alternative count to that primarily charged;
jurors are invited to return a special verdict by which they answer
specific questions of fact that may also have an impact
on sentencing.
These types of jury involvement in sentencing occur during the course
of delivering a verdict. A further possible
avenue of jury involvement
in the sentencing process can occur
the jury has returned
a guilty verdict, and the judge asks the jury to clarify the reasons
for that verdict. As this issue is inextricably
linked with the Chief
Justice’s proposal, it is discussed in the following chapter.
2.3 While the debate about jury involvement in the sentencing
phase is restricted to academic circles in this country, it has been
long-standing practice in other jurisdictions. For example, in some
parts of the United States, juries not only make recommendations
regarding appropriate sentencing, but are responsible for imposing the
sentence. Although such a system is not being proposed here,
the nature of, and rationale for, jury sentencing in the United States
by way of comparison and contrast with the practice
in New South Wales.
Also, the United States models might provide useful guidance on
procedural issues, such as how and when judges
can consult with the
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LENIENCY
2.4 When a jury returns a verdict of guilty, it may, if it
chooses, recommend to the judge that the offender be given leniency.
recommendation does not constitute part of the verdict.
There is no legislative recognition in NSW of the jury’s right to recommend leniency.
However, a number of cases have referred to the power, either explicitly or implicitly.
The definitive High Court statement can be found in
Whittaker v The King
where Justice Isaacs said:
[i]t is of course the duty of a judge who has the difficult task of
determining the proper sentence to be imposed upon a person convicted
of a crime to take into his consideration a recommendation by the jury
for mercy. But it must be emphasised that it is not part of
verdict; it does not bind the trial judge; it operates only as a
recommendation, and the responsibility in the interests of society
impose an appropriate sentence commensurate with the seriousness of the
crime remains with the trial judge. It in no way absolves
judge from the duty of considering the circumstances of the crime
independently for himself, and it in no way requires
him to put any
remote or strained interpretation upon the facts to find some
justification for the rider.
2.5 The weight given to such a recommendation will depend on individual judges and the circumstances of each case.
Since jury recommendations are not binding, a plea for mercy is only
one of a number of factors a judge will need to consider when
on an appropriate penalty.
Indeed, the courts have
cautioned against trial judges relying too heavily on what they
perceive to be the jury’s finding of
fact behind a recommendation
Human nature being what it is, such recommendations are not always
based upon reason or upon logic. They may be based upon all kinds
considerations, and such things as sentiment, a spirit of compromise, a
misunderstanding of the true situation, and a host of
other things, may
be responsible for them. A Judge is not bound to act upon such a
recommendation, if, in his opinion, the circumstances
do not justify
it, and if the jury in the present case had been asked upon what they
based their recommendation—and I think
that it is to be regretted
that they were not asked— it might have appeared that it did not
rest upon any substantial basis
and was not entitled to be given any
real weight.
2.6 The above quotation raises the issue of whether or not the judge
should ask the jury their reasons for making a recommendation
R v Wingrove
the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal determined that, where the
recommendation is framed in a way that throws doubt on the basis for
the jury’s guilty verdict, the judge should ask the jury what
they mean by recommending that the offender be treated leniently.
However, apart from this limited circumstance, the Court was of the
view that a judge should not make further enquiries of a jury
qualifies a verdict by way of a recommendation for leniency.
The broader question of whether a judge should ask a jury to clarify
the basis of a verdict to convict is discussed in the following
2.7 Neither the judge, nor counsel for either side, may expressly
invite the jury to make a comment as to the leniency of the sentence
should they choose to convict the defendant.
Generally, a
jury is not even informed, either before retiring to deliberate or upon
returning to deliver their verdict, of their
right to recommend that
the judge impose a lenient sentence should they choose to convict. Nor
are they informed of the possible
sentencing options or the maximum
available sentence. In Report 48, we recommended that, while the power
of a jury to express an
opinion as to leniency should be preserved, so
too should the current practice of not informing the jury of this
power, unless they
ask whether they may qualify their verdict in such a
This is to mitigate against the temptation to
deliver a compromise guilty verdict: that is, finding the defendant
guilty on the condition
that a lenient punishment be imposed.
Similar considerations apply to the practice of not disclosing to the
jury details of the sentence and the sentencing options that
2.8 Presumably, the power of a jury to make a recommendation
as to the leniency of sentence also extends to making a recommendation
that the judge impose a sentence at the more severe end of the scale.
However, we are not aware of any cases where this has occurred.
ASKING JURIES TO DETERMINE SPECIFIC FACTS RELEVANT TO SENTENCING
2.9 It is the primary role of the jury to determine whether or
not the evidence presented during the trial leaves them satisfied
reasonable doubt that the defendant committed a specific
offence, or offences, listed on the indictment. Sometimes, the jury is
with alternative offences, which may be expressly charged, or
available as statutory alternatives. In such a case, the jury must
decide whether the facts support a finding of guilt in relation to
offence A or offence B, or neither offence. Since offence A and
B are likely to have different maximum penalties prescribed by statute,
the jury’s finding of guilt regarding one offence
but not the
other, indirectly affects the sentence the offender may receive. In
this way, jurors can have de facto involvement in
sentencing as a
by-product of their role as determiners of guilt.
2.10 The jury’s general guilty verdict will not always
reveal the facts found to have been proven. While this does not affect
the verdict, the answers to these facts may be significant in
determining the appropriate sentence. A classic example is the
between murder and manslaughter. Where a jury decides an
offender is guilty of manslaughter but not of murder, it is not always
whether that verdict was returned because the jury had a doubt as
to whether the offender had the requisite intention or state of
required for murder, or whether some other factor, such as provocation,
excessive self defence, intoxication or substantial
impairment by
abnormality of mind, was involved. Since the penalty for manslaughter
can vary considerably depending on the presence
or absence of these
(and other) factors, it may be useful for a judge to know the basis for
the jury’s findings.
2.11 In certain circumstances, a judge may invite the jury to
deliver a special verdict by answering specific questions concerning
issues of fact which arise in the trial.
The courts have
held that, while it is open to juries to deliver special verdicts, they
may only answer specific questions of fact
that relate to the elements
of the offence identified on the indictment, and not those matters that
relate to sentence only.
Kingswell v The Queen
the defendant was charged with conspiring to import narcotics into Australia under s 233B of the
Customs Act 1901
(Cth). That section stated that a person found guilty of that offence was punishable as provided by s 235 of the
Customs Act 1901
(Cth). The appropriate penalty provided for under s 235 depended on the
Court being satisfied of a number of factual matters, including
quantity of the narcotics involved. One of the questions raised in
was whether the matters of fact to be determined under s 235 were
elements of the offence (due to the combined operation with s 233B),
were matters that related only to sentencing.
2.12 The High Court ruled that the jury was not empowered to
give a special verdict relating to the facts identified in s 235 as
circumstances
of aggravation relevant to sentencing, as they were not
issues pertaining to the elements of the offence in s 233B as specified
the indictment. In his judgment, Justice Brennan stated:
A jury which is charged to try the issues on an indictment is not
at liberty to find facts which are not pertinent to those issues.
has long been established that, if a jury returns a special verdict,
its verdict must be confined to the issues which it is sworn
else a finding on any other issue is… void.
Cheung v The Queen
a jury found
Cheung guilty of having been knowingly concerned in the importation
into Australia of a commercial quantity of heroin.
The trial judge then
imposed a sentence based on his findings as to the extent of
Cheung’s involvement in the crime. On appeal,
it was argued on
Cheung’s behalf that denying the jury the right to determine
facts that are critical to the type and length
of the sentence imposed
is a denial of the right to a jury trial under s 80 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
2.14 The High Court discussed the respective roles of the judge and
jury as finders of facts relevant to sentencing. In the course
discussion, the High Court confirmed that the role of the jury is to
determine the matters of fact on which issue is joined
by a plea of not
guilty. The issue of whether a special verdict should have been
obtained from the jury to clarify its view of the
facts was raised in
oral argument, but was not argued at trial or on appeal, and so was not
considered in detail by the High Court.
However, Justice Kirby
expressed cautious approval of asking jurors specific questions of fact
to ensure, as closely as possible,
that the sentence is in line with
the basis for the jury’s verdict:
... at least where the potential difference for sentencing is as
substantial as it was in this case, it is desirable, and certainly
permissible, to seek from the jury answers to questions (or a special
verdict) concerning the basis upon which they have convicted
2.15 It was also suggested that, where possible, defendants could be
charged with alternative offences, so that a jury’s decision
convict on one but not the other, would make the basis of their verdict
clear for the purposes of sentencing.
Further, some members of the Court were sympathetic to the view that
the prosecution should frame the indictment as specifically
as possible
to enable the jury to make its views clear on each factual issue
relevant to the offence.
2.16 However, all arguments advocating a greater role for the jury in sentencing failed in
case. The High Court held that the nature of the accused’s motive
for becoming involved in the crime, and the extent of his
involvement,
while relevant to sentencing, was not an element of the particular
offence charged and not, therefore, a matter to be
resolved by the jury.
In rejecting the Constitutional argument, the Court stated that the:
procedure involved the trial judge, following a jury verdict of
guilty, reviewing the evidence for himself for the purpose of making
findings on matters of fact which were necessary for sentencing, and
which were not resolved by the jury’s verdict. Such a
does not involve any infringement of a right to trial by jury. It
involves the application of well-established principles
division of functions which are, and were in 1900, an aspect of trial
2.17 The majority were of the view that, while the jury would have
heard evidence relevant to sentencing issues, and some jurors
relied on some of that evidence in deciding the guilty verdict, the
jury can, and should, in no way be seen as deciding
all facts of
possible relevance to sentencing.
JURY SENTENCING IN THE UNITED STATES
2.18 American juries have had a role in sentencing ever since
the War of Independence in 1776, which ended English rule over the
colonies. In the early days of the colony, people were
suspicious of the arbitrary power exercised by Crown appointed judges,
were eager to cast off the vestiges of English colonial rule.
The early colonists saw juries as being far better suited than judges
to determine the extent to which the defendant’s behaviour
deviated from the socially accepted norms. In many colonies, decisions
as to guilt and punishment were a joint effort, with county
justices of
the peace, grand juries and judges all having a say in the
defendant’s fate. Up until the last few years of the
century, punishment for felony offences was usually by way of death,
rather than discretionary terms of imprisonment,
with the primary
motive being retribution. Consequently, a jury’s guilty verdict
would often be delivered along with the command
that the defendant be
hanged “by the neck until dead”.
2.19 In practice, however, very few executions were carried out.
In Virginia, for example, the judge and the governor commuted many
death sentences imposed by the jury.
Dissatisfaction with
this somewhat haphazard form of sentencing, led to calls for the
introduction of other penalties, besides death,
that judges, juries and
governors could consistently enforce.
2.20 In 1786, Pennsylvania was the first state to introduce
discretionary terms of hard labour for certain offences, in addition to
having the death penalty for others. At the same time, Pennsylvania
also became the first state to give judges the power to decide
imprisonment for non-capital offences.
In 1796, Virginia
also adopted discretionary terms of imprisonment, but chose to keep the
jury as the sentencing authority for all
capital and non-capital
criminal offences.
Other states chose between the jury
sentencing and judge sentencing models almost immediately upon
attaining statehood and entering
2.21 Jury sentencing reaching its zenith in the mid to late
nineteenth century. This period coincided with the growing fear of an
unrepresentative judiciary and gathering momentum for judicial
elections. Juries were viewed as offering “a better safeguard
against unfair sentences than a single judge”, and represented
the embodiment of the ideal of a decentralised democracy”.
By 1919, fourteen of the forty-eight American states allowed juries to
deliver sentences in relation to non-capital criminal offences.
2.22 However, the popularity of jury sentencing began to
decline. This was due to a combination of factors. First, the
complexity of litigation signalled a need for judicial
interpretation and decision-making “bound by precedent and
in written opinions”.
Secondly, the
codification of many laws and the move towards federalisation rendered
the local input of juries less significant.
Further, the growth of the
law schools in the nineteenth century resulted in a legally trained
professional elite, creating a knowledge
gulf between the role of
lawyers and lay people.
2.23 The early twentieth century also saw a change in attitudes
towards crime and punishment. Defendants were given the power to waive
their right to trial by jury, and the growing practice of plea
bargaining resulted in a greater number of guilty pleas, removing
need for a jury trial. The establishment of parole and probation
systems further eroded the popularity of jury sentencing, with
length of prison terms being based on professional opinions as to the
rehabilitation prospects of the offender.
non-capital jury sentencing fell to its lowest ebb following the rise
of determinate sentencing in the 1970s and 1980s.
Public desire to be
tougher on crime and promote consistency in punishments for similar
crimes led some states to introduce mandatory
sentencing, and
mathematical formulas and grids for prescribing sentences, that allow
for only limited discretion, even by judges.
As a result,
an increasing number of states abandoned the practice of jury
sentencing for non-capital offences, leaving the current
number of jury
sentencing states at six.
Current position
Jury sentencing in capital offences
2.24 The historical role of the jury in determining the
appropriateness of the death penalty has been preserved in many United
United States Code
provides that, where an offender has pleaded, or been found to be, guilty of an offence punishable by death,
a separate hearing will be held to determine if the death penalty is appropriate.
That hearing is to be conducted before the same jury that determined
the offender’s guilt, or, if the offender pleaded guilty
convicted by a judge sitting alone, a jury may be empanelled
specifically for the purpose of determining the appropriateness
death penalty.
The accused may request that the
sentencing hearing not take place before a jury, in which case the
sentence will be determined by
a judge sitting alone.
2.25 The sentencing hearing is like a mini-trial, during which
the prosecution and defence counsel present to the jury aggravating
mitigating factors, respectively. Aggravating factors include whether
the offence was committed in a cruel, heinous or depraved
was the result of substantial planning and premeditation; or committed
for pecuniary gain. Further aggravating factors
would exist where the
offender has prior convictions for similar, or other serious offences;
where the death of the victim occurred
while the offender was
committing another crime; or where the victim was particularly
vulnerable due to age, youth or infirmity,
or was a high public
In mitigation, the defence may argue that the
offender was acting under duress, a severe mental or emotional
disturbance, or an impaired
capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of
his or her actions. Additional mitigating factors may include the lack
of any prior convictions;
that the offender played only a minor role in
committing the offence, or that there are equally culpable offenders;
that the victim
consented in the conduct that lead to his or death; or
any other factors concerning the offender’s background and
that would justify a sentence other than death.
2.26 The prosecution must prove the presence of any aggravating
factors beyond reasonable doubt, while the defence need only establish
mitigating factors on the preponderance of information.
The jury (or the judge if there is no jury) must decide unanimously
whether the aggravating factors found to have been proved sufficiently
outweigh all of the established mitigating factors. In the absence of
any mitigating factors, the jury must decide whether the aggravating
factor or factors alone are sufficient to justify a sentence of death.
If the jury are unable to reach a unanimous decision, the
judge shall
determine whether the offender should be sentenced to death, to life
imprisonment without the possibility of parole,
or to some lesser
The difficulty that juries can face reaching a
unanimous decision on the death penalty was highlighted in the recent
sentencing of
Zacarias Moussaoui for offences concerned with his
involvement in the attacks of September 11, 2001.
2.27 In addition to the federal provisions, thirty-eight state
as treason.
In all of those jurisdictions, where a jury
trial was conducted resulting in a guilty verdict, the jury will have
some form of involvement
in the sentencing process. This was made
Ring v Arizona
where the United
States Supreme Court determined that only juries, and not judges, could
find the existence of aggravating factors
necessary to invoke the death
penalty. The degree of jury involvement varies from state to state. For
example, juries in Alabama,
Delaware, Florida and Indiana have more of
an advisory role than juries in other states, with judges making the
ultimate sentence
determination.
In all capital
sentencing jurisdictions, including federal proceedings, judges may
impose a lesser sentence than that recommended
by the jury, but may not
increase the sentence beyond the jury’s finding.
2.28 Capital punishment has been found to have a Constitutional
basis. The Eighth Amendment provides that “[e]xcessive bail
not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual
punishments inflicted”. While the Courts have determined
capital punishment as a penalty for deliberate murder
not considered to be “cruel and unusual punishment”, its
application may be outlawed by the Eighth Amendment in some
circumstances. In
Furman v Georgia
the Supreme
Court struck down the capital punishment statutes of Georgia and Texas
on the grounds that they facilitated discriminatory
and arbitrary life
and death decisions, and were therefore unconstitutional. The Court
declared that, in order to avoid being caught
by the “cruel and
unusual punishment” clause, sentencing procedures for capital
punishment must be structured so as to
avoid arbitrariness and
capriciousness. To that end, sentencing juries should be provided with
sufficient direction and guidance
to structure their discretion, so
that the full circumstances of each case, and each offender, can be
thoroughly considered.
2.29 As a result of the
decision, courts and
legislatures have been vigilant in ensuring that sentencing juries
receive appropriate guidelines to guard against
the arbitrary and
disproportionate imposition of the death penalty.
general terms, this meant revising state criminal statutes to specify
aggravating and mitigating factors (similar to the federal
discussed above) to which sentencing authorities may have regard when
considering the appropriateness of the death penalty.
It also meant
separating the verdict and sentencing stages into two distinct
hearings, so that jurors do not hear prejudicial evidence
the defendant’s character and prior convictions until after the
verdict has been delivered.
Jury sentencing in non-capital offences
2.30 In contrast to the widespread practice of jury sentencing
in capital cases, juries in non-capital cases have direct involvement
at the sentencing stage in only six states. In Arkansas, Kentucky,
Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas, and Virginia, juries decide on appropriate
sentences for offenders convicted of offences for which discretionary
terms of imprisonment, fines, or both, are available. In reality,
sentencing occurs in only a very small number of non-capital cases,
since over ninety percent of matters are plea bargained.
2.31 In all of these states, the same jury that delivered the guilty verdict determines the sentence the offender will receive.
However, there is significant variation between the states in terms of
jury sentencing practice. For example, there are differences
the states as to whether or not a defendant may elect to be sentenced
by a judge rather than a jury,
and also in relation to
the types of offences that may be sentenced by juries. Further, the
sentencing options that jurors may select
from differ from state to
as does the issue of whether or not the sentences are subject to parole.
2.32 The most significant variation between jury sentencing
states is whether or not the trial is separated into two distinct
for determining guilt and punishment. Five of the six jury
sentencing states have a bifurcated format: meaning that the sentencing
takes place in a separate proceeding after the trial has concluded.
Consequently, juries only hear evidence specifically relevant to sentencing after they have convicted the defendant.
At the sentencing hearing, juries will hear evidence of any aggravating
or mitigating factor, and details of the offender’s
criminal record.
In Missouri, jury sentencing only operates in relation to trials for first offenders.
Judges in Missouri impose sentences on offenders with prior convictions.
2.33 In Oklahoma, a combination of the bifurcated and the
unitary schemes exists. Under a unitary scheme, the jury decides issues
of guilt and sentence at the same time. The unitary scheme has been
criticised due to its potential prejudicial effect. If information
relevant to sentencing but not to guilt (such as evidence of prior
convictions) is given to the jury before they deliver their verdict,
there is a significant danger that the two issues could become confused
in the minds of the jurors and the verdict could be prejudiced.
However, if sentencing information is not given, then jurors must make
a decision as to sentencing without full knowledge of all
In an attempt to avoid some of these pitfalls,
Oklahoma only uses unitary proceedings for first offenders, and
bifurcates proceedings
for defendants with a criminal history.
Criticism of unitary jury sentencing proceedings caused the Missouri legislature to abandon the practice in 2003.
2.34 Sentencing juries deliberate in secret, and must decide unanimously on the appropriate sentence.
In doing so, they generally select a specific term of imprisonment from
within a broad statutory range, with very little assistance
However, the power of the jury to determine a sentence is not without
limits. Sentencing juries do not have access to the full range
penalties that may be imposed by judges. For example, in some jury
sentencing states, jurors are limited to imposing sentences
imprisonment. They have no authority to suspend sentences, recommend
probation, or refer offenders to any non-custodial alternatives
referral to drug treatment or other rehabilitation programs.
Consequently, the unavailability of these sentencing options means that
jury sentences for some offences tend to be higher than judicially
imposed penalties, even though the jury may wish to be more lenient.
2.35 Nor is the jury’s say necessarily final. Judges may alter or suspend a jury’s sentence in most states.
For example, in Kentucky, Virginia, Arkansas and Missourri, a judge may
reduce a jury’s sentence if it is considered unduly
may not increase it unless it fails to comply with relevant sentencing
However, research in some states, particularly
Kentucky and Arkansas, has revealed a general reluctance by judges to
modify jury
The researchers attribute this
reluctance to a combination of factors, namely: genuine judicial
confidence in the jury as a “superior
assessor of the appropriate
punishment”;
a willingness to allow the jury to take responsibility for sentencing decisions;
and the view that jury sentencing helps to divert more cases away from the courts.
Attitudes appear to be more ambivalent in Virginia, with one court
having described jury sentencing as little more than offering
“advisory opinion or first-step decision”.
2.36 Sentencing juries do not have access to all of the
information available to the judge. For example, as a general rule,
do not receive access to sentencing guidelines.
Nor are they provided with other relevant statistics concerning parole or sentencing trends for similar offences.
In some states, juries are only informed about an offender’s
eligibility for parole, and not given any other information about
likelihood of actual release. Juries may impose sentences at the
harsher end of the scale based on the erroneous assumption that
offender who is eligible for parole will only serve a fraction of that
time before automatically being released.
In many jury sentencing states, jurors also lack information about more lenient alternatives to incarceration.
2.37 Accordingly, juries are hampered in their ability to
recommend sentences that are consistent and in context with the
justice system as a whole. This is particularly problematic
since jurors, unlike judges, lack broad sentencing experience. They
recommend penalties based on the experience of a single isolated
case, possibly drawing on their somewhat uncertain recollection
may have occurred in other cases that have attracted the public
attention, or even personal prejudice. The disparity in the
information
received by judges and jurors can, in some jurisdictions, result in
juries imposing higher sentences than judges who
are more informed.
The lack of information given to sentencing juries is considered, even
by advocates of jury sentencing, to be one of the greatest
drawbacks of
the current system in the United States.
Recent Supreme Court rulings
2.38 Until recently, the issue of jury sentencing in the United
States had lain dormant. However, a series of decisions by the United
States Supreme Court have re-energised the debate concerning jury
sentencing for non-capital offences. In the case of
Apprendi v New Jersey
the defendant was convicted before a jury of a firearms offence
carrying a maximum penalty of ten years imprisonment. The trial
was of the view that the offence also involved elements of racial
hatred, which he felt justified imposing a penalty greater
statutory maximum. On appeal, the Supreme Court overruled the trial
judge’s decision, stating that only the jury could
whether facts existed that warranted enhancing the sentence above the
statutory maximum.
2.39 The Court reaffirmed this principle in
Blakely v. Washington
holding that the constitutional right to trial by jury in a criminal
trial, enshrined in the Sixth Amendment, included not only
the right to
have a jury decide guilt or innocence, but also the facts upon which
any sentence enhancement is based.
Ongoing debate
2.40 Prior to the
and related decisions, jury
sentencing in non-capital matters was regarded by most commentators in
the United States as an anachronistic
hang-over from post colonial
However, these cases have reignited the debate in
America over the role the jury should play in sentencing in relation to
non-capital
is authority
for the proposition that sentencing decisions following jury trials may
only be based on facts that have been determined
by the jury, it does
not expressly determine whether or not sentencing decisions must be
made by a judge or a jury. However, some
commentators have argued that
could reverse the historical drift away from jury sentencing and open
the way for the reintroduction of non-capital jury sentencing
2.41 Jury sentencing in non-capital cases has been described by
some as one of the “least understood procedures in American
criminal justice”.
Critics in the United States
claim it to be costly, time-consuming, unnecessary and antiquated; that
jurors lack the expertise of
judges, which can lead to disproportionate
or inconsistent sentences that are based on prejudice rather than solid
Others note that the criminal justice systems
in jury sentencing states do not provide non-capital sentencing juries
with sufficient
power and information to enable their effective
functioning.
2.42 Jury sentencing advocates are of the view that the
arguments voiced against jury sentencing, such as jurors’ lack of
and inability to handle complex issues, amount to a mistrust
of the jury system as a whole.
Some claim that the
perceived problems with non-capital jury sentencing could be addressed
by importing many of the procedures already
in place for capital cases:
such as giving jurors clear instructions as to aggravating and
mitigating factors, access to relevant
sentencing guidelines, and more
rigorous appellate review.
In response to piecemeal
mandatory sentencing laws derived from political pressure and public
opinion polls, supporters argue that
jury sentencing may be the
“most direct and least distorting mechanism to conform criminal
sanctions to community sentiment”.
2.43 Others researchers have reached a more pragmatic
conclusion, noting that non-capital jury sentencing is not an
and curious appendage of an earlier age”.
However, studies in three jury sentencing states have revealed that its
practice bears little relation to the democratic ideals on
which it is
was traditionally based.
Rather than setting a benchmark
reflecting community expectations, researchers found that jury
sentencing is favoured by prosecutors
as a means of encouraging
guilty pleas.
The study also found that jury
sentencing can operate as a convenient tool to place accountability for
any unpopular sentencing policy
on jurors rather than criminal justice
This is especially the case in jurisdictions with an elected judiciary.
The researchers believe that this discrepancy between theory and
practice has implications for reformers in the United States,
of whether they seek to replace jury sentencing with
judicial sentencing, or to strengthen the current powers of sentencing
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ noted that trial by jury in this
country does not include sentencing by a jury: at [6]. It was held
there was no requirement under the Commonwealth
Constitution
jury to be asked to state the basis on which a guilty verdict was
reached, or for it to decide contested facts relevant to
sentencing.
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1.
[1960] VicRp 21
[1960] VR 137.
. The Australian Capital Territory is the only
Australian jurisdiction to have legislated the jury’s power to
recommend leniency:
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) s 342.
Myerson v The King
[1908] HCA 14
(1908) 5 CLR 596
R v Dickson
(1865) 4 SCR (NSW) 298
[1960] VicRp 21
[1960] VR 137
Whittaker v The King
[1928] HCA 28
(1928) 41 CLR 230
[1979] Tas R 1
[1961] VicRp 36
[1961] VR 236
R v Wingrove
(1936) 53 WN (NSW) 118.
[1928] HCA 28
(1928) 41 CLR 230.
[1928] HCA 28
(1928) 41 CLR 230
. Some courts are more dismissive of jury
recommendations on the grounds that punishment is the province of the
judge not the jury:
[1960] VicRp 21
[1960] VR 137.
. The other factors a judge must consider are discussed at para 1.9-1.23.
R v Whittaker
(1928) 28 SR (NSW) 411
at 420 (Street CJ). See also
R v Millward
(1931) 23 Cr App R 119.
(1936) 53 WN (NSW) 118.
R v Wingrove
(1936) 53 WN (NSW) 118
. See para 3.38-3.45.
[1963] 1 WLR 1311.
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986), (“NSWLRC Report 48”) Recommendation 73.
. NSWLRC Report 48 at para 8.15. See para 3.36 for
a discussion of the danger of jury sentencing leading to compromise
. The issue of whether the judge may consult with the jury
their verdict is the essence of the Chief Justice’s proposal, and
as such, is discussed in the following chapter. Here, we
look at the
jury’s ability to influence sentencing as part of their verdict.
Thompson v The Queen
[1989] HCA 30
(1989) 169 CLR 1
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
, Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ stated that it was
not necessary to decide whether a jury could be compelled, as distinct
from invited,
to return a special verdict, as this had not been raised
in submissions by either side: at [19].
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
Director of Public Prosecutions v Nasralla
[1967] 2 AC 238.
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264.
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
at 287. Although Justice Brennan’s judgment in this case was a
dissenting one (on other grounds), the reasoning of the majority
not imply error in the passage quoted.
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1.
provides for the right to trial by jury for defendants charged on indictment with Commonwealth offences.
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
and [86] (Gaudron J).
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
(Kirby J) and [160] (Callinan J).
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
. For an account of the history of jury sentencing
in America, see J Iontcheva, “Jury Sentencing as Democratic
Virginia Law Review
; A Lanni, “Jury Sentencing in Noncapital Cases: An Idea Whose Time Has Come (Again)?”
Yale Law Journal
; Nancy J King, “The Origins of Felony Jury Sentencing in the United States”
Chicago-Kent Law Review
; and M Hoffman, “The Case for Jury Sentencing”
Duke Law Journal
. This was certainly the case in Virginia: see King (2003) at 947.
. See King (2003) at 947-950.
. See King (2003) at 950.
. See King (2003) at 937.
. See King (2003) at 937 and Iontcheva at 317.
. Although some states adopted jury sentencing well after their entry into the Union: see Lanni at 1790-1791.
. See Iontcheva at 318 and 323.
. See Iontcheva at 319.
. See Iontcheva at 324.
. See Iontcheva at 324-327.
. See Iontcheva at 327-330.
. King (2003) at 937. See para 2.30-2.37 below for details.
. As provided under 18
United States Code
United States Code
United States Code
s 3593(b)(1) and (2).
. See the full list of aggravating factors in 18
United States Code
s 3592(b), (c) and (d).
United States Code
United States Code
United States Code
. See M Coultan, “Americans divided over Moussaoui verdict”
Sydney Morning Herald
(Friday, 5 May 2006 at 7); and P Hirschkorn, “Jury spares 9/11
plotter Moussaoui” (accessed at
«www.cnn.com/2006/LAW/05/03/moussaoui.verdict/»).
. The offences that are punishable by death vary between capital punishment states.
[2002] USSC 3339
122 S Ct 2428
(2002). The Court extended the ruling in
Apprendi v New Jersey
[2000] USSC 57
(2000) to capital proceedings, by deciding that denying
juries the power to decide the facts on which a death sentence is based
a contravention of the Sixth Amendment to the US
Constitution
(guaranteeing the right to a fair trial): see para 2.38-2.40 for a
discussion of the
Ring v Arizona
[2002] USSC 3339
122 S Ct 2428
(2002) at 2449.
Ring v Arizona
[2002] USSC 3339
122 S Ct 2428
Judges may stipulate that a maximum term of life imprisonment should
have a lifetime non-parole period: 18
United States Code
3594. Note that while judges, appellate courts and State Governors may
in fact make the final decision in capital cases, juries
must not be
told that the ultimate responsibility for determining the death penalty
rests with an authority other than them: see
Caldwell v Mississippi
[1985] USSC 153
[1972] USSC 170
Gregg v Georgia
[1976] USSC 171
. It is estimated that approximately 4000 United
States juries hand down sentences for non-capital offences each year:
and R Noble, “Felony Jury Sentencing in Practice: A
Three-State Study”
Vanderbilt Law Review
. Iontcheva at 355. Plea bargaining involves a
deal between the prosecuting and defence attorneys, whereby the accused
agrees to plead
guilty, but to a lesser offence than the one with which
he or she was initially charged. In some states, a defendant may still
to be sentenced by a jury even after entering a guilty plea.
However, this is almost never done in practice for fear of upsetting
the bargain struck with the prosecution: see Iontcheva at 355 and King
and Noble at 894.
. See Iontcheva at 354.
. For example, in Kentucky and Arkansas, the
defendant cannot be sentenced by a judge following a jury trial unless
the prosecution
consents: King and Noble at 903-904 and 934. Virginian
law prohibits judicial sentencing following a guilty verdict at a jury
King and Noble at 919.
. See para 2.34 below.
. King and Noble at 891-892.
. Those states are Arkansas, Kentucky, Missouri, Texas and Virginia.
. See Iontcheva at 354-355.
. Iontcheva at 354-355.
. N J King, “How Different is Death? Jury Sentencing in Capital and Non-Capital Cases Compared” (2004) 2
Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law
195 at 195.
. See Lanni at 1792. See also The Hon R J Jackson,
“Missouri’s Jury Sentencing Law: A Relic the Legislature
to Rest” (1999) 55(1)
Missouri Bar
. See Lanni at 1791-1792.
. King (2004) at 195
. King (2004) at 195. For a critique of jury
sentencing in Missourri, see the Hon R J Jackson,
“Missouri’s Jury Sentencing
Law: A Relic the Legislature
Should Lay to Rest” (1999) 55(1)
Journal of the
Missouri Bar
14. Note that the US Supreme Court declared unitary capital proceedings to be unconstitutional:
Furman v Georgia
[1972] USSC 170
. Iontcheva at 355.
. King and Noble at 892. For example, jurors in a
rape trial in Virginia must select a sentence anywhere between five
years and life:
see King (2004) at 197.
. King and Noble at 900 and 911.
. King and Noble at 912.
. See Lanni at 1792.
. See King and Noble at 892, and Jackson at 16-17.
. King and Noble at 901-902, 908, 918-919.
. King and Noble at 941.
. Note that judges in both Arkansas and Kentucky are popularly elected.
. King and Noble at 941-946
. See Lanni at 1793; and Iontcheva at 355.
. Iontcheva at 355; King and Noble at 893,
913-914, 928-30. Note that this is in stark contrast to juries in
capital cases, where
it has been held to be constitutionally required
to provide sufficient sentencing guidelines: see para 2.28-2.29 above.
. Iontcheva at 355 and King and Noble at 893-894.
. King and Noble at 914-916, and 928-929.
. King and Noble at 911 and 931.
. King and Noble at 899-900, and 910-911. This trend can be used by the prosecution to lever a guilty plea from the defendant.
. See Iontcheva at 359 and 366-372.
[2000] USSC 57
[2004] USSC 2665
124 S Ct 2531
. Note the different approach taken by the High Court of Australia in
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
, discussed at para 2.13-2.17 above.
. See Lanni at 1776 and Jackson at 14.
. See, eg, MKB Darmer, “The Federal
Sentencing Guidelines After Blakely and Booker: The Limits of
Congressional Tolerance and
a Greater Role for Juries”
South Carolina Law Review
; E Lillquist, “The Puzzling Return of Jury Sentencing: Misgivings About Apprendi”
North Carolina Law Review
; JJ Prescott and S Starr, “Improving Criminal Jury Decision
Making After the Blakely Revolution” (2005) University of
Michigan Law School, Working Paper Series No 39 (accessed at
«www. /law.bepress.com/umichlwps/olin/art39»).
. See, eg, Hoffman.
. King and Noble at 887.
. See Jackson and the arguments advanced in Hoffman at 985-991
. See, generally, King (2004).
. See Iontcheva at 315; and Lanni.
. See Iontcheva at 359; Lanni at 1802; and Hoffman at 1000-1011.
. See Lanni at 1802.
. King and Noble at 889.
. The study involved interviews with judges,
prosecutors and defence attorneys from Arkansas, Kentucky and Virginia:
see King and
Noble at 890.
. The concept of a “plea discount”
(whereby the defendant receives a lesser penalty upon pleading guilty
than would otherwise
have been imposed following a trial resulting in a
conviction) is a pervasive feature of American criminal justice.
Consequently,
many defendants prefer to plead guilty and be sentenced
by a judge rather than risk the unpredictability of being tried and
by a jury: see King and Noble at 895-940.
. King and Noble at 889.
. As one commentator put it: “Judges are elected, jurors are votes”: King and Noble at 933.
. King and Noble at 889 and 949-962.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
3. A more direct role for juries in sentencing?
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Introduction
Public perceptions and sentencing
Jury involvement in sentencing
Means of involving the jury
Logistical questions
Issues for discussion
3.1 The Chief Justice observed in the opening of the Law Term Dinner
Speech, that public confidence in the administration of justice
of the matters that is essential to government.
The direct involvement as decision-makers of members of the public,
in their capacity as such, does more to ensure the maintenance
high level of trust and confidence in the administration of justice
than, perhaps, any other single factor.
He went on to say that:
[s]entencing engages the interest, and sometimes the passion, of
the public at large more than anything else judges do. The public
attitude to the way that judges impose sentences determines, to a
substantial extent, the state of public confidence in the
administration
of justice.
3.2 In a different context, the Chief Justice has also cautioned that
sentencing involves “a process of balancing overlapping,
contradictory and incommensurable objectives. The requirements of
deterrence, rehabilitation, denunciation, punishment and restorative
justice do not point in the same direction.” He also noted that
those who are involved in the sentencing process should not
distracted from this task by the transient pressures of short term
unpopularity with the outcome of their decisions.
3.3 As noted earlier, the task of an Australian jury is completed once a verdict has been delivered,
leaving the judge alone to determine the appropriate penalty. The
concern which arises is whether criticism of sentencing and public
perceptions of penalties being too lenient and out of step with
community expectations, risks leading to an apparent decline in
of, and confidence in, the fairness of sentencing decisions
made by judges. While recognising that some of this criticism is
ill-founded,
and that there is a danger in the selective media
reporting of sentences, the Chief Justice nevertheless acknowledged the
it can do, not only to public confidence, but also to the
overall effectiveness of the justice system. The Chief Justice
that one way of addressing this may be to provide an
opportunity for the jury to play a role in the sentencing process, with
to enhancing public confidence in it.
3.4 The essence of the Chief Justice’s proposal is that,
after a jury has found an accused person guilty of a particular
offence, the jury should continue to have a role in a process
of in camera consultations with the trial judge before any sentence
imposed on the accused. The proposal raised for consideration would
require that the jury involved in the consultation would be
composed of
at least some of the members of the jury that delivered the verdict in
the particular case:
It is not appropriate or desirable to create some kind of
artificial jury composed of persons who have not had to decide the
question of guilt. A jury that has had to turn its collective
mind to the determination of guilt has had to focus in a direct, and
not merely advisory way, on elements critical to the sentencing task.
This focus cannot be artificially created.
3.5 The Chief Justice did not suggest that the jury should actually
determine the sentence, as occurs in some United States jurisdictions.
Rather, the suggestion was that the judge should discuss relevant
issues with the jury after evidence and submissions on sentence
been received, before the judge decides on the sentence. The
consultation between judge and jury proposed was one that would
conducted in camera and protected by secrecy provisions.
3.6 The Chief Justice did not put forward the proposal as a means
of increasing the level of sentences, and made it clear that he
believe that it would have that effect. He offered the view that the
process of consultation would improve the quality of
decision-making both jury decision-making and enhance public confidence
in sentencing. He suggested that judges would welcome
assistance from a
spectrum of opinion reflecting a diversity of experience. He observed
that the sentencing process could be improved
by a judge being able to
draw on a broad range of experience. Further, the Chief Justice
considered that enabling judges to consult
with jurors as to the actual
reasons for the jury’s guilty verdict, which are currently
concealed by the secrecy surrounding
their deliberations, would assist
the sentencing process.
3.7 Chief Justice Spigelman put forward the suggestion as to an
enhanced jury role in sentencing tentatively, noting that many issues
needed to be resolved if any such proposal were to be implemented. For
example, consultation between judge and jury could intrude
secrecy of jury deliberations. Furthermore, there would be resource
implications in recalling jury members at the sentencing
stage, with
logistical difficulties arising from the delay which necessarily occurs
between the delivery of the verdict and the sentence.
3.8 We now consider in detail the following issues raised by the Chief Justice’s speech:
Public perceptions concerning the current sentencing process, and how that impacts on public confidence.
The likely effect that introducing a role for jurors in
sentencing would have on public confidence levels, sentencing decisions
the jurors themselves.
The type of input that jurors should have, eg, being asked by
the judge to explain why they found the defendant guilty, or giving
their views on questions that relate directly to sentencing.
The practical and procedural questions that would need to be
resolved before any proposal for involving the jury in the sentencing
process could be implemented.
Whether there are any Constitutional constraints in relation to any such proposal.
PUBLIC PERCEPTIONS AND SENTENCING
The importance of public opinion
3.9 Public perception can be a most powerful tool: often acting
as a catalyst for reform and influencing the decisions of policy makers.
So far as the criminal justice system is concerned, the perception in
many countries is that violent crime is spiralling out of control,
judges are out of touch with reality, and that sentences are far too
lenient for the crimes being committed.
initiatives such as the NSW Sentencing Council, by providing a forum
for community views on sentencing, and the guideline
judgments scheme,
by aiming to promote consistency in sentencing principle and
appropriate levels of sentencing, can be seen as attempts
public confidence.
3.10 The primary reason for suggesting a direct role for the
jury in sentencing is to respond to negative public perceptions and to
promote greater public confidence in the criminal justice system.
However, before considering any such reform to sentencing practice,
would be useful to examine the nature of public opinion concerning
sentencing, and the factors that fashion, or at least impact
Difficulty in ascertaining a “true” indication of public confidence
3.11 Discussion about public opinion and levels of public
confidence often proceed on the basis that it is a definable and
concept. It is generally taken for granted that media reports
of public opinion on certain subjects are accurate and well-founded.
However, research has shown that public opinion is far more diverse
than the impression given through the media.
quite malleable, and can be changed and manipulated depending on the
facts presented and the questions asked. For example,
an opinion poll
on whether the death penalty should be reintroduced would be likely to
have a higher “yes” response rate
following a particularly
gruesome murder, than if it were conducted during a less newsworthy
3.12 Studies from around the world reveal that the rate of serious crime has plateaued over the last decade,
while the incarceration rate is gradually increasing.
Despite this, public dissatisfaction with the criminal justice system’s response to crime continues to gather momentum.
Research has looked at the reasons for this apparent disparity between
statistics and perception. Studies have asked whether it indicates
the public are becoming more punitive in their approach, whether judges
actually are out of touch with public views, or whether
other factors
are operating to create a public perception that does not reflect what
is actually happening in the courts.
Research into public perceptions of sentencing
3.13 In 1987, the Australian Institute of Criminology conducted a study into public attitudes to crime and punishment.
That study surveyed a random sample of 2551 people, seeking their views
on appropriate sentencing options in response to particular
situations. The results showed that, in general, better educated and/or
wealthy people tended to be more lenient in their views
than poorer
and/or less well educated people, the elderly took a more punitive
approach than younger people, while males supported
harsher sentences
more often than females.
Overall, however, the results
reflected a diversity of opinion, with no single set of views regarding
appropriate punishments being
shared across the community. The authors
considered this diversity to be an acknowledgement among members of the
public of the complexity
of the sentencing process: a fact they felt
was often unrecognised by the tabloid press.
3.14 In the United Kingdom, jurors in 2321 cases were asked
whether or not the sentence handed down regarding the cases on which
served were roughly what they were expecting. Nearly one third
(32%) believed that they were, with the same percentage of people
having formed no opinion as to what an appropriate sentence would be.
The remaining third who considered the sentence unsatisfactory
divided between those felt it was less severe than they would have
liked (23%), and those who believed the sentence to be less
than it should have been (14%).
These statistics support findings showing the diversity of public opinion regarding sentencing.
3.15 A Canadian study yielded interesting results pointing to
the complex nature of public opinion. When asked whether offenders
of particular crimes were treated too harshly or too
leniently by the courts, a significant majority of respondents felt
courts were too lenient.
However, when asked
whether the appropriate solution to Canada’s prison
overpopulation was to build more prisons or to impose
non-custodial sentences, respondents overwhelmingly chose the latter
While these responses may appear inconsistent, commentators account for this by reason of the following:
People significantly overestimate the incidence of violent crime,
and underestimate the severity of current sentencing practices,
therefore think the courts’ response to be inadequate. People are
also more likely to support more severe sentences if
victimised by the fear of crime.
These findings have been duplicated in studies in Australia,
New Zealand,
and the United Kingdom.
Survey results will more accurately reflect the type of
question asked, the context in which it was asked, and the amount of
information
provided, rather than a definitive indication of public
Most people receive the majority of their information about
the courts and sentencing through the mass media, whose reporting of
issues is, at best, disproportionate and superficial, and at
worst, biased and inaccurate.
3.16 This last point became evident in further Canadian research, which
tested people’s reaction to particular sentences based
amount of information they received concerning each case. Those who
read only media accounts were much more inclined to feel
sentence imposed was too lenient, particularly where the media had been
critical of the judge. However, people who had access
documents relating to the same case, which set out the full facts of
both sides, were much more content with the decision
of the trial
judge. In fact, a number of people felt that the sentence was too harsh.
Consequently, the researchers conclude that the superficial portrayal
of public views in the Canadian media does not do justice to
complexity of the public’s actual opinion.
These same results have been found in Australia,
the United Kingdom,
and the United States
showing that people are much more inclined to consider sentences to be
appropriate, and more open to alternatives to imprisonment,
are made fully aware of the facts of particular cases.
Media and public opinion
3.17 As the Chief Justice pointed out in his speech, the media
play a significant role in relaying, shaping and distorting public
opinion. Systematic allegations by the media of leniency in sentencing
are not only ill-informed, but also chip away at public confidence
skew public perception.
The Chief Justice acknowledged
that mistakes in sentencing occasionally do occur. Unfortunately, these
tend to be the only examples
highlighted in the media, giving the
impression that those decisions are widespread and typical. This may
have the ironic, and unintended,
effect not only of creating an
unwarranted fear of crime and lack of confidence in the criminal
justice system, but also of dissipating
the deterrent purpose of
sentencing by sending a message to would-be offenders that there is a
significant chance they will not be
punished severely.
3.18 This issue has also been discussed by the Chief Justice of
Victoria, who speaks from personal experience when describing the
sentencing process as “stressful, worrying and gut
wrenching”.
Like Chief Justice Spigelman, Chief
Justice Warren has welcomed community debate on sentencing, and
recognised the importance of
public confidence in the sentencing
process. However, she too noted that the media may distort the
public’s view of sentencing
by selective reporting. While this is
to some extent the nature of the news media, when it comes to
sentencing, it cannot possible
convey the full picture as presented to
3.19 By their very nature, the news media provide the public
with information that is new, or out of the ordinary, and therefore
of comment. Since offenders convicted of violent crimes are
newsworthy, and since sentencing is the most visible aspect of the
process, it is not surprising that sentencing decisions are a
fertile source for media reports. It is also not surprising that only
the most salacious details of a select few cases are ever reported.
3.20 It is right and necessary that the media report on crime
and punishment and generate public debate. In doing so, they also have
a responsibility to report the truth to ensure that debate is fully
informed. We acknowledge that court documents can be bulky and
difficult to understand, which does not translate well with the news
media’s need to present clear, timely and interesting
However, stories on sentencing are often scant on detail to the point
of inaccuracy, and fail to present a balanced picture.
This can slant
public opinion unfairly, and create unwarranted fear by suggesting that
crime is out of control, and that the courts
continually flout public
opinion by imposing excessively lenient sentences. In this way, while
claiming to reflect public opinion,
the media are in fact creating it
with no realistic or accurate basis. This can feed into the legislative
and policy process, since
no policy maker wants to be seen as
unresponsive to public views, or as soft on crime.
3.21 As Chief Justice Spigelman noted, there is as much point in
complaining about selective media reporting as there is in complaining
opinion as the one under discussion, it is important to at least
acknowledge that what we take for granted as representing public
opinion, may not in fact be all that it appears.
JURY INVOLVEMENT IN SENTENCING
3.22 In this section, we discuss the broad concept of involving the jury in the sentencing process.
We note the advantages and disadvantages of jury involvement, with
particular reference to the potential impact on public confidence,
sentencing decisions, and on the jurors themselves.
Potential impact on public confidence
3.23 Media reports following the Chief Justice’s speech
indicate that victim’s groups generally regard the proposal to
require judges to canvass the views of jurors before deciding on a
sentence to be a positive move, providing judges with a “reality
3.24 The underlying assumption of those groups is that the
public would have greater confidence in the sentencing decisions made
judges, if they had direct access to community expectations about
appropriate penalties, as conveyed through the jury members. In
way, it is thought that the public may be less likely to feel that
sentencing decisions are out of step with public opinion
on crime and
sentencing.
3.25 On the other hand, however, there is reportedly a concern
among the legal profession that the proposal could lead to more
uncertainty
and anxiety than it resolves.
There are a
number of practical difficulties with the proposal, discussed below at
paragraph 3.50-3.65, which, if not redressed,
could actually have a
negative impact on public confidence. For example, because it is
proposed that the consultations between the
judge and jury be secret,
there would be no way of accurately conveying to the public what was
said by jury members, and whether
the jury’s views were reflected
at all in the ultimate sentence.
3.26 Further, as noted above, it is arguable that the commonly
held view that sentencing practice has become far too lenient is based
largely on perception, generated through the media, rather than
reality. As also discussed above, research consistently indicates
people are much more inclined to agree with the sentences handed down
by judges when they are apprised of all of the facts and
background.
Should this research be bourne out in practice, then jurors, who would
be aware of all aspects of the case, having heard
the arguments for
both sides, may be more likely to support a sentence that would match
that favoured by the judge.
3.27 Should this trend emerge, there are two possible, and
conflicting, outcomes so far as public confidence is concerned. First,
public confidence may increase as people would be reassured that judges
are not as out of step with public opinion as portrayed in
when that public opinion is fully informed. However, the second, and
arguably more likely, outcome is that public confidence
would continue
to falter as there would be no dramatic increase in sentence severity,
and the perception of excessive leniency would
remain. The danger with
this possible outcome is that not only would judges continue to be
publicly criticised for their sentencing
decisions, but the jury would
be implicated as well. This could have the unintended irony of eroding
public confidence in the jury
system, rather than increasing confidence
in the sentencing process.
Potential impact on sentencing decisions
3.28 As the Chief Justice noted in his speech, jury involvement
in sentence determination may result in sentences that better reflect
community expectations by encompassing a broader range of opinions. He
also referred to what some judges describe as the “difficulty
loneliness” of the sentencing task, and expressed the view that
many judges would welcome the assistance of jurors’
In particular, the Chief Justice considered that juries could assist on
matters relevant to sentencing by offering opinions on the
the crime, or the chance of the offender committing a similar crime.
3.29 However, many commentators doubt the efficacy of any
proposal involving the jury in the sentencing process, and its impact
sentencing decisions. Some feel that jurors may take into account
irrelevant or unrealistic considerations when expressing their
opinions. For many on the jury panel, sitting through a trial will have
been their closest, and possibly first, exposure to the criminal
and, particularly in cases involving gruesome evidence, will be the
worst thing they have ever seen. The fear has been expressed
could lead to “mob sentencing”, with jurors wanting
retribution and recommending that judges impose sentences
at the most
severe end of the scale, regardless of any mitigating factors.
3.30 Chief Justice Spigelman stated in his speech that he did
not propose jury involvement in sentencing with the aim of introducing
harsher sentences. Indeed, he referred to studies, discussed at
paragraph 3.13-3.16 above, that indicate jurors are not significantly
more harsh in the views on sentencing than judges. In any event, under
the possible system identified by the Chief Justice, jurors
express opinions, with the final decision to be made by the judge.
3.31 Opponents of jury involvement in sentencing also believe
that it would result in a lack of consistency in sentencing, which
in turn impact on public confidence.
It can be difficult enough to get twelve jurors to agree on a verdict, let alone a sentencing option.
Once again, this may not be of tremendous concern, since the ultimate
decision is to be made by the judge and not the jurors. However,
jury’s views are truly to be taken into account by the judge, it
is argued that there may still be an element of disagreement
inconsistency.
3.32 This raises the related consideration of how effective the
proposal would ultimately be. Would hearing the diverse opinions of
twelve people actually help a judge reach a more accurate conclusion
than he or she would otherwise have reached after examining
evidence and hearing submissions?
If the role of the jury
in sentencing is confined to the advisory role proposed by the Chief
Justice, would it ever be more than
a token gesture?
Potential impact on jurors
3.33 In his speech, the Chief Justice noted that jurors are
often interested in the sentencing process, with some attending the
hearings following the trials in which they participated.
However, others have argued that having an interest in the process is
from wanting, or being compelled, to attend a sentencing
hearing and actively participate.
Not all jurors want to
be involved at this level. Having already given up days, or weeks, of
their time during the trial, jurors
may be reluctant to submit to
further disruption of their work and family lives.
3.34 It is also argued that the primary role of the jury as
determiners of guilt is difficult enough. Requiring jurors to have
into sentencing could serve as a further distraction and add to
their stress levels.
Opponents of the proposal also
consider it to be too difficult a task for jurors, who have no legal
training, no experience in sentencing,
and are unaware of typical
sentences and trends.
Sentencing involves an instinctive understanding of legislation, principles, trends and guidelines, which jurors do not have.
Some suggest that it would be “unnecessary, time-consuming, and
expensive to educate every jury member on the intricacies of
law” which, it is argued, would need to happen if the
consultation process is to be meaningful.
Moreover, there
is the problem of the jury being influenced by their perceptions of the
community reaction to the offence, as portrayed
by the media during the
interval between verdict and sentence, which can sometimes be quite
intense and vitriolic.
3.35 These arguments, however, may be overstating the problem.
According to the model discussed by the Chief Justice, the jury’s
role would be an advisory one only: limited to answering specifically
targeted questions, such as the prospects of re-offending,
perceived gravity of the offence, or the reasons for their verdict.
While jurors would need to have a basic understanding
of the sentencing
process and their role in it, it does not follow that they would need
to be aware of every intricacy of sentencing
law and practice.
The information that jurors may need to have access to if they have a
role in sentencing is discussed at paragraph 3.57-3.58 below.
3.36 Perhaps the most cogent argument against the proposal, so
far as the impact on jurors is concerned, is the possibility that
they will have a role in sentencing may influence the
jury’s verdict. Commentators have expressed concern that
involving jurors
in two stages of the criminal justice process may
prejudice their primary role in determining the verdict. Jurors who may
trouble reaching a decision could compromise on their
verdict. For example, some jurors may decide to agree to convict a
in circumstances where they would otherwise remain doubtful,
because they believe they will have a role in convincing the judge to
impose a lenient sentence.
There is also the related fear
that expanding the jury’s role in sentencing would lead jurors to
consider external, or even
irrelevant, facts when determining the
verdict. However, as noted in the previous chapter, it not always
possible under the present
system to know the evidence on which the
jury bases its verdict.
MEANS OF INVOLVING THE JURY
3.37 Having discussed the broad concept of greater jury
involvement in the sentencing process, we look in this section at the
in which such involvement could be facilitated. In the previous
chapter, we note that there have been occasions where judges have
jurors to answer specific questions of fact as part of their verdict,
in certain circumstances, provided those facts related
to essential
elements of the offence, and not to sentencing matters alone. Here, we
examine the possibility that jurors should be
able to answer questions
following their guilty verdict that relate solely to sentencing, such
as how serious they believe the offence
to be, and the likelihood of
the offender committing the same offence again. We also look at the
propriety and possible consequences
of judges asking jurors to disclose
the facts on which their guilty verdict was based.
Clarifying the facts supporting a guilty verdict
3.38 As discussed in Chapter 2, a guilty verdict may not always
reveal which aspects of the offender’s conduct the jury found
be proven beyond reasonable doubt, or what the jury believed about the
offender’s mental state. At present, the sentencing
“fill in the gaps” by forming his or her own view of the
facts upon which the jury based their decision. The
main constraint on
the sentencing judge in this respect is that the sentence must not
conflict with the jury’s verdict,
and must not take into account any matters of aggravation which could amount to a more serious offence.
3.39 The issue of judges asking jurors questions concerning the
reason for their verdict is a contentious one, and has been raised
discussion on previous occasions.
In certain cases
involving manslaughter, where the jury’s verdict could have been
based on a number of possible scenarios,
courts have raised the
possibility that the jury should be asked to disclose the reason for
its verdict.
The risks involved in asking jurors to clarify the reasons for their verdict were summed up by Justice Stephen:
Care must no doubt be taken to ensure both that the foreman clearly
understands the nature of the question and that he is fully capable
answering it, that is, that he in fact knows what are the grounds which
have led his fellow jurors to their verdict. If there
has been no
unanimity as to grounds or if individual jurors have not disclosed, and
may, indeed, not be prepared to disclose, their
grounds the foreman
cannot of course, supply the information sought. It should be made
clear to him that his function is only to
answer to the best of his
ability the question asked, ensuring that, if answered, it does truly
reflect the jury’s unanimous
view. The question should, of
course, be so confined as to ensure that it does not invite any
spontaneous general disclosure of the
jury’s deliberations.
3.40 As noted in the previous chapter, Justice Kirby has also given
qualified support to the idea, in relation to a drug importation
provided proper safeguards are put in place to protect the secrecy of
jury deliberations.
However, the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal has indicated that, while
trial judges have the power to ask jurors the reasons for their
verdict, this is not a practice that should be encouraged.
3.41 This Commission previously considered this issue two decades ago. In Discussion Paper 12, we tentatively proposed that:
where alternative bases for a conviction (which have different
consequences for sentencing) are left to a jury, the judge should
to determine which basis the jury accepted. … [I]n
such cases, the judge should direct the jury in the summing-up to
on which ground the verdict is based. When the verdict is
rendered in such a way that the ground accepted is not clear, the judge
should first ask the foreman whether the jury reached a unanimous view
as to which ground it accepted. If the foreman affirms that
was unanimous on this issue, the judge should then ask which ground was
accepted . The judge should then be bound, in sentencing,
jury’s view of the facts.
3.42 In Report 48, we considered there to be merit in the proposal that
the determination of sentence should reflect the jury’s
of facts. However, the Commission could not agree on how the jury
should be questioned as to the basis for its verdict, and
so deferred
making a recommendation.
Benefits of the proposal
3.43 Clearly, the major benefit of the proposal to question the
jury as to the reasons for its verdict is to take some of the
work” out of sentencing, where there are a number of
bases on which the jury could have convicted the defendant. This could
assist judges to impose sentences that more accurately reflect the
nature and degree of the offender’s wrongdoing as found
jury. It could also uncover potential defects in the jury’s
decision-making process, which the trial judge could point
appeal court.
Problems with the proposal
3.44 The NSW Court of Criminal Appeal listed the following
problems associated with asking questions of a jury concerning their
1. To inform the jury, in the course of a summing-up, that
they will later be invited to answer a question, or questions, as to
basis of the verdict, may distract them from their task of seeking
unanimity on a general verdict, and provoke unnecessary confusion
disagreement as to the basis of the verdict.
2. The jury’s response to any such question may be unclear. A
response that indicated two grounds of decision might, depending
the circumstances, indicate that the jury were unanimous on both
grounds, or that some jurors adopted one ground, and the remainder
adopted another. The response may create more uncertainty than
previously existed.
3. There may be various possible views of the evidence in a
case; different jurors may adopt different views and yet, consistently
with their directions, reach a common verdict. To invite them to refine
their verdict may be productive of mischief.
4. There is a substantial risk that the jury will be invited to
make a decision upon which they have not been properly addressed by
5. Where there are two or more accused the jury might choose to
answer the question with respect to one or more and not with respect
another or others. This would be invidious.
6. The judge may be embarrassed if he or she does not agree with the jury’s answer to the question.
7. Where two or more partial defences are advanced, if the jury
were to come to a conclusion favourable to an accused on the first
defence they considered, they might not consider the other or others;
if that occurred, an answer to the question might convey a
impression of having considered and rejected the other or others.
A further drawback is that consultation between the judge and jury may
undermine the secrecy of jury deliberations, as details
decision-making process may be revealed.
Commentators
have described it as “vital for the protection of jurors and to
the administration of justice that jury members
may speak freely,
anonymously and confidentially without fear of later judicial
Jury deliberations may also be
prejudiced if they are later to be exposed to public criticism on the
basis that the reasoning may
appear contentious or to involve some
degree of compromise.
Asking the jury to express opinions following conviction
3.46 One element of the Chief Justice’s proposal was that
judges should be able to ask jurors their opinions on matters
directly to sentencing, which may not have been relevant for
their verdict in relation to guilt. The questions could be in relation
to submissions brought before the sentencing hearing, including those
which were of a subjective nature. Examples of the type of
information
identified, include opinions as to the likelihood of the offender
re-offending, the chances of rehabilitation, and the
gravity of the
conduct involved.
3.47 This would involve a departure from the current position
at common law, discussed in the previous chapter, in three respects.
First, it involves the jury in helping determine matters of sentencing
only. Secondly, it provides for a role for the jury following
of the verdict, even though it has been assumed, as a matter of law,
that once they have delivered a verdict, their role
is concluded.
Thirdly, it would involve the jury in giving an advisory, non-binding
opinion, which would not be reflected in a verdict.
3.48 The advantage of jury involvement is that sentencing
judges might have greater confidence that the sentences they hand down
contemporary social values. This would be especially relevant
in cases where there are complicating or extenuating circumstances
may mitigate against either the gravity of the offence or the severity
of the sentence. For example, in cases where an offender
convicted of manslaughter involving euthanasia, or following years of
domestic violence abuse, public opinion may tend towards
a more lenient
sentence being imposed than would otherwise be the case.
3.49 The disadvantage is that there is likely to be a diversity
of opinion among jurors, which may ultimately be of little assistance
to the sentencing judge. There is no way of knowing whether or not the
opinion of twelve people drawn randomly from the community
fact, reflect contemporary social values. Nor is there any way of
knowing whether or not the opinion may be based on a juror’s
personal experience, prejudice or bias, or represents an impartial and
independent assessment of the evidence and submissions presented
the sentencing hearing. Ironically, this is more likely to be the case
in relation to offences involving contentious social
issues, such as
the examples in the above paragraph, where judges could benefit most
from greater exposure to public opinion.
LOGISTICAL QUESTIONS
3.50 As the Chief Justice noted in his speech, his proposal gives rise to a number of practical issues that need to be resolved.
Potential for inconvenience and delay
3.51 At paragraph 3.33-3.36, we discussed the potential impact
of the Chief Justice’s proposal on jurors, noting that not all
members of a jury panel may want to participate in sentencing the
offender they have just convicted. The Chief Justice referred in
speech to recalling “such proportion of the jury as is able to
the possibility that a judge could consult, on matters of sentencing,
with less than the full complement of jurors who determined
verdict. This in turn raises the question whether jury participation in
sentencing ought to be voluntary, or compulsory unless
possible or practical for jurors to attend.
3.52 Compulsory attendance at a sentencing hearing would
involve further inconvenience for jurors and greater administrative
Moreover, recalling a jury panel for sentencing
purposes is not the same as empanelling jurors in the first place.
Originally, twelve
jurors are chosen at random from a large pool of
candidates. The trial date is set, and the selection of the jury fits
around that
date. In sentencing, however, only the twelve defined
people who delivered the particular verdict are eligible. Accordingly,
sentencing hearing, or at least the consultation between the judge
and jury on sentencing issues, would need to be held at a time
maximum number of jurors would be able to attend if the exercise is to
be of any benefit. Given that sentencing hearings
usually involve a
delay sometimes of six weeks or more from the conclusion of the trial,
in order to prepare the necessary evidence
and secure the availability
of the participants, the additional need to recall as many jury members
as possible could contribute
to further delay.
3.53 It may not be possible or practicable for all of the jurors
to attend. Some may die, or fall ill or have commitments outside
needed to make consultation on sentencing fair and worthwhile.
jury participation in sentencing proceed if less than half of the
original panel are available at the time of the sentencing
While jurors are currently required to agree unanimously on a verdict,
they need not agree on their interpretation of the facts leading to the
verdict. Consequently, hearing from only a few of the jury
panel at the
sentencing stage may not give the judge the full picture of the facts
on which the guilty verdict was based, which is
one of the primary
rationales for securing jury involvement.
3.54 There would also need to be some parity between sentencing
hearings. For example, questions of fairness could arise where one
offender was sentenced after the judge heard the views of twelve
jurors, and another was sentenced at a separate hearing where a
number of jurors were available for consultation. While it is certainly
desirable to expedite the sentencing process, this
must occur within
the bounds of procedural fairness.
Question of timing
3.55 Some of the issues discussed above could be addressed by
the timing of the jury’s involvement in the sentencing process.
As previously noted, the sentencing hearing takes place weeks, or even
months, after the jury delivers its guilty verdict. In the
jurors may forget their exact reasons for reaching the views they did
during their deliberations. More significantly, jurors
influenced in the meantime by factors external to the evidence
presented at trial and due to be brought at the sentencing
This would be particularly likely in high profile cases with extensive
media coverage. The problems inherent with jurors having virtually
instant access through the Internet to prejudicial information about
their cases has been highlighted in recent decisions before
Court of Criminal Appeal.
These difficulties would be compounded in the time lag between verdict and sentencing.
3.56 An alternative is for the judge to consult with the jury as
to their views on sentencing immediately following delivery of a
verdict. This would have the advantage of not requiring the jury to be
recalled at a later date, and so avoid the associated
problems with juror unavailability. The evidence from the trial, and
the reasons why they chose the verdict they did would
be fresh in their
minds. However, the major drawback of this approach is that the jury
would not have access to potentially important
information specifically
on sentencing that was not presented at the trial. Nor would they have
the opportunity to hear submissions
on sentencing brought by counsel
for both sides relating to aggravating or mitigating factors, or to the
subjective considerations
that are a critical part of the sentencing
process. As a result, their input would be less valuable to the
sentencing judge.
Jurors’ information needs
3.57 At the sentencing hearing, information that has a bearing
on the type and length of penalty an offender should receive is
to the court. That information will generally differ from the
evidence brought forward during the trial, given that it is intended
for a different purpose. This is particularly the case with any
Victim’s Impact Statement, or a report from the Probation and
Parole Service or Department of Juvenile Justice, if required.
3.58 In our
Majority Verdicts
Report, we examined the
question of jurors’ information needs during a trial. We looked
at studies revealing that jurors generally
found it quite difficult to
understand the law and the evidence, and were assisted in their
comprehension by receiving clear instructions
from the judge,
preferably at the start of the trial and in writing.
also helped if jurors were made aware of the ability to take notes and
ask questions of the judge. Even though jurors would not
be expected to
be the ultimate decision makers, nevertheless, consideration would
still need to be given to the type of information
jurors would receive
during the sentencing phase, and the manner in which it is presented,
if jurors are to make a meaningful contribution
to sentencing.
Procedural issues
3.59 The issue of how the consultations are to be conducted also
needs to be resolved. The Chief Justice’s proposal contemplates
that the judge should consult with members of the jury in private as to
their views on certain aspects of sentencing, after they
had listened
to the evidence presented during the sentencing hearing. This would
have the benefit of protecting jurors, and guarding
against intrusions
into the secrecy of jury deliberations. However, critics of the
proposal claim that the secrecy of the consultations
would be a denial
of natural justice and run contrary to the tradition of justice being
run in an open court.
3.60 It is unclear the extent to which the secrecy provisions
would, or should, apply. The proposal identified by the Chief Justice
left open the suggestion that a trial judge would be able to inform an
appeal court of any possible errors in the jury’s decision-making
process which were revealed as a result of consultations on sentencing.
If so, this would undermine the requirement that the consultations
held in camera, and intrude into the veil of secrecy that has been
observed in relation to jury deliberations. On the other hand,
judges were restricted in the ability to report the content of the
discussions to the appeal court, or include details of the
consultation
in the reasons for the sentence handed down, then the extent to which
the jury’s views were taken into consideration
in determining the
sentence would remain unknown. In this event, the consultation process
would be likely to have little impact on
public confidence.
3.61 The structure of the consultations also needs to be
addressed. For example, would all jurors need to be consulted at the
time? Should the judge have to consult individually with all of
the jurors able to attend the sentencing hearing, or should the
speak on behalf of the jurors? As noted earlier, while
jurors may agree with each other on the verdict, they may each hold a
view of the facts on which the verdict was based, or on other
matters of relevance to sentencing. Consequently, consulting only with
a spokesperson may give the judge an incomplete picture of the
jury’s views. On the other hand, it is questionable how useful
judge would find twelve different opinions on the facts pertinent to
sentencing.
3.62 At paragraph 3.51-3.52 above, we discussed the issue of
whether or not jurors should be compelled to participate in sentencing.
If it is compulsory for jurors to attend the sentencing hearing, what
should happen if one or more of the jurors attends but refuses
reveal their views on sentencing issues, or reasons for supporting a
guilty verdict?
3.63 Another issue that needs to be considered is whether or
not a defendant should be able to ask that the jury not be involved in
the sentencing process. Apart from raising questions of parity, matters
of public policy would also be involved. If jury input into
were to be adopted as a means of ensuring that sentences reflect
community values, should the public interest in jury
involvement in
sentencing outweigh the defendant’s wish to be sentenced by a
judge alone? Further, it may be more likely that
offenders convicted of
particularly gruesome crimes, such as rape, murder or child sexual
offences, would seek to avoid the involvement
of the jury in
sentencing.
3.64 Finally, it is not unusual for Commonwealth and State
offences to be heard together in the one trial. In its current
examination
of sentencing of federal offenders, the Australian Law
Reform Commission has provisionally proposed that juries should not be
in the sentencing process.
Should this be
accepted, and some form of jury involvement be implemented at State
level, it would create an uneasy synthesis in
trials involving both
Commonwealth and State offences. Juries would be able to deliver a
guilty verdict regarding both types of offences,
but only have a
sentencing role with regard to State offences.
3.65 We are not aware of any Constitutional barriers to juries performing an advisory role in the sentencing process.
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
Should jurors be involved directly in the sentencing process?
What are the benefits and detriments of jury involvement in sentencing?
What would be the likely effect of jury involvement on public confidence in the sentencing process?
Is there a more effective way of
addressing the issue of public confidence in sentencing decisions, and
if so, what should it be?
What effect would jury involvement be likely to have on sentencing decisions?
How should consultation between
judges and jurors be conducted? For example, should the consultation be
a structured one, where the
jury answers specific questions put to them
by the judge, or should there be more open discussion?
What sort of questions should a sentencing judge be able to ask a jury?
Should jurors be asked to clarify the reasons for their guilty verdict? Why or why not?
Are there other ways that jurors can be involved in the sentencing process?
How can judges protect the secrecy of jury deliberations while consulting with the jury on aspects of sentencing?
Should it be compulsory for jurors to participate in the sentencing process?
What is the minimum number of jurors required to
give the judge a fair and accurate indication of the jury’s views
on sentencing?
What should happen if the minimum number of
jurors cannot be assembled for the sentencing hearing within a
reasonable period following
conviction of the offender?
At what stage following a guilty verdict should the jury be consulted as to their views on sentencing?
Should jurors receive access to all the
information that the sentencing judge would have, including any
Victim’s Impact Statement
and sentencing guidelines? In what
format should this information be presented?
To what extent should the judge explain sentencing law and practice to the jury?
Should each juror be consulted regarding his or
her views on sentencing, or should the foreperson convey the
jury’s views to
the judge? If there is disagreement among jurors
as to the appropriate approach to sentencing, should all views be
presented to the
judge, or only a unanimous or majority view?
What should happen if the jurors cannot agree on
the questions left to them by the judge, or on the opinions that they
wish to offer?
What should happen if a juror refuses to disclose his or her views?
Do you agree that consultation
between the judge and jury should occur in private without the presence
of counsel for both sides?
Should all aspects of the consultation be
kept secret ( eg, the number of jurors consulted), or only some
aspects, and if so, which
Should the defendant be able to request that the jury not be involved in the sentencing process? If so, in what circumstances?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
. The Honourable JJ Spigelman AC, Chief Justice of New South
Wales, “A New Way to Sentence for Serious Crime”, Address
for the Annual Opening of Law Term Dinner for the Law Society of New
South Wales (31 January 2005). See
www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/sc/sc.nsf/pages/spigelman_310105».
. The Honourable JJ Spigelman AC, Chief Justice of
New South Wales, Address to the Parole Authorities Conference (10 May
www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/sc/sc.nsf/pages/SCO_spigelman100506»
. Or, in the case of a hung jury, where no verdict can be delivered and the jury is discharged.
. See para 2.18-2.43 for a comparative look at jury sentencing in the United States.
. See para 1.6-1.47 for a description of the current sentencing process.
. D Indermaur, “Public Perceptions of Sentencing in Perth, Western Australia” (1987) 20
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
163 at 163.
. For a detailed analysis of the complexity of
public opinion and its impact on sentencing law and policy in Australia
and overseas,
see J Roberts, L Stalans, D Indermaur and M Hough,
Penal Populism and Public Opinion – Lessons from Five Countries
(Oxford University Press, New York, 2003).
. See discussion below at para 3.11-3.21.
. See NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
NSW Recorded Crime Statistics 2005
(relased 10 April 2006); see also the interactive Crime Trends Tool
accessed at «www.bocd.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/bocd/cmd/crime
trends/». See also Roberts, Stalans, Indermaur and Hough at
. See J Fitzgerald, “Trends in Sentencing in the New South Wales Criminal Courts: 1990-2000” 62
Crime and Justice Bulletin
1 (BOCSAR, November, 2001). See also Roberts, Stalans, Indermaur and Hough at 19.
. See Roberts, Stalans, Indermaur and Hough; and
Indermaur (1987) at 163; see also United Kingdom Parliament,
“Public Attitudes
Towards Sentencing: Research Findings” at
«www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm199798/cmselect/cmhaff/486/…».
In a recent New Zealand survey, respondents were asked to rate the job
done by a number of criminal justice officials. Judges, along
prison service, received the lowest rankings: see J Paulin, W Searle
and T Knaggs,
Attitudes to Crime and Punishment: A New Zealand Study
(December 2003, Ministry of Justice, Wellington, New Zealand) accessed
at «www.justice.govt.nz/pubs/reports/2003/publicattitudes».
. J Walker, M Collins and P Wilson, “How the public sees sentencing: an Australian survey”
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
(No 4, April 1987, Australian Institute of Criminology).
. Walker, Collins and Wilson at 6.
. Walker, Collins and Wilson at 6.
. M Zander and P Henderson,
The Royal Commission on Criminal Justice: The Crown Court Study
(Research Study No 19, 1993) at para 8.8.3.
. See also United Kingdom Parliament,
“Public Attitudes Towards Sentencing: Research Findings” at
«www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm199798/cmselect/cmhaff/486/…».
. See AN Doob and JV Roberts, “Public
punitiveness and public knowledge of the facts: some Canadian
surveys” in N Walker
and M Hough,
Public Attitudes to Sentencing: Surveys from Five Countries
(Gower Publishing Co Ltd, Great Britain, 1988) at 111-113. See also JV
Roberts and AN Doob, “Sentencing and Public Opinion:
Taking False
Shadows for True Substances”
(1999) 27(3)
Osgoode Hall Law Journal
at 494-496 and 497-499.
. Doob and Roberts in Walker and Hough at 113; Roberts and Doob at 504.
. M Hough, H Lewis and N Walker, “Factors
associated with ‘punitiveness’ in England and Wales”
in Walker and
Hough at 210-211.
. Indermaur (1987) at 175-177.
. Paulin, Searle and Knaggs.
. N Walker, M Hough and H Lewis, “Tolerance
of Leniency and Severity in England and Wales” in Walker and
Hough at 185-186.
. See also Indermaur (1987) at 163.
. Doob and Roberts in Walker and Hough at 113-133;
Roberts and Doob at 499-501. See also Indermaur (1987) at 164. A study
in the United
Kingdom revealed that 91% of people surveyed gained most
of their information about crime from the print and electronic media.
study also found that readers of the tabloid press were more
likely to hold punitive views regarding sentencing than other readers:
M Hough, H Lewis and N Walker, “Factors associated with
‘punitiveness’ in England and Wales” in Walker and
Hough at 212-213.
. Doob and Roberts in Walker and Hough at 124-133; Roberts and Doob at 501.
. Doob and Roberts in Walker and Hough at 131-132.
. Indermaur (1987); J Walker, M Collins and P Wilson, “How the public sees sentencing: an Australian survey”
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
(No 4, April 1987, Australian Institute of Criminology).
. A Ashworth and M Hough, “Sentencing and the Climate of Opinion”
Criminal Law Review
; see also Zander and Henderson.
. See Roberts, Stalans, Indermaur and Hough. See also M J Hindelang,
Public Opinion Regarding Crime: Criminal Justice and Related Topics
(US Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, 1975).
. See The Hon JJ Spigelman, “Sentencing Guideline Judgments”
Australian Law Journal
. Her Honour Justice Marilyn Warren, Chief Justice
of Victoria “Sentencing Opinion Piece” (11 April 2005) (see
«www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au»).
. For a discussion on the media’s influence
on public opinion and sentencing policy, see Roberts, Stalans,
Indermaur and Hough
. The details of how the proposal might be implemented are discussed at para 3.37-3.63 below.
. M Pelly, “Lawyers uneasy over plan for jury sentencing role”
Sydney Morning Herald
(2 February 2005).
. M Pelly, “Lawyers uneasy over plan for jury sentencing role”
Sydney Morning Herald
(2 February 2005).
. See discussion at
Criminal Law Journal
. The benefits and drawbacks of involving the jury in this manner are discussed at para 3.46-3.49.
. J McIntyre, “The role of juries in sentencing”
at 56; M Pelly, “Give jury a say in sentence: top judge”
Sydney Morning Herald
(1 February 2005); and “Sentencing Could Benefit from Jury Input:
NSW Chief Justice” (2 February 2005): (see
«www.findlawaustralia.com.au/news»).
. McIntyre at 56.
. An example is the recent experience of the
United States jury in the sentencing of Zacarias Moussaoui for his role
in the terrorist
attacks of September 11, 2001. It was reported that
the jury had difficulty in reaching a unanimous decision on many of the
involved: see M Coultan, “Americans divided over Moussaoui
Sydney Morning Herald
(Friday, 5 May 2006 at 7);
and P Hirschkorn, “Jury spares 9/11 plotter Moussaoui”
(accessed at
«www.cnn.com/2006/LAW/05/03/moussaoui.verdict/»).
Criminal Law Journal
. McIntyre at 56.
. McIntyre at 57.
. M Pelly, “Lawyers uneasy over plan for jury sentencing role”
Sydney Morning Herald
(2 February 2005); K Gibbs “NSW Chief Justice advises greater
role for jurors” (11 February 2005) at
«www.lawyersweekly.com.au/articles/b4/0c02c9b4.asp»;
McIntyre at 57.
. McIntyre at 56.
. McIntyre at 56.
. McIntyre at 56. See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(Discussion Paper 70) at para 13.90-13.91.
Criminal Law Journal
Criminal Law Journal
at 363; McIntyre at 56.
Savvas v The Queen
[1995] HCA 29
(1995) 69 ALJR 564.
R v De Simoni
[1981] HCA 31
(1981) 147 CLR 383.
. See, eg, New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Discussion Paper 12, 1985) (“NSWLRC DP12”); New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986) (“NSWLRC Report 48”) at para 8.16-8.20; and Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(2005, Issues Paper 29) at para 11.58-11.61.
Veen v The Queen (No 1)
[1979] HCA 7
(1979) 143 CLR 458
(1991) 57 A Crim R 8.
Veen v The Queen (No 1)
[1979] HCA 7
(1979) 143 CLR 458
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
. See para 2.14.
(1997) 41 NSWLR 374
at 379-380. See also
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
. NSWLRC DP12 at para 9.17.
. NSWLRC Report 48 at para 8.19-8.20.
Criminal Law Journal
Isaacs v The Queen
(1997) 41 NSWLR 374
at 379-380.
Criminal Law Journal
at 363; McIntyre at 57.
. McIntyre at 57.
. See para 2.2-2.17.
. Issues such as these naturally involve competing questions of public policy and differences in personal beliefs.
. McIntyre at 57.
. See McIntyre at 57.
. Although the Government has announced that
majority verdicts will be introduced in criminal trials in NSW: see K
Burke and M Pelly,
“Law waves goodbye to 12 angry men”
Sydney Morning Herald
(10 November 2005); and D Fisher, “An end to hung juries – Laws introduced to allow majority verdicts”
Daily Telegraph
(10 November 2005).
. Procedural fairness issues are discussed at para 3.59-3.64 below.
. McIntyre at 57.
[2003] NSWCCA 406
(2003) 59 NSWLR 431
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86.
The issue of jury access to prejudicial reports is also discussed in See M Chesterman, J Chan, S Hampton,
Managing Prejudicial Publicity
(February 2001, Justice Research Centre, Law and Justice Foundation of
NSW). See also Her Honour Justice Virginia Bell, “How
to Preserve
the Integrity of Jury Trials in a Mass Media Age” (Speech at the
Supreme and Federal Courts Judges’ Conference,
27 January 2005)
accessed at
«www.lawlink/supreme_court/11_sc.nsf/SCO_speech_bell_270105».
Majority Verdicts
(Report 111, August 2005) at para 4.17-4.46.
. McIntyre at 57.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(2005, Discussion Paper 70) preliminary view expressed at para 13.94-13.95.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
Table of cases
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
AB v The Queen
[1999] HCA 46
(1999) 198 CLR 111
Apprendi v New Jersey
[2000] USSC 57
(2000) ... 2.27, 2.38, 2.40
Attorney General's Application No 1 of 2002
(2002) 56 NSWLR 46
Attorney General’s Application No 2 of 2002
[2002] NSWCCA 515
Attorney General’s Application No 3 of 2002
(2004) 6 NSWLR 305
Blakely v. Washington
[2004] USSC 2665
124 S Ct 2531
(2004) ... 2.39
Bugmy v The Queen
[1990] HCA 18
(1990) 169 CLR 525
Caldwell v Mississippi
[1985] USSC 153
(1995) ... 2.27
Cameron v The Queen
(2002) 209 CLR 339 ... 1.33
Cheung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
... 1.6, 1.21, 2.1, 2.11, 2.13 2.17, 3.40
(1992) 28 NSWLR 593
Director of Public Prosecutions v Nasralla
[1967] 2 AC 238 ... .2.11
Furman v Georgia
[1972] USSC 170
(1972) ... .2.28-2.29
Gregg v Georgia
[1976] USSC 171
(1976) ... 2.29
Kingswell v The Queen
[1985] HCA 72
(1985) 159 CLR 264
... 1.6, 2.11-2.12
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
(1984) 154 CLR 606
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
(2005) 215 ALR 213
... 1.9, 1.11, 1.32-1.34, 1.45
Maxwell v The Queen
[1996] HCA 46
(1996) 184 CLR 501
Myerson v The King
[1908] HCA 14
(1908) 5 CLR 596
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
(1998) 194 CLR 610
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
... 1.10-1.11
[1963] 1 WLR 1311 ... .2.7
(1998) 99 A Crim R 510
(2004) NSWCCA 319
R v De Simoni
[1981] HCA 31
(1981) 147 CLR 383
... 1.6, 1.21, 3.38
R v Dickson
(1865) 4 SCR (NSW) 298
(2005) NSWCCA 455
(1994) 75 A Crim R 398
(1992) 25 NSWLR 732
(1961) VR 326
... 1.22, 2.4
[1999] NSWCCA 111
(1999) 46 NSWLR 346
(1997) 41 NSWLR 374
... 1.22, 3.40, 3.44
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
(1998) 45 NSWLR 209
[2003] NSWCCA 406
(2003) 59 NSWLR 431
(1991) 57 A Crim R 8
R v Merritt
[2004] NSWCCA 19
(2004) 59 NSWLR 557
R v Millward
(1931) 23 Cr App R 119
(1993) 70 A Crim R 368
R v O’Neill
[1979]2 NSWLR 582 ... 1.21-1.23
R v Ponfield
(1999) 46 NSWLR 327
R v Previtera
(1997) 94 A Crim R 76
(2003) NSWCCA 220
R v Shankley
(2003) NSWCCA 253
[2002] NSWCCA 142
(2002) 54 NSWLR 300
... 1.32-1.33
R v Simpson
(2001) 53 NSWLR 704 ... 1.28
[2004] NSWCCA 37
(2004) 60 NSWLR 86
[1960] VicRp 21
[1960] VR 137
... .2.4-2.5
[2004] NSWCCA 131
(2004) 60 NSWLR 168
... 1.28, 1.30
[1979] Tas R 1
[2002] NSWCCA 343
(2002) 55 NSWLR 252
... 1.9-1.10, 1.19, 1.33
R v Wingrove
(1936) 53 WN(NSW) 118
... 2.4, 2.6
McL and The Queen
[2000] HCA 46
(2000) 74 ALJR 1319
Ring v Arizona
[2002] USSC 3339
122 S Ct 2428
(2002) ... .2.27
Savvas v The Queen
[1995] HCA 29
(1995) 183 CLR 1
... 1.6, 1.22, 3.38
Stanton v Dawson
(1987) 31 A Crim R 104
Thomson & Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383 ... 1.19, 1.32
Thompson v The Queen
[1989] HCA 30
(1989) 169 CLR 1
at 30 ... .2.11
Veen v The Queen
[1979] HCA 7
(1979) 143 CLR 458
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR 465
Weininger v The Queen
[2003] HCA 14
(2003) 212 CLR 629
Whittaker v The King
[1928] HCA 28
(1928) 41 CLR 230
... .1.47, 2.4-2.5
Wong & Leung
[1999] NSWCCA 420
(1999) 48 NSWLR 340
... .1.19, 1.33
Wong v The Queen; Leung v The Queen
[2001] HCA 64
(2001) 76 ALJR 79
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
Table of legislation
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Commonwealth
Constitution
s 80 ... 1.6, 2.13
Crimes Act 1914
Customs Act 1901
s 233B ... .2.11-2.12
s 235 ... 2.11-2.12
New South Wales
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
... 1.13, 1.20, 1.31
, Division 4 ... .1.27
, Division 3 ... 1.11
, Division 4 ... .1.18-1.19
, Division 1A ... 1.37
, Division 1B ... 1.30
, Division 2 ... 1.11
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Amendment (Sentencing Guidelines) Act 1998 ... 1.19
Jury Act 1977
Australian Capital Territory
Crimes Act 1900
United States
18 United States Code
s 3591 ... .2.24
s 3592(a) . ... 2.25
s 3592(b) ... 2.25
s 3592(c) ... 2.25
s 3592(d) ... 2.25
s 3593(b) ... .2.24
s 3593(b)(1) . ... 2.24
s 3593(b)(2) ... 2.24
s 3593(c) ... 2.26
s 3593(e) ... 2.26
s 3594 ... 2.27
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Issues Paper 27 (2006) - Sentencing and juries
Bibliography
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
ASHWORTH A AND HOUGH M, “Sentencing and the Climate of Opinion”
Criminal Law Review
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(2005, Issues Paper 29)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(2005, Discussion Paper 70)
BAKER J, “Are the Courts Becoming More Lenient? Recent
Trends in Convictions and Penalties in NSW Higher and Local Courts
Crime and Justice Bulletin
BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH, NSW
Criminal Court Statistics 2004
, Annual Report
BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH,
NSW Recorded Crime Statistics 2005
CHESTERMAN M, CHAN J, HAMPTON S,
Managing Prejudicial Publicity
(February 2001, Justice Research Centre, Law and Justice Foundation of NSW)
DARMER MKB, “The Federal Sentencing Guidelines After
Blakely and Booker: The Limits of Congressional Tolerance and a Greater
Role for Juries
(2004-2005) 56
South Carolina Law Review
FITZGERALD J, “Trends in Sentencing in the New South Wales Criminal Courts: 1990-2000 (2001) 62
Crime and Justice Bulletin
HALPHEN A, “A Public Voice in Sentencing?”
Criminal Law Journal
HINDELANG MJ,
Public Opinion Regarding Crime: Criminal Justice and Related Topics
(US Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, 1975)
HOFFMAN MB, “The Case for Jury Sentencing”
Duke Law Journal
HORAN J, “Perceptions of the Civil Jury System” (2005) 31(1)
Monash University Law Review
INDERMAUR D, “Public Perception of Sentencing in Perth Western Australia” (1987)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
IONTCHEVA J, “Jury Sentencing as Democratic Practice”
Virginia Law Review
JACKSON RL, “Missouri’s Jury Sentencing Law: A Relic the Legislature Should Lay to Rest” (1999) 55(1)
Missouri Bar
KING NJ, “The Origins of Felony Jury Sentencing in the United States”
Chicago-Kent Law Review
KING NJ, “How Different is Death? Jury Sentencing in Capital and Non-Capital Cases Compared” (2004) 2
Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law
KING NJ & NOBLE RJ, “Felony Jury Sentencing in Practice: A Three-State Study”
Vanderbilt Law Review
LANNI A, “Jury Sentencing in Non-Capital Cases: An Idea Whose Time Has Come (Again)? (1999) 108(8)
The Yale Law Journal
LEADER-ELLIOTT I, “Instinctive synthesisers in the High Court”
Criminal Law Journal
LILLQUIST E, “The Puzzling Return of Jury Sentencing: Misgivings About Apprendi”
North Carolina Law Review
MCINTYRE J, “The role of juries in sentencing”
MOFFATT S, WEATHERBURN D AND FITZGERALD J, “Sentencing
Drink Drivers: The Use of Dismissals and Conditional Discharges”
Crime and Justice Bulletin
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Discussion Paper 12, 1985)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Criminal Procedure: The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Majority Verdicts
(Report 111, August 2005)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
(Discussion Paper 33, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
(Report 79, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
(Report 96, 2000)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Sentencing: Corporate Offenders
(Report 103, 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Sentencing: Young Offenders
(Report 104, 2006)
PAULIN J, SEARLE W AND KNAGGS T,
Attitudes to Crime and Punishment: A New Zealand Study
(December 2003, Ministry of Justice, Wellington, New Zealand)
PRESCOTT JJ AND STARR S, “Improving Criminal Jury Decision
Making After the Blakely Revolution” (2005) University of
Law School, Working Paper Series No 39
ROBERTS JV AND DOOB AN, “Sentencing and Public Opinion: Taking False Shadows for True Substances”
(1999) 27(3)
Osgoode Hall Law Journal
ROBERTS JV, STALANS L, INDERMAUER D AND HOUGH M,
Penal Populism and Public Opinion – Lessons from Five Countries
(Oxford University Press, New York, 2003)
SPIGELMAN JJ, “Sentencing Guideline Judgments”
Australian Law Journal
WALKER N AND HOUGH M,
Public Attitudes to Sentencing: Surveys from Five Countries
(Gower Publishing Co Ltd, Great Britain, 1988)
WALKER J, COLLINS M AND WILSON P, “How the public sees sentencing: an Australian survey”
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
(No 4, April 1987, Australian Institute of Criminology)
ZANDER M AND HENDERSON P,
The Royal Commission on Criminal Justice: The Crown Court Study
(Research Study No 19, 1993)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Issues for discussion
Table of cases
Table of legislation
Bibliography
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter