URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/1993/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues - Discussion Paper [1993] NSWLRCDP 29
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the
Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
PART I - INTRODUCTION
1.INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND TO THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
What is intellectual disability?
Over-representation in the criminal justice system
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
The Commission’s previous work on criminal procedure and police powers
THE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE TO DATE
The Commission’s approach
The Issues Paper
The Research Reports
THE NEXT STEP - THE DISCUSSION PAPERS
The organisation of this Discussion Paper
THE FUTURE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE
PART II - GENERAL ISSUES
2.POLICE PROCEDURES
INTRODUCTION - THE CRITICAL NATURE OF THE POLICE ROLE
Police and people with an intellectual disability
Attitudes toward police
Police attitudes on intellectual disability
Conclusions
THE POLICE COMMISSIONER’S INSTRUCTIONS
Public availability
Other difficulties
Breach of the Instructions
Police may be disciplined
Complaints about police
Adequacy of the present system
Penalty for breach of the Instructions
Evidence obtained in breach of the Instructions
Conclusions: breach of the Instructions
Codes of Practice
Breach of a Code of Practice
Implementation of the Police Powers Report
“Vulnerable” persons in police custody
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: THE POLICE COMMISSIONER’S INSTRUCTIONS AND CODES OF PRACTICE
3.IDENTIFICATION
INTRODUCTION
Lack of recognition by police
POLICE GUIDELINES
Screening tests
Standard questions
Access to support for police
RIGHTS ASSISTANCE CARD
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: IDENTIFICATION
INTRODUCTION
EXISTING TRAINING PROGRAMS
New South Wales
WHAT TRAINING IS APPROPRIATE?
The role of people with disabilities in police training
CONCLUSIONS
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: TRAINING
5. ADMINISTRATIVE INITIATIVES
INTRODUCTION
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POLICE POLICY
SPECIALIST UNITS OR OFFICERS
Existing and proposed alternatives
Intellectual Disability Liaison Officer
General Duties Youth Officer Program
The Wagga Wagga Special Needs Unit
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: INTERNAL ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM
INTER-DEPARTMENTAL AND INTER-AGENCY INITIATIVES
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: EXTERNAL PROCEDURES
PART III - SUSPECTS
6.POLICE INVESTIGATIONS
INTRODUCTION
POLICE QUESTIONING OF SUSPECTS WITH AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
The NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions
The “appropriate adult” or “independent person” in police questioning
Who should be the “appropriate adult” or “independent person” in police questioning?
What should be the role of the “appropriate adult” or “independent person”?
The position in other jurisdictions
Conclusions: presence of a third person at police interviews
Attendance of a lawyer
BREACH OF GUIDELINES IN RELATION TO POLICE QUESTIONING
THE POLICE CAUTION AND THE RIGHT TO SILENCE
Admissibility
Conclusions: the police caution
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: POLICE QUESTIONING
CONFESSIONS/ADMISSIONS
Consideration of confessions by the courts
Alternative protections
TENTATIVE PROPOSAL FOR REFORM: CONFESSIONS
ELECTRONIC RECORDING OF POLICE INTERVIEWS
Disadvantages
TENTATIVE PROPOSAL FOR REFORM: ELECTRONIC RECORDING
IDENTIFICATION PARADES
TENTATIVE PROPOSAL FOR REFORM: IDENTIFICATION PARADES
7.DIVERSION
INTRODUCTION
DIVERSION BY POLICE
The decision to charge
Concerns in relation to police diversion
Options for police
Admissions Centres
Admission to a hospital
Programs for juvenile offenders
Use of a contract-based diversionary system
Community Justice Centres
CONCLUSIONS
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: DIVERSION
8.BAIL AND CUSTODY
INTRODUCTION: SUMMONS OR ARREST?
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: SUMMONS OR ARREST?
Understanding of the bail process
The determination of bail
Understanding and complying with bail conditions
Guardianship issues
Denial of bail due to inadequate services
Special bail provisions
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: BAIL
POLICE CUSTODY
Time limits
A special rule for suspects with an intellectual disability?
Other custody issues
Custody Officers
The NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions
Medical issues
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: CUSTODY ISSUES
PART IV - VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
9.VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
REPORTING CRIME
Police response to victims and witnesses with an intellectual disability
The Guardianship Board
POLICE QUESTIONING OF VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
Coaching and contamination
The Police Commissioner’s Instructions
Role of the third or “support” person
Electronic recording
Alternative investigatory procedures
APPREHENDED VIOLENCE ORDERS
COMPENSATION FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME
AN EDUCATIVE ROLE FOR THE POLICE?
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
NSW LAW REFORM COMMISSION PUBLICATIONS RELEASED UNDER THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE REFERENCE
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE POLICE POWERS REPORT
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW), the then Attorney General, the Hon Peter Collins QC MP, referred, by letter received on 30 September 1991, the following matter
to the Law Reform Commission for report:
To inquire into and review the law and practice relating to the treatment of the intellectually disabled in the criminal justice system
and matters incidental thereto; and in particular, without affecting the generality of the foregoing, to consider -
(a) whether there should be a new uniform statutory definition of "intellectual disability";
(b) whether, and to what extent, the intellectually disabled should be diverted from the criminal justice system, including consideration
of the custodial and non-custodial alternatives to the sentencing and detention of the intellectually disabled;
(c) the treatment of intellectually disabled persons in police custody and in prison;
(d) the release from custody into the community of intellectually disabled persons considered dangerous;
(e) whether specialist units should be established within the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Legal Aid Commission,
the Corrective Services Commission, the Police Service and other related bodies, to deal with the intellectually disabled; and
(f) in so far as the law and practice relating to the treatment of the intellectually disabled is relevant to the treatment of the
mentally ill in the criminal justice system, whether any recommendations should also be made in relation to the mentally ill.
PARTICIPANTS
The Law Reform Commission is constituted by the
Law Reform Commission Act
. For the purpose of this reference, the Chairman, in accordance with the Act, created a Division comprising the following members
of the Commission:
The Hon R M Hope AC CMG QC (until 2 April 1993)
The Hon G J Samuels AC QC (from 3 April 1993)
Professor David Weisbrot
Professor Brent Fisse
Ms Clare Petre (until 23 October 1992)
Ms Jane Stackpool
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Research and Writing
Ms Leonie Armstrong
Research Assistance
Mr Bruce Fischer
Mr Jarrod White
Mr Horace Lam
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop Publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Ms Suzanna Mishhawi
Administrative Assistance
Ms Zoya Howes
Ms Suzanna Mishhawi
Honorary Consultants
Associate Professor Susan Hayes
Mr Mark Ierace
SUBMISSIONS
The Commission invites submissions on the issues raised in this Discussion Paper.
How to make a submission
Anyone may make a submission or comment, including people with an intellectual disability, relatives or service providers, participants
in the criminal justice system, such as police or lawyers, or members of the public. You can do so in any of the following ways:
Make a written submission by writing to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 SYDNEY]
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
Telephone the Commission on (02) 9228 8230 and ask to speak to a Legal Officer to make your comments by telephone.
Telephone or write to the Commission to arrange to make a submission in person.
If you need an interpreter or have some other difficulty of communication or transport, please arrange for someone to telephone the
Commission and we will attempt to make some suitable arrangements.
What should a submission contain?
There is no special form for a submission or restriction on what can be said: we are interested to hear any comments, from any source,
or witnesses. The Commission invites submissions on issues relevant to the review, including but not limited to the issues raised
in this Discussion Paper.
Closing date for submissions
The closing date for submissions is
13 December 1993
. No final decisions will be made by the Commission until after the deadline for submissions is past. If you require an extension
of time, please telephone the Commission by that date.
Confidentiality
Submissions made to the Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission's process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally be
made available on request to any person or organisation. However, if you would like all, or part of your submission or comment to
be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission or comments. Any request for a copy of a submission marked "confidential"
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act
In preparing the next Discussion Paper and the final Report, the Commission may find it useful to refer to and make mention of comments
submitted in response to this and other Papers issued by the Commission. However, if a request for confidentiality is made, it will
be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of such submissions in the Discussion Paper or Report.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
Summary of Tentative Proposals for Reform
History of this Reference (Digest)
The proposals summarised below do not represent the final views of the Commission. They are based on the research and consultations
undertaken by the Commission to date and, being designed as a tool for further consultation, do not contain the level of detail found
in the recommendations of a final Report. Paragraph references to the sections of this Paper which amplify these proposals are provided
in square brackets. The Commission therefore seeks further submissions and comments about the effectiveness of these proposals and
invites suggestions for alternative or additional proposals.
A further Discussion Paper dealing with issues relating to courts and sentencing soon will be released. After a further process of
consultation and submissions for both Discussion Papers, the Commission will prepare its final Report to the Attorney General containing
our recommendations for reform and annexing, if appropriate, draft legislation. This Report will then be tabled in Parliament and
made public.
GENERAL ISSUES
The Police Commissioner’s Instructions and Codes of Practice
Nature of Codes of Practice
1. Codes of Practice which set out the police procedures for conducting criminal investigations should be developed, modelled on those
in use in the United Kingdom. The Codes would replace the relevant NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions in this area. These
Codes should contain procedures in relation to police investigations involving people with an intellectual disability, whether as
suspects, victims or witnesses, the detail of which will be considered later in this Discussion Paper. [see paras 2.35-2.38, 2.45]
2. The Codes of Practice should be statutory instruments, prepared as regulations under an enabling Act, promulgated only after the
public exposure of, and debate over, draft Codes, and should be subject to the normal rules of parliamentary disallowance. A Working
Group should be established to manage the development of the Codes of Practice. The Group should consist of police representatives,
as well as representatives of interested groups and the general community appointed by the responsible Minister or Ministers. [see
paras 2.35-2.38]
3. The Codes of Practice should be made widely available to the public generally, and readily available at all police stations for
consultation by police officers, detained persons and other interested persons. [see paras 2.35-2.38]
Breach of Codes of Practice
4. Where evidence is obtained improperly or in contravention of a law or Code of Practice, or in consequence of an impropriety or
of a contravention of a law or Code of Practice, the evidence should be presumed to be inadmissible. Such evidence may be admitted
only where the desirability of admitting the evidence substantially outweighs the undesirability of admitting the evidence having
regard to the manner in which the evidence was obtained. [see paras 2.39-2.45]
5. Until such time as proposal 1 is implemented, there must be clear and effective implications arising in relation to evidence obtained
in breach of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions, apart from the existing threat of disciplinary action against the police
officer involved. As proposed in relation to the Codes of Practice, evidence obtained in breach of certain designated Instructions,
including those sections central to investigations, arrest and detention, should be presumed to be inadmissible, although again the
courts will retain the discretion to admit the evidence where the desirability of admitting the evidence substantially outweighs
the undesirability of admitting the evidence having regard to the manner in which the evidence was obtained. [see paras 2.13-2.34]
Identification of intellectual disability
6. Police should have 24-hour access to experts to provide advice, answer specific questions or arrange assessments about whether
or not a person in custody or being questioned has an intellectual disability. [see paras 3.12-3.14]
7. The Commission suggests that the Department of Community Services (DOCS) is the appropriate body to provide such a service in relation
to identification and other information as it is the major service provider to people with an intellectual disability throughout
New South Wales. The same 24-hour service would be able to provide other useful information, such as: the availability of services
for people with an intellectual disability in the area; and advice about intellectual disability generally. The Commission believes
that liaison between the police and DOCS is crucial in this area. The type of information which could be released and the assistance
which could be provided through such a 24-hour service will need to be developed after further consultation in relation to issues
of privacy and confidentiality. [see paras 3.12-3.14]
8. A Code of Practice (or the Police Commissioner’s Instructions) should repeat (or at least cross-reference) the guidelines
currently provided for identifying and interviewing
with an intellectual disability in the section of the Instructions relating to questioning
with an intellectual disability. [see para 3.5]
9. These guidelines should be amended to include indicators of intellectual disability and some suggested questions about the person’s
background and education, together with some tasks and observations, which can be used to indicate to the police that a person may
have an intellectual disability. However, it must be made clear that such factors are only to serve as a guide and there must be
expert assessment to identify properly intellectual disability. [see paras 3.5-3.11]
10. The guidelines should specify that if a police officer has
any reason to believe
that the person being questioned has an intellectual disability, the officer must follow the procedures for questioning a person
with an intellectual disability, such as the presence of a lawyer and Support Person. In other words, police should err on the side
of inclusion, to ensure that the necessary safeguards are put in place for vulnerable persons. [see para 3.11]
11. A card-based intellectual disability identification system is not considered appropriate or beneficial, and should not be encouraged.
[see paras 3.15-3.20]
Training for police
12. The detail of training programs is primarily an internal matter, based upon an organisation’s particular systems and procedures.
Therefore the Commission proposes that an audit of current police training in relation to intellectual disability be undertaken.
Training about the special needs and vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability should not just be directed to the level
of the new recruit, but should be included in the training provided for custody officers and detectives, at other specialist training
courses dealing with areas in which police are likely to come into contact with people with an intellectual disability, and in “Staff
Development Days”. Some of the relevant issues in this area are:
identifying whether a person may have an intellectual disability;
the distinction between intellectual disability and mental illness;
the relevant Codes of Practice or Police Instructions;
the particular vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability in police questioning;
available services for people with an intellectual disability, especially local services; and
the consequences of failing to deal appropriately with offenders with an intellectual disability, both for the person with an intellectual
disability and for the police officer involved, such as the possible exclusion of evidence. [see paras 4.11-4.15, 4.18]
13. People with disabilities should be involved in this training so that police officers have personal contact with people with an
intellectual disability and the benefit of their insights and experiences. This may assist to decrease some of the misunderstandings
14. Training about intellectual disability should have regular monitoring and input to ensure that the information given is correct
and the suggested procedures and terminology used are appropriate. [see para 4.18]
Administrative initiatives
Internal administrative reform
15. There should be a general police policy - and a Policy Unit or Policy Officer - dealing with issues affecting people with an intellectual
disability, so that the issue can be considered at Head Office level. This also will provide an appropriate contact at this level
so that difficulties can be considered and reform implemented on an ongoing basis. [see paras 5.2-5.3]
16. At the operational level, the development of a district-based General Duties Disability Officer or a patrol-based Special Needs
Unit or Special Needs Officer should be considered. [see paras 5.4-5.12]
External procedures
17. At both the operational and the policy level, effective channels of communication, consultation and responsibility between the
Police Service and the Department of Community Services must be established. [see para 5.14]
18. A permanent inter-departmental Committee should be established to develop and update policy guidelines in this area. Such a Committee
should be independent of any particular Department and should consider the involvement of non-government community organisations.
[see para 5.15]
Police investigations
19. Police must use appropriate methods of dealing with suspects with an intellectual disability. Police should be aware of the special
susceptibility of people with an intellectual disability to authority figures and of their tendency to give answers that they believe
are expected of them. Police also should be aware of the difficulties people with an intellectual disability may have with details
such as times, dates and numbers. Leading or repetitive questions should be avoided and an attempt made to pitch the language and
concepts used at a level which will be understood. These matters should be clearly spelled out in police guidelines, preferably in
a Code of Practice. [see paras 6.1-6.5]
The police caution
20. Where a police officer suspects that a person has an intellectual disability, the officer should be aware that the person may
be unable to understand the concept of the right to silence which underlies the requirement of the police caution. The officer should
be aware that a confession obtained in such a case may be later held to be inadmissible on the grounds of voluntariness or unfairness.
[see paras 6.44-6.60]
Presence of a lawyer
21. No interrogation of a suspect with an intellectual disability should take place unless a lawyer representing the person is present.
[see paras 6.38-6.40]
Presence of a “Support Person”
22. No interrogation of a suspect with an intellectual disability should take place unless a third party is present. (This is exclusive
of the legal adviser referred to in the preceding proposal.) The name, role and identity for that person are as follows:
The third person should be known as a “Support Person”. This name reflects the role envisaged by the Commission for that
person. The Commission suggests that the terms “appropriate adult”, with its implications of a child-like role for people
with an intellectual disability, and “independent third person”, with its implications of a neutral and passive role,
should be avoided.
The role of the Support Person is, as its name suggests, to be supportive of the suspect with an intellectual disability, but not
to be their lawyer or the guarantor of their rights. It is unrealistic (and dangerous) to expect a person without legal training
to fulfil such a role. The Support Person clearly should be attending for the suspect’s benefit, rather than to assist the
police, and should not be a neutral or passive observer of the proceedings. The Support Person should play a limited “interpretive”
role if necessary; for example, assisting to explain the police caution, or suggesting the police rephrase a question if the suspect
is having difficulties, or explaining what the suspect means by a particular word or phrase.
The Support Person preferably should be a person (above the age of 18 years) requested by the suspect with an intellectual disability.
It is anticipated that such a person will know the suspect well, whether as a family member, guardian, carer or friend (though these
categories are not exclusive) and have the trust of the suspect. The Support Person should be able to communicate easily with, and
be able to assist, that person. The Support Person should not be a police officer or anyone likely to be involved in the alleged
offence; for example, as a witness. If the chosen person is unavailable, unwilling to assist, or inappropriate due to their potential
involvement in the investigation, or the suspect cannot nominate a person, police should have access to a list of people with experience
with the special needs of people with an intellectual disability in their area who would be prepared to fulfil such a role from time
to time. [see paras 6.9-6.37]
23. The Support Person:
should have an opportunity to speak privately with the suspect before the interview commences;
should remain present for all aspects of the police interview, including cautioning, charging, fingerprinting, bail and other procedures;
if an intimate search is required, should be of the same sex as the suspect.
The presence (or absence) of the Support Person in relation to each of these procedures should be recorded, by the Custody Officer.
[see para 6.37]
24. All matters in relation to the attendance of a Support Person, including the appropriate contact telephone numbers and names of
organisations (particularly local services), should be set out clearly in police guidelines, preferably in a Code of Practice. [see
25. A pamphlet or other material (such as a video) should be prepared which sets out all relevant information about the role of the
Support Person. This material should be provided to the Support Person before the commencement of any interrogation. [see para 6.36]
26. The Support Person should be a competent but not compellable witness in respect of any hearing relating to the content and conduct
of the interview, to overcome the possibility of the Support Person being called to give evidence against the suspect. [see para
Repetition of the caution and the adoption of the statement
27. People with an intellectual disability who are capable of understanding the concepts involved in the police caution should be
reminded periodically of the caution, particularly after any substantial break in the questioning. [see para 6.52]
28. The standard “adoption” questions asked at the end of an interview should be asked in language appropriate to the
person with an intellectual disability. If the interview is not electronically recorded, the person also should be given the opportunity
of having their record of interview read back to them slowly, and should be asked frequently whether it is correct. [see paras 6.56-6.57]
Confessions
29. In light of the recognised vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability, the court should take extra care to determine
whether the statement was truly “voluntary”, and to determine whether a voluntary admission should nevertheless be excluded
in the exercise of the court’s discretion on the basis of unfairness or prejudice to the accused. Expert evidence is likely
to be relevant on this point. Where a confession is admitted into evidence, a statutory provision should require the court to issue
a warning to the jury of the danger of convicting on the basis of the confession alone where the person has an intellectual disability,
because of doubts about the reliability of such material. [see paras 6.61-6.72]
Electronic recording of interviews
30. Police interviews with a suspect with an intellectual disability in respect of
criminal offences, should be videotaped as the words, gestures, phrasing and the intonation used may be of special significance.
[see paras 6.73-6.80]
Identification parades
31. Identification parades should not be used for people with an intellectual disability in circumstances where unfairness to the
suspect is likely to result, due to the unusual manner or appearance of the particular suspect. [see paras 6.81-6.82]
32. Final decisions about the diversion from the usual course of laying of criminal charges by police to some form of punishment
for the suspect (including compulsory attendance at some service or program) should not be made by the police, but by an appropriate
board, tribunal or judicial officer. (The role of such bodies will be considered in the Commission’s next Discussion Paper.)
[see paras 7.4-7.17, 7.37-7.40]
33. The pilot diversion program at Wagga Wagga for offenders with an intellectual disability should be the subject of an independent
evaluation to determine its effectiveness and general appropriateness as a model. [see paras 7.27-7.32]
Bail and custody
Summons or arrest
34. An amendment should be made to s 352 of the
(NSW) in terms that a police officer should only arrest a person if that officer has reasonable grounds to believe that proceeding
against the person by way of a summons or court attendance notice would not be effective. [see paras 8.1-8.3]
35. A Code of Practice should include provisions (or the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions should be amended) to:
ensure that the Support Person (present during the questioning of a suspect with an intellectual disability) is present to assist
in the bail procedure, whether or not a lawyer also is present; and
confer on police a positive duty to take an accused’s intellectual disability into account when assessing the likelihood of
the accused understanding and complying with bail conditions, the importance of the accused’s residential and employment status
in that assessment, and the relative burden upon the accused of any conditions imposed. [see paras 8.7-8.20]
36. A pilot scheme for a bail hostel for people with an intellectual disability should be established (along the lines proposed by
the Kingsford Legal Centre, namely attached to an existing hostel or institution). [see paras 8.21-8.24]
37. The forms in Schedule 1 of the
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW) should be amended to provide comprehensive plain English explanations of the bail process, bail conditions, and the accused’s
rights and obligations in relation to bail. [see paras 8.7-8.9]
(NSW) and the
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW) should be amended to specify whether the provision of information by an accused through the Background and Community Ties
Questionnaire (Form 4) is mandatory or voluntary, and in what circumstances it is required. [see paras 8.7-8.9]
Custody officers
39. The NSW Police Service should consider the introduction of a formal system of “Custody Officers” in New South Wales
to operate the proposed custodial detention scheme. [see paras 8.38-8.42]
Time limits for detention before charging
40. If the common law safeguards in relation to detention after arrest are abrogated by legislation and a “reasonable period”
approach for police detention of suspects is adopted, as proposed, the criteria for the determination of what is “reasonable”
must take into account the vulnerability of the suspect, for example as a result of his or her youth, Aboriginality, physical or
intellectual disability, or mental illness. [see paras 8.29-8.37]
VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
Police questioning
41. Police must use appropriate ways of questioning victims and witnesses with an intellectual disability. Police should be aware
of the special susceptibility of people with an intellectual disability to authority figures and of their tendency to give answers
that they believe are expected of them. Police also should be aware of the difficulties people with an intellectual disability may
have with details such as times, dates and numbers. Leading or repetitive questions should be avoided and an attempt made to pitch
the language and concepts used at a level which will be understood. These matters should be clearly spelled out in police guidelines,
preferably in a Code of Practice. [see paras 9.18-9.24]
Presence of a “Support Person”
42. No questioning of a victim with an intellectual disability should take place if a Support Person is not present, unless the victim
objects to the presence of any other person at the police interview. The name, role and identity for that person are as follows:
The third person should be known as a “Support Person”. This name reflects the role envisaged by the Commission for that
person. The Commission suggests that the terms “appropriate adult”, with its implications of a child-like role for people
with an intellectual disability, and “independent third person”, with its implications of a neutral and passive role,
should be avoided.
. The role of the Support Person is, as its name suggests, to be supportive of the victim with an intellectual disability. The Support
Person should be clearly attending for the victim’s benefit, rather than to assist the police, and should not be a neutral
or passive observer of the proceedings. The Support Person should play a limited “interpretive” role if necessary, for
example, suggesting the police rephrase a question if the victim is having difficulties, or explaining what the victim means by a
particular word.
The Support Person preferably should be a person (above the age of 18 years) chosen by the victim with an intellectual disability.
It is anticipated that such a person will know the victim well, whether as a family member, guardian, carer or friend (though these
categories are not exclusive), have the trust of the victim, and be able to communicate easily with that person. The Support Person
should not be a police officer or anyone likely to be involved in the alleged offence; for example, as a witness. If the chosen person
is unavailable, unwilling to assist, or inappropriate due to their potential involvement in the investigation, or the victim cannot
nominate a person, police should have access to a list of people with experience with the special needs of people with an intellectual
disability in their area who would be prepared to fulfil such a role from time to time. [see paras 9.24-9.28]
43. The Support Person:
should have an opportunity to speak privately with the victim before the interview commences;
should remain present for all aspects of the police interview, subject to the wishes of the victim; and
if a medical examination is required, should be of the same sex as the victim.
The presence (or absence) of the Support Person in relation to each of these procedures should be recorded. [see para 9.28]
44. All matters in relation to the attendance of a Support Person, including the appropriate contact telephone numbers and names of
organisations (particularly local services), should be clearly set out in police guidelines, preferably in a Code of Practice. [see
Review of police decisions
45. Refusal to prosecute by the police or to take a statement, on the ground that a person has an intellectual disability and would
be unable to give a statement, should be subject to review. A refusal to take a statement should be reviewed automatically, not on
the request of the victim, by a senior officer. The refusal to prosecute where a complaint has been laid and a statement taken should
be reviewable, either by a senior officer or the Director of Public Prosecutions. [see paras 9.14-9.15]
Electronic recording of interviews
46. Videotaping of interviews with victims with an intellectual disability should be carried out to the greatest extent practicable,
as this will be useful, not only to the victim with low literacy levels when refreshing his or her memory, but to the court. [see
47. Police (among others) should be involved in education programs for people with an intellectual disability and carers as to legal
rights, services available for victims of crimes, and guidelines as to recognising and reporting crime. [see paras 9.39-9.40]
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
1.1 This Discussion Paper is concerned with people with an intellectual disability in their contact with the police: as suspects,
victims or witnesses. It is the fourth paper released as part of the Commission’s general reference on people with an intellectual
disability and the criminal justice system. This chapter provides an introduction to intellectual disability and to the rationale,
scope and progress to date of the reference. It also sets out the areas to be covered within this Discussion Paper and outlines the
proposed future conduct of the reference.
BACKGROUND TO THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
What is intellectual disability?
1.2 People with an intellectual disability have significantly lower than average intellectual ability and deficits in social and adaptive
functioning.
In simpler terms, they have been described as finding it “harder to learn than others”.
The intellectual disability:
usually manifests during the person’s developmental period (that is, before adulthood). Accordingly it is often referred to
as a ‘developmental’ disability. In the great majority of cases it is not capable of being overcome by any medical, psychological
or psychiatric treatment. It is therefore a permanent condition.
From this reduced intellectual capacity flows certain behavioural distinctions. A person with an intellectual disability may have
difficulty in grasping abstract concepts, handling complex tasks, and absorbing and assessing information at a ‘normal’
1.3 The cause of a person’s intellectual disability is not known in many cases. However, common causes include: hereditary defects
in the genes or chromosome abnormalities, such as in Down Syndrome; brain damage before or at birth; brain damage after birth due
to illness or accident; or an “acquired” disability due to malnutrition or deprivation in early childhood.
1.4 A person’s intellectual disability is usually classified as “mild”, “moderate”, “severe”
or “profound”, based upon certain IQ (intelligence quotient) ranges. A further category, “borderline”, is
also used to indicate people just above the mild range in terms of intellectual functioning.
A person with a “severe” or “profound” disability may be unable to learn basic social skills such as speech,
walking and personal care, and is likely to reside in an institution. The majority of people with an intellectual disability, however,
have a “mild” level of intellectual disability and “can learn skills of reading, writing, numeracy, and daily living
sufficient to enable them to live independently in the community.”
However, these classifications can be misleading, encouraging people without a full understanding of the disability involved to
believe that a “mild” intellectual disability is inconsequential. Mark Ierace, a barrister with considerable experience
in this area, has commented:
Often I have heard lawyers speak of their clients’ intellectual disability as not being a problem because psychological tests
have revealed that it is only “mild”. Little do they realise what this really means. Judges frequently make similar comments.
1.5 In fact, where the average IQ is defined as 100, the World Health Organisation defines a mild intellectual disability as an IQ
between 52 and 67 and, statistically, “a person functioning towards the bottom of the mildly intellectually disabled category
[IQ of 55] is functioning less well than 99.9 per cent of the population”.
In practical terms:
[a] person with a mild intellectual disability may not be able to use a telephone book, or street directory. They may not be able
to read more than the most basic of words. Conceptual thought may be only understood at its most basic. A word such as “intent”
may be beyond their understanding.
1.6 There are many myths and misunderstandings about intellectual disability. These myths (for example “most people with an
intellectual disability live in institutions” and “intellectual disability is the same as mental illness”) are
accepted by many people and may influence government policy and community attitudes about how such people should be treated. It is
important to recognise that an intellectual disability is
a mental illness or a physical sickness which can be “cured”.
Nor is an intellectual disability necessarily obvious from the person’s appearance. An intellectual disability, especially
a mild intellectual disability, is often a hidden disability:
[m]any people, especially those with a mild intellectual disability, are ashamed of their disability and afraid of ridicule. People
with a mild intellectual disability form one of the largest hidden disability groups. Often these people will try to cover up their
disability rather than seek support needed to do the activities they want to do such as learn literacy and numeracy skills.
1.7 Most clinical definitions of intellectual disability only include people who have a “developmental” disability, not
people who receive an injury to the brain (usually as the result of a car accident) after the age of 18 years. Many issues raised
and strategies discussed in this Paper, however, are likely to be relevant for both people with a “developmental” intellectual
disability and people with an “after acquired” brain injury. There may be distinct issues which arise only for the latter
group of people, however, and where the tentative proposals for reform raised in this Paper will be inappropriate. The Commission
seeks submissions in this regard.
Over-representation in the criminal justice system
1.8 This reference arose from concern that people with an intellectual disability were over-represented in, or were being treated
inappropriately by, the criminal justice system. It has been estimated that approximately 2-3% of the population have an intellectual
disability.
Until recently, many people with an intellectual disability were institutionalised or separated from society. Now, with changing
community attitudes and support for “independent living” programs, people with an intellectual disability are playing
an increasing role in the community. Similarly, there is greater community contact with, and input into, institutions and other forms
of supported accommodation. Consequently, people with an intellectual disability are likely to have increased contact with the criminal
justice system and its components, including the police, lawyers and courts. It is generally accepted that people with an intellectual
disability are already over-represented within the criminal justice system, both as offenders and as victims, though further research
is needed in this area.
1.9 In relation to offenders, the majority of research has occurred in prisons. The most recent New South Wales prisons study estimated
that people with an intellectual disability comprise 12-13% of the New South Wales prison population, using a definition of intellectual
disability which included both the results of intelligence tests and social and adaptive skills.
It also has been suggested that offenders with an intellectual disability are over-represented in other parts of the criminal justice
system. The Commission’s own research in this area,
again undertaken by Associate Professor Susan Hayes, found significant over-representation of people with an intellectual disability
as defendants in Local Courts (see para 1.23 below). This research used an operational definition of intellectual disability based
on a test of cognitive reasoning ability. Social and adaptive skills were not able to be assessed due to privacy considerations.
The study found that 14.2% of the sample had an intellectual disability and a further 8.8% were in the borderline category. Put differently,
nearly one in four of the persons appearing before Local Courts on criminal charges may have a significant intellectual deficit.
Other studies, both in Australia and overseas, consistently point to the over-representation of people with an intellectual disability
as offenders.
1.10 The vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability as victims of crime has often been commented upon, particularly in
relation to sexual assault. Though there is little data available, recent studies in New South Wales,
and South Australia,
for example, have found a higher than average incidence of sexual assault and, in the South Australian study, of other crimes. The
actual incidence may be even higher as the Victorian Report also suggested that victims with an intellectual disability did not report
crimes for a variety of reasons, including their lack of understanding that a crime had been committed and ignorance of where to
go to seek help. The Report also commented on the small number of cases which actually reach the courts, and the difficulty that
people with an intellectual disability have in understanding the formalities and processes of the courts.
1.11 The significance of this level of over-representation is that the treatment of people with an intellectual disability is
a marginal issue in the criminal justice system - the numbers are high enough to suggest that every police officer, every criminal
lawyer, every prison officer, and every magistrate or judge dealing with criminal matters is likely to encounter persons with intellectual
disabilities in their daily work.
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
1.12 It was within the context of concerns about over-representation and unfair treatment that the former Attorney General, the Hon
John Dowd QC MP, requested that a Committee be convened to conduct a preliminary review of the operation of the criminal justice
system as it affects people with an intellectual disability. The Committee contained representatives from a number of agencies, including
the Department of Corrective Services, the Criminal Law Review Division of the Attorney General’s Department, the Mental Health
Review Tribunal, the Guardianship Board, the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Magistracy, the Public Defenders’
Office and (what is now known as) the Department of Community Services. (The New South Wales Law Reform Commission did not participate
in this stage of the review.) The Committee’s two meetings produced a brief Issues Paper which revealed the need for a more
comprehensive review of the area.
1.13 Accordingly, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission received a reference
to inquire into and review the law and practice relating to the treatment of people with an intellectual disability in the criminal
justice system. The full terms of reference are set out on page iv of this Paper.
The Commission’s previous work on criminal procedure and police powers
1.14 Since 1982 the Commission has released a number of publications in the area of the criminal process as a result of its reference
to review criminal procedure, the conduct of criminal proceedings and other incidental matters. These publications are listed in
Appendix A of this Paper. The most recent Report released as part of that reference was
Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(the “Police Powers Report”), which was tabled in Parliament in February 1991. That Report made substantial recommendations
for reform in relation to the conduct of police investigations. The Report’s major recommendations are also summarised in Appendix
A of this Discussion Paper. Generally these recommendations have not been implemented in New South Wales and some are discussed further
in this Paper.
1.15 On 7 August 1993, however, the Attorney General, the Hon John Hannaford MLC, announced that legislation clarifying the powers
of police to detain persons following their arrest will be introduced in the next session of Parliament. The press release stated
that the proposed amendments to the
(NSW) would include a provision that police can only detain suspects for a “reasonable time”. The press release also
stated that there would be guidelines for the determination of reasonable time and safeguards for suspects, such as access to a lawyer
and an interpreter where necessary during police detention, although no further detail about these amendments is available yet. The
use of a “reasonable time” test was not recommended by the Commission in the Police Powers Report. The Commission notes
that the viability of the proposals in this Discussion Paper is not necessarily contingent upon the adoption of our recommendations
in the Police Powers Report, or upon the establishment of any other particular regime. We still believe, however, that the integrated
package of reform that the Commission recommended in the Police Powers Report would provide the best general basis for special protections
for such vulnerable persons as people with an intellectual disability.
1.16 The Police Powers Report recommended that special rules be developed for the treatment of children, Aboriginal persons and other
vulnerable persons in police custody. The recommendation read as follows:
The Commission recognises that there are certain groups in the community which are especially vulnerable and may be at particular
risk when involved in the process of police investigation. The Commission identifies the following as groups which require special
protection in police custody: (a) children; (b) Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders; (c) mentally ill or mentally disordered persons,
and persons with developmental disabilities; (d) persons from non-English speaking backgrounds; and (e) other persons who, by reason
of some disability, are unable to communicate properly with the police (such as the seriously visually or aurally impaired, persons
who cannot speak, and so on). As a general matter, the Commission recommends that special rules be developed to regulate the custodial
investigation of persons in these categories, and that no questioning or investigation take place in respect of such persons unless
an appropriate independent person is present. However, detailed consideration of this issue will be the subject of a further Report
by the Commission.
1.17 The Commission has not yet released its Report on vulnerable persons in police custody, but the needs of people with an intellectual
disability in police custody have now been contained within this current reference to review the treatment of people with an intellectual
disability throughout the whole criminal justice system.
THE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE TO DATE
The Commission’s approach
1.18 Some interest groups have expressed concern that the Commission’s reference may contribute to the perception that people
with an intellectual disability should be treated differently, paternalistically, and separated from other members of the community.
It is worth quoting one submission in detail:
People with intellectual disability have been treated as separate and distinguished from the general community for many years. This
has led to perceptions that people with intellectual disability are somehow innately different, and that they do not have the same
rights as others. ... It is still the case that today many people fail to recognise that people with intellectual disability have
the same rights and freedoms as others in society. It is often the case that when a person becomes aware that someone has the label
of having intellectual disability, the person becomes unsure of how to treat the individual, as if the disability substantially alters
common social interactions. Even lawyers will often consider that the “usual” laws may somehow not apply to people with
intellectual disability. ... Council is concerned that some may perceive this inquiry as once more distinguishing and hence separating
people with intellectual disability from the mainstream. It is clear that this inquiry is very much needed, but it must also be made
abundantly clear that its impact is not to create separate laws for people with intellectual disability, but rather is designed to
ensure the general law applies fairly to all people. The aim then of the inquiry is to examine where the current system is failing
to accommodate the special needs which people with intellectual disability may have which prevent them from accessing the rights,
protections, and supports which are meant to be available to all persons under the law.
1.19 The Commission recognises that people with an intellectual disability have the same rights and responsibilities as all other
members of the community. However, because of the disadvantages and vulnerability to exploitation experienced by people with an intellectual
disability, the community may require that extra procedures are followed in the criminal justice system to ensure that legal principles
apply to them equally and uniformly, and to allow them to fully exercise their rights and responsibilities. Similarly, lawyers, police
and other actors in the legal system may need special training and techniques in order to fulfil their legal, official and ethical
responsibilities and to ensure that people with an intellectual disability are treated appropriately.
1.20 It must be borne in mind, by contrast, that
criminal responsibility,
in our system of justice, is usually constructed around the concept of subjective intention or awareness. In relation to criminal
responsibility, some people with an intellectual disability may not have the same level of responsibility as other members of the
community. This may occur because they fall within the defences of mental illness or diminished responsibility or because they may
not have the requisite
(or mental state) to be convicted of an offence. For example, in relation to the offence of larceny (theft) the accused must have
to permanently deprive the owner of the relevant object. A person with an intellectual disability may not have had such an intention.
Alternatively, some people with an intellectual disability, because of their low level of understanding, may not be found fit to
stand trial for an offence. The determination of fitness to plead and criminal responsibility are, however, decisions for the courts
and therefore will be considered in a further Discussion Paper.
The Issues Paper
1.21 Considering the breadth of the terms of reference and the variety of interest groups to be consulted, the Commission decided
that it should seek a preliminary response to the terms of the reference and release an Issues Paper before preparing a Discussion
Paper and formulating specific proposals for reform. The terms of reference were widely distributed and the Commission incorporated
the comments made in preliminary meetings, interviews, written submissions and telephone calls in an Issues Paper,
released in June 1992.
1.22 The Issues Paper traced the criminal justice process, beginning with the commission of a crime and covering contact with the
police, appearing before court, sentencing, custody and release; raising questions for discussion in relation to people with an intellectual
disability at each stage. It was designed to promote discussion and seek information and views about the issues raised, rather than
to provide the solutions. Over 1,000 copies of the Issues Paper were distributed. There has been considerable media coverage of,
and public interest in, this reference and the Commission has received a large number of written and oral submissions.
The Research Reports
1.23 During the preliminary research for this reference the Commission noted the lack of recent New South Wales statistics about the
numbers of people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system, other than the prison statistics referred to above.
The Commission therefore decided to seek funding to carry out empirical research. The Commission also decided in the early stages
of the reference that it should place a priority on seeking input from people with disabilities themselves. This is not a simple
matter, however. The Commission’s usual methods of seeking written or telephone submissions, based on written documents, would
be inappropriate for people with low literacy levels. Discussion groups were therefore proposed using a specially prepared session
outline and appropriate discussion leaders. The Commission received funding assistance from the Law Foundation of New South Wales
for these projects, resulting in two Research Reports:
Research Report 3,
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Consultations.
This Research Report contains the comments and recommendations for reform made by people with an intellectual disability, who spoke
to the Commission about their experiences in the criminal justice system and their ideas for change; and
Research Report 4,
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances Before Local Courts.
This study was undertaken for the Commission by Associate Professor Susan Hayes of the University of Sydney, who surveyed people
appearing before four selected New South Wales Local Courts on criminal charges. Local courts were selected because of the high flow-through
rate of court appearances, and the range and diversity of offences. The Research Report also suggests some solutions to the problem
of over-representation of people with an intellectual disability in Local Courts and suggests where further research may be useful.
1.24 The findings of, and difficulties for people with an intellectual disability highlighted by these Research Reports will be considered
in more detail in this and forthcoming Commission Papers.
THE NEXT STEP - THE DISCUSSION PAPERS
1.25 The next step after the Issues Paper and the Research Reports was to be the release of a comprehensive Discussion Paper, incorporating
submissions received through the Issues Paper and concerns raised by the Research Reports. A Discussion Paper considers the issues
raised in the Issues Paper in greater detail and sets out specific, but tentative, proposals for reform. Such proposals do not represent
the Commission’s decided opinion, but rather are produced for comment. In the course of preparing the Commission’s Discussion
Paper for this reference, it was decided to divide the Discussion Paper into two Papers, the first dealing with issues relevant to
the police, and the second containing considerations relevant to the courts and sentencing options. This decision was made primarily
for reasons of length and readability, and recognises that there are many groups and individuals with concerns which only relate
to a particular part of the Commission’s reference. The Commission was also influenced by the fact that the NSW Police Service
is currently considering the issues involving people with an intellectual disability coming into contact with the police, and it
was felt that the Commission’s work in this area should be released as soon as possible to provide additional input into this
The organisation of this Discussion Paper
1.26 People with an intellectual disability come into contact with the police as suspects, as victims and as witnesses to crimes.
In each of these roles, identification by the police of the person’s intellectual disability
and the consequent use of appropriate questioning techniques is essential. In the Issues Paper, the Commission identified the areas
needing particular consideration in relation to the police as:
the adequacy of the existing police guidelines (the Police Commissioner’s Instructions);
identification of a person’s disability by the police;
police questioning of suspects, victims or witnesses with intellectual disabilities;
the effectiveness of the police caution for people with an intellectual disability;
the treatment of confessions made by people with an intellectual disability;
standard police procedures such as bail; and
education and training programs for police officers in all of these areas.
1.27 In the Issues Paper the Commission also listed safeguards which had been suggested to ensure that people with an intellectual
disability were treated appropriately in their contact with the police. The Commission sought comments and submissions about the
role of the police when dealing with people with an intellectual disability and the efficacy and practical application of these proposed
safeguards. In particular, we sought comments from the police as to the practicality, within their normal working constraints, of
such safeguards. This Discussion Paper continues to discuss the difficulties faced by people with an intellectual disability when
coming into contact with the police and the existing mechanisms to overcome them. The areas covered by this Police Discussion Paper
are as follows:
general police procedures, including police guidelines, identification and training and co-ordination with other agencies;
the apprehension, detention and investigation of suspects; and
the treatment of victims and witnesses.
1.28 Specific proposals for reform are formulated, incorporating submissions made to the Commission. As stated above, these proposals
do not represent the final views of the Commission. The Commission therefore seeks further submissions and comments about the effectiveness
of these proposals and invites suggestions for alternative or additional proposals.
1.29 It must be noted, however, that most of this Discussion Paper considers the position of a person with an intellectual disability
coming into contact with the police who is not also a juvenile and is without some additional vulnerability in police custody such
as Aboriginality. The special concerns which arise when the person with an intellectual disability also, for example, is Aboriginal,
or is a juvenile, or has a mental illness, will be discussed in the next Discussion Paper. The Commission, however, welcomes comments
and submissions in relation to the particular issues which may arise at the police level.
THE FUTURE CONDUCT OF THE REFERENCE
1.30 It is anticipated that the second Discussion Paper for this reference will cover the following areas:
statutory definitions of intellectual disability;
lawyers and their dealings with their clients with intellectual disabilities, including obtaining instructions and issues of legal
issues affecting people with an intellectual disability in courts, including fitness to be tried, findings of competence, giving evidence,
criminal defences and the role of court personnel;
sentencing, custody and release, including consideration of the custodial and non-custodial alternatives available for the offender
with an intellectual disability and the release of people considered “dangerous”;
alternatives to the criminal justice system such as diversion and mediation and their advantages and disadvantages for people with
an intellectual disability; and
other issues relevant to the whole criminal justice system such as specialist units, and the particular needs of juveniles and Aborigines
with intellectual disabilities.
1.31 After a further process of consultation and submissions following the release of both Discussion Papers the Commission will prepare
its final Report to the Attorney General, annexing, if appropriate, draft legislation. This Report will then be tabled in Parliament
and made public.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. There are a number of commonly used clinical definitions of intellectual disability: see, for example the World Health Organisation’s
International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-9, 1977), now (ICD-10, 1992); the American Association on Mental Retardation’s (AAMR)
Mental Retardation: Definition, Classification, and Systems of Supports
(9th ed, 1992); and the American Psychiatric Association’s
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual III-R
(DSM III-R, 1987). The AAMR definition, for example, states that “Mental Retardation refers to substantial limitations in present
functioning. It is characterised by significantly subaverage intellectual functioning, existing concurrently with related limitations
in two or more of the following applicable adaptive skill areas: communication, self-care, home living, social skills, community
use, self-direction, health and safety, functional academics, leisure, and work. Mental retardation manifests before age 18.”
DSM IV is due to be released shortly.
. L Gething, T Poynter and F Reynolds
Disability Awareness Package - Manual
(Community Disability and Ageing Program, University of Sydney, 1991) at 47.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 1.
. Gething, Poynter and Reynolds at 48.
. The World Health Organisation uses the following IQ ranges for these classifications: borderline (IQ 68-85); mild (IQ 52-67); moderate
(IQ 36-51); severe (IQ 20-35); and profound (IQ less than 20). Other categorisation systems vary slightly in IQ range.
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney 1992) at 25.
. M Ierace “Intellectually Disabled People and the Law” (Department of the Attorney General, Criminal Law Seminar, 7 July
1993) at 2.
. S C Hayes “The Accused with an Intellectual Disability: Fitness and Sentencing”
(Public Defender’s Seminar, 14 May 1992) at 3.
. Ierace (1993) at 2.
. A useful list of these and other myths about intellectual disability is provided in Hayes and Craddock at 24-26.
. Gething, Poynter and Reynolds at 53.
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability, for example, estimated in 1992 that in New South Wales, with a population
of 5.6 million, there are about 27,500 persons with a substantial disability and 140,000 persons with a mild to moderate intellectual
disability.
. S C Hayes and D McIlwain
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the New South Wales Prison Population: An Empirical Study
(November 1988) at 47. This study assessed the prevalence of intellectual disability in five NSW prisons: Mulawa Training and Detention
Centre for Women, Central Industrial Prison, Parramatta Gaol, Metropolitan Remand Centre and Broken Hill Gaol. The five gaols held
a population of 1,318 prisoners of which 675 were screened.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances Before Local Courts
(Research Report 4, 1993).
. There is not the need or the space to summarise all the relevant research undertaken in this Paper. This issue will be considered
in more detail in the final Report. A useful summary in relation to offenders is found in Hayes and Craddock, ch 2.
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Final Report, 1990). This Report found that people with an intellectual disability report a higher than average proportion of sexual
assault cases. In this study the Department of Health noted disability as a specific data collection item. In the first six months
of collection, 55 out of 855 (6.4%) adults referred to the Sexual Assault Service had an intellectual disability. The Report also
refers, at 11, to overseas research which also revealed a high prevalence of sexual assault against people with an intellectual disability.
. K Johnson, R Andrew and V Topp
Silent Victims: A Study of People with Intellectual Disabilities as Victims of Crime
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988) at Appendix 4. In Victoria, 19 agencies agreed to monitor their cases of alleged crime
against people with an intellectual disability during the last quarter of 1987. The agencies included government and non-government
organisations. Though the Report stated that the data should be treated as tentative for a number of reasons, the survey revealed
that the overwhelming majority of alleged crimes reported to agencies during the study period involved sexual offences.
The Incidence of Crime Victimisation among Intellectually Disabled Adults
(Final Report, National Police Research Unit, 1990). This South Australian study found that people with an intellectual disability
were twice as likely as people without this disability to be the victim of a personal crime (eg assault). They were also one and
a half times more likely to be the victim of a property offence (eg theft).
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Criminal Law Review Division, Issues Paper, 1991).
. The reference was received on 30 September 1991 from the then Attorney General, the Hon Peter Collins QC MP, pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW). By a separate letter, dated 19 November 1991, the Attorney General also asked the Commission to examine the recent amendments
(NSW) in relation to alternate arrangements for the taking of assault victim’s evidence, which currently only apply to children
under the age of 16 years. The Commission was asked to consider whether the
(NSW) should be amended so that alternate arrangements can be made for all witnesses requiring this protection, irrespective of age.
This issue is not, however, relevant for this Discussion Paper.
. Many submissions have commented on the language used in the Terms of Reference, and expressed a preference for “people with
an intellectual disability” rather than “the intellectually disabled”. The Commission acknowledges this comment
and has used the phrase “people with an intellectual disability” in preference throughout this reference.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990).
. NSWLRC Report 66, Recommendation 6 and commentary in paras 5.47-5.52.
. New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(September 1992) at 1.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper 8, 1992).
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
2. Police Procedures
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION - THE CRITICAL NATURE OF THE POLICE ROLE
2.1 This Part of the Discussion Paper considers the general issues affecting all contact between the police and people with an intellectual
disability, whether suspects, victims or witnesses. Such general procedures include the role of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions,
how the police can identify the possibility of a person having an intellectual disability, and what training is provided to the police
then discusses the particular procedures applicable to suspects and
similarly considers the position of victims and witnesses.
2.2 This chapter begins with a brief consideration of the importance of the role of the police in the criminal justice system and,
in particular, in their contact with people with an intellectual disability. In the Police Powers Report the Commission recommended
that this critical area of the criminal justice system should be governed by a comprehensive legislative regime:
addressing the needs of the police for adequate power to conduct criminal investigations while offering proper and realisable safeguards
for persons in police custody. It is time to shift the focus away from the jury trial ... to the pre-trial process ...”.
The Report referred to the following passage from Sallmann and Willis, which bears repeating:
The perception of the jury trial as the stage where the only really important decisions are made is often accompanied by a view of
criminal investigation as exploratory, procedural, mechanical, introductory - relatively unimportant, in other words. Nothing could
be further from the truth, and in fact a great many persons’ convictions are signed, sealed and delivered in the police station
during the criminal investigation process.
2.3 As the initial contact with the police can so often determine the ultimate outcome of a matter, it is therefore crucial that
police procedures are fair and appropriate. This is particularly important for people with an intellectual disability because of
their low levels of understanding and their recognised disadvantage in existing police procedures, which is discussed further below.
Appropriate procedures at the police level are likely to have a significant impact on obtaining fair treatment of people with an
intellectual disability in the latter stages of the criminal justice process.
Police and people with an intellectual disability
Attitudes toward police
2.4 In the Commission’s own consultations with people with an intellectual disability about their experiences in, and suggestions
for reform of, the criminal justice system, most of the discussion focused on the role of the police. Participants in the consultations
had more contact with the police than with other personnel in the criminal justice system. Most participants identified police in
a positive role, although some expressed fear of police stations and believed that police had greater powers than they actually formally
possess; for example, that police could place them in institutions against their will. The consultations discussed such areas as:
the role of the police; how to contact the police; police knowledge about intellectual disability; police training; and the police
caution. Participants’ comments in relation to each of these areas are referred to throughout this Discussion Paper. The Commission
concluded from its consultations that, compared to members of the general community, many of the participants in the discussion groups
would be at a disadvantage under the present system of police questioning and court processes.
2.5 A 1987 survey in New South Wales of people with an intellectual disability about attitudes to the police raised similar issues.
Two different questionnaires were prepared for people with an intellectual disability: one for people who had not had any official
The survey questions were answered by a total of 90 people who had differing levels of disability.
Of the 76 people who were interviewed using the first questionnaire, most had a positive attitude towards the police and only a
small percentage (13%) said they were afraid of them. Of concern, however, was the fact that most of this group were generally unaware
of their legal rights and 77% said that they would sign anything the police requested. A support person who was well known to the
person was seen as important, with nearly all respondents (93%) stating that they would like someone, such as parents or their workshop
supervisor, to accompany them if they were interviewed by the police.
2.6 The second questionnaire was answered by 14 respondents, 10 of whom had been taken to a police station, while the others had been
questioned by the police elsewhere. The results indicated that the majority of the respondents (71%) were alone at the time of questioning
or arrest, although most commented that they would have preferred to have had someone with them at this time. Other findings were:
57% found it difficult to talk to the police and the same number said that the police officers involved had difficulty understanding
what they were saying; 73% of those taken to the police station had difficulty understanding procedures at the police station; and
78% said that they had signed a document at the police station without understanding what it contained.
Obviously it is difficult to generalise from such a small sample.
Police attitudes on intellectual disability
2.7 Further research is currently being undertaken in Wagga Wagga by Mark Brennan and others in relation to police and people with
an intellectual disability through a grant from the Criminology Research Council. The research aims to identify the communication
needs of people with an intellectual disability and to develop support materials for police officers. The researchers are undertaking
an extensive consultation process with the police (including highway patrol, beat police, detectives and station police), seeking
information about police perceptions of intellectual disability. They are looking at, for example, how the police assess whether
the person has an intellectual disability; how they attempt to communicate with the victim or suspect if they identify a disability;
what extra information about intellectual disability would help them; what training is available and effective (at the Police Academy
and at the local level); and comments about what ought to be the relationship between police and people with an intellectual disability.
The project will produce curriculum materials which respond directly to the perceived educational needs of police officers.
2.8 The Commission can make some preliminary observations about police attitudes about intellectual disability from its own research
and consultations to date, both with the police and others. Despite the statistics on over-representation referred to in Chapter
1, there appears to be a perception amongst some police that there are not sufficiently large numbers of people with an intellectual
disability coming into contact with the criminal justice system to warrant the diversion of resources into this issue or to prepare
a police policy. At the same time, however, there is a recognition that particular cases involving people with an intellectual disability
cause considerable difficulties for the police.
2.9 As in the general community, misunderstanding by the police of the difference between mental illness and intellectual disability
appears to be common. Some police have expressed their concern at being expected to judge whether or not a person who may appear
to them to be “mentally ill” has a mental illness or an intellectual disability, or both, or neither. There are concerns
that sometimes a person with an intellectual disability, who is not mentally ill and therefore cannot be admitted to hospital, still
may become extremely distressed in police custody and be a suicide risk or a risk to others.
2.10 Police are often not aware of the specific procedures set out in the Police Commissioner’s Instructions in relation to
people with an intellectual disability. It has been suggested to the Commission that, even when police suspect a person has an intellectual
disability and are aware of the existing police procedures for questioning such a person, many believe it is either difficult or
inappropriate to take action against an offender with an intellectual disability. For example, having to locate a third person for
the interview, as required by police procedures, is inconvenient. It may also be difficult to seek outside assistance within existing
resources; for example, taking a suspect to a hospital for appraisal will require taking a patrol car off the road. It has been stated
that police become frustrated, particularly where the person has a history of offending, by Magistrates’ use of s 32 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) to dismiss charges and release the defendant on the ground of their disability. There is a perception that, in some cases,
offenders are taking advantage of this procedure, and that they have a greater level of understanding of the consequences of their
actions than is accepted by the court.
2.11 However, the potential of the police to play an important positive role for people with an intellectual disability also has been
commented upon. It has been the experience of at least one service that the police, once the person’s disability has been identified,
generally have gone to great lengths to treat the person appropriately and fairly, including contacting appropriate organisations
for assistance or to put the person in touch with services. Identification therefore becomes a crucial issue.
Conclusions
2.12 From the Commission’s own research, consultations and submissions it seems clear that there are misconceptions on both
sides, whether by the police about intellectual disability or by people with an intellectual disability about the police. Education
is likely, therefore, to play a key part in any reforms. The police have a crucial and difficult role. They have to deal with the
consequences of a wide range of social and personal problems and are often placed in dangerous, distressing, or “powerless”
situations. It is important that any proposals for reform are workable and practical in the course of active duty. The Commission
particularly seeks input from members or former members of the Police Service about their experiences, comments about the advantages
and disadvantages of the tentative proposals contained in this Paper, and their own proposals for reform.
THE POLICE COMMISSIONER’S INSTRUCTIONS
2.13 The starting point for considering police relations with people with an intellectual disability must be the Police Service’s
own existing practices and procedures, as there is no primary legislative consideration of these issues. In New South Wales, police
procedures are set out in the “Rules and Instructions” issued by the Commissioner of Police (“the Instructions”).
These Instructions cover an enormous range of material, from arrest procedures to police sporting and social functions. The Instructions
were discussed in the Commission’s Police Powers Report, which made detailed recommendations for their reform. This Paper will
consider, amongst other things, the detail of the Instructions affecting people with an intellectual disability. However, the threshold
question of the use of a system of internal Instructions for all police procedures must be reconsidered.
Public availability
2.14 In both the Police Powers Report and the Issues Paper, the lack of public availability of these Instructions and the lack of
knowledge about their content and application by both police and the community was commented upon.
This is a matter of concern, considering the critical police procedures covered by the Instructions. The New South Wales Police
Service commented in its submission, in relation to the lack of public availability of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions:
This is somewhat misleading as the Instructions are available to any person under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act
. The Instructions concerning the questioning of suspects has appeared in Watson and Purnell, a standard legal text on criminal law.
It is unfair to say that there is widespread ignorance amongst police of their application. It is not expected that police know every
Instruction, but rather use them as guidance so that they may carry out their duties ethically and effectively.
Reference to the Instructions in some criminal law texts and availability under freedom of information provisions cannot be considered
to equal public availability. The Instructions cannot be purchased, nor are they on display (or even made accessible) at a police
station, as is the requirement in England.
Other difficulties
2.15 The Instructions, which consist of four large ring-binder folders, have other difficulties. For example:
their length means that few police have a working knowledge of all of the areas covered;
their bulk limits their transportability - it is impractical, for example, to keep a copy in every police car;
there is no uniformity in terminology; for example, the Instructions use a variety of terms such as “mentally handicapped”,
“mentally retarded”, “intellectually disabled” and “developmentally delayed”, usually without
definition. This proliferation of terms is likely to increase confusion for police officers;
they are not a reference tool which is quick and easy to use. The exterior labelling, indexing and cross-referencing makes it difficult
to locate topics or specific instructions. For example, there are a number of references to intellectual disability (or the other
terms referred to above) throughout the Instructions; however, the only reference in either of the two Indexes is to interviewing
intellectually disabled victims of sexual assault. The Commission has been told, for example, of police officers being unable to
locate the instructions about intellectual disability, even when informed of their existence;
there have been legal inaccuracies in the Instructions: for example, in relation to
Williams v R
an important High Court case dealing with police powers of arrest, the judgment of the single dissenting judge (rather than the four-judge
majority) was set out for some years as the existing law on that crucial subject until it was finally corrected;
they are not issued to all police officers; a set of Instructions will have to be shared by a number of officers, or, in some cases,
even a section.
2.16 Most of these practical difficulties are in the process of being overcome. The Instructions have recently been reviewed and substantially
rewritten. The new Instructions were launched in December 1991. Since June of this year the Instructions have been computerised so
that all Police Stations with on-line facilities (which is now the majority of Police Stations) can access the Instructions electronically
and use computer searching techniques. This will allow easier searching and updating. However, this does not overcome the issue of
public availability nor public scrutiny in relation to either the promulgation or the adherence to the Instructions, nor the problem
of the content of some of the Instructions. The Commission suggests that it may be appropriate to make such on-line access (at least
in relation to areas of importance to the public such as arrest and investigation) available to other bodies, such as criminal lawyers
or to the public through, for example, the State Library.
2.17 The Deputy President of the NSW Police Association, Senior Sergeant Terry O’Connell, has recently expressed his concern
greater regulation and heightened scrutiny [of Police]. The Commissioner’s Instructions were recently rewritten. Mercifully,
they now comprise a mere 1636 pages, 121 individual instructions and 1052 sub sections. These, of course, increase after every inquiry.
Their real value seems to reveal itself following an incident, where they act as a useful checklist to see where police have failed
to comply. It seems that police are subjected to disproportionately high standards of accountability when compared to politicians
and lawyers who are only too willing to provide prescriptive remedies every time there is a suggestion or complaint about police.
Obviously, any suggestions for reform which merely result in lengthening the Instructions are unlikely to be effective, unless the
police are also assisted, in practical ways, to understand and carry out the recommended procedures.
Breach of the Instructions
Police may be disciplined
2.18 In the Commission’s previous papers it was stated that the Instructions also have the fundamental weakness of not possessing
effective legal force, and of being subject to amendment by a decision of the Police Commissioner.
This was contrasted with the Police Codes of Practice in England and Wales, which are discussed further below. The legislative basis
for the Police Commissioner’s Instructions is found in the
Police Service Act
1990 (NSW), which provides for the issuing, amending and revoking of instructions by the Police Commissioner to members of the Police
Service “with respect to the management and control of the Police Service”.
Section 97 of that Act states that the regulations made pursuant to the Act may provide for the discipline of police officers, including
such penalties as dismissal, demotion, suspension, fines or cautions. The
Police Service Regulation
1990 (NSW) provides that one of the general conditions of service is liability to dismissal or other punishment. Clause 9(4) states:
Police officers are liable to dismissal or other punishment ... for disobedience, neglect or omission of duty, incompetence ... or
any misconduct punishable by law or contrary to the Act, this Regulation
or the Police Instructions.
[emphasis added]
2.19 Thus there is provision for breaches of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions to lead to a sanction for the police officer
concerned. However, it has been stated that:
there is no established procedure within the police force for ensuring observance of the Instructions and no penalty for breach. Even
senior detectives in NSW disclaim any more than rudimentary knowledge of these Instructions.
2.20 Consideration of a breach of the Instructions could arise through a complaint, whether from another police officer or a member
of the public. A specific complaint referring to a breach of an Instruction is more likely to come from another police officer, as
a member of the public is unlikely to be aware of the detail of the Instructions. A member of the public would be more likely to
complain in general terms about conduct which may in fact involve a breach of the Instructions.
2.21 Complaints against police are now governed by the
Police Service Act
1990 (NSW), following legislative amendments which came into force on 1 July 1993, implementing the 1992 Parliamentary Committee
Inquiry Upon The Role Of The Office Of The Ombudsman In Investigating Complaints Against The Police
The “watchdog” role of the New South Wales Ombudsman in the investigation of complaints has been largely retained, however.
The present procedure for complaints against the police should be briefly summarised. This procedure is available for all complaints
breach of the Instructions.
Complaints about police
2.22 Complaints can be made to a police officer or the Ombudsman. If a police officer receives a complaint it must be forwarded to
the Police Commissioner, or nominated officer, who must then forward a copy to the Ombudsman.
Complaints can also be made through a Member of Parliament
or referred to the Ombudsman by the Minister for Police or the Independent Commission Against Corruption.
The Ombudsman, in relation to complaints received, determines whether a complaint should be investigated, and either undertakes that
investigation,
or refers the matter to the Police Commissioner who is thereby required to undertake an investigation.
The Police Commissioner also can decide to investigate a complaint at his or her discretion (if that complaint is received by the
Police Commissioner at first instance).
If the Ombudsman determines, on certain prescribed grounds,
that a complaint should not be investigated, he or she must notify the complainant of the reasons and send the Commissioner a copy
of the complaint and the response to the complainant.
There are also procedures for initial conciliation of certain complaints.
Direct investigation by the Ombudsman.
Until recently, all investigations initially were carried out by the police and the Ombudsman performed a largely supervisory role.
It was only after the police finished their investigation, and any deficiencies were pointed out by the Ombudsman and returned to
the police for rectification, that the Ombudsman could undertake any inquiry. Now the Ombudsman also can conduct a direct investigation
of a complaint “if satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so”, without waiting first for the internal police
investigations to be completed.
After investigation the Ombudsman must decide whether the complaint is either “sustained” or “not sustained”.
The latter category includes complaints where the Ombudsman is neither satisfied that a complaint has been sustained nor satisfied
that the complaint has not been sustained.
There are then reporting, notification and action requirements.
Requirement of writing.
Complaints must still be made in writing, which has obvious difficulties for a complainant with an intellectual disability:
The Ombudsman’s oversight of complaints against police is largely an exercise in examining paper. Complaints must be in writing.
Reports on the initial investigations by police often run to hundreds of pages, which are then sent to the complainants, who again
respond in writing.
2.25 Accordingly, complaints against the police involving a person with an intellectual disability would probably need to be made
on their behalf by another person. In the New South Wales Ombudsman’s 1992
Annual Report
it was stated that the marked increase in complaints against the police without any concurrent increase in resources was having an
impact on vulnerable complainants:
It was clearly demonstrated by a number of submissions [to the Joint Parliamentary Committee] that the greatest impact of declining
resources falls on people who are least able to articulate and support their complaint. Typically, the system becomes less responsive
to Aboriginals, complainants of non-English speaking background and juveniles.
Adequacy of the present system
2.26 This Paper is not intended to review the present police complaints-handling mechanisms. However, it has been suggested that this
mechanism is not sufficient to prevent, or at least discourage, breaches of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions, particularly
where the person affected has an intellectual disability and is unlikely to be able to easily access the complaints process. It is
difficult to determine, from the statistics kept by the Ombudsman, the number of police complaints which involved a person with an
intellectual disability. The Office of the Ombudsman did, however, undertake a description search for the Commission to identify
complaints where persons with “intellectual/mental disabilities” were mentioned in the description of the complaint.
This search turned up only eight such complaints for 1992-1993, but the Office warned that this figure was not necessarily conclusive
as a person’s intellectual disability or otherwise would not necessarily be referred to in the description of the complaint.
The Commission seeks further information in relation to police complaints and people with an intellectual disability.
Penalty for breach of the Instructions
2.27 The issue of appropriate penalty for breach of Instructions must also be addressed. It has been suggested to the Commission that
many breaches of the Instructions, where they do not also amount to a breach of the law, are not regarded as a particularly serious
matter and, if a complaint is sustained, the police officer involved may be “counselled”, rather than receiving a more
serious penalty. It is difficult again to discover useful statistics in this regard. The Ombudsman’s own statistics contained
in the Annual Report refer to the Ombudsman’s determinations and therefore do not contain information about the sanctions for
complaints which were “sustained”. According to the NSW Police Service’s Internal Affairs Branch
Annual Report 1992,
there were 490 (out of the total of 8,965) “complaint issues” in relation to “Breaches of Instructions” which
were the subject of investigation, with an additional 49 (out of 358) complaint issues which were investigated internally, though
not required by the Ombudsman.
There are no figures as to how many of these particular complaints were sustained or what particular sanctions were incurred in relation
to a breach of the Instructions. In relation to action against police generally, in 1992 there were a total of 188 charges preferred
(121 criminal and 67 traffic), together with 324 departmental charges. A total of 928 other punishment and disciplinary actions were
taken for matters found proven. The majority of these 928 actions were in the category of “paraded and counselled” (542)
or “reprimanded” (188). Other categories included dismissal (10), the deferral of penalty (118), loss in seniority (6),
fines (12), resignations (35), transfers (6) and reductions in rank (11).
Evidence obtained in breach of the Instructions
2.28 Apart from the complaints system discussed above, the person with an intellectual disability who has not been dealt with by the
police in accordance with the Instructions may look to the courts to exclude any evidence so obtained. This is obviously a much more
important area (than later disciplinary action against a police officer) in terms of protecting the rights of the accused. Breach
of police procedures may be raised directly or indirectly as the basis for an objection to the admissibility of evidence, such as
a confession. The presumption of exclusion of evidence improperly obtained was recommended by both the Australian Law Reform Commission
and the New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
but the treatment of such evidence is still governed in New South Wales by judicial discretion. A “voluntary” confession
(whether improperly obtained or otherwise) may be excluded on the ground that its reception would be “unfairly prejudicial”
to the accused. There is also a second discretion, which exists in relation to unlawfully obtained evidence generally, whether confessional
or “real”, which excludes evidence on public policy grounds, usually because of some impropriety involved in how it was
2.29 Australian courts generally have interpreted narrowly the effect of a breach of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions.
R v Robinson,
the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal declared that the relevant Instruction (then Instruction 16) relating to records of interview was
merely one method of interrogation among many to which the Commissioner “simply gives his blessing ... [and the] fact that
the recommended method of procedure has been departed from is not in itself a matter of any relevance at all”. Rather, the
Court was interested in whether the procedure adopted cast any doubt on the veracity of the accused person’s answers.
The High Court has also stated that the Standing Orders of the Victorian Police Commissioner were:
not rules of law, and the mere fact that one or more of them have been broken does not of itself mean that the accused has been so
treated that it would be unfair to admit his statement.
The Court went on to say that the Standing Orders, (equivalent to the Police Commissioner’s instructions in New South Wales):
may be regarded in a general way as prescribing a standard of propriety ... But it cannot be denied that they do not in every respect
afford a very satisfactory standard. Their language is in some cases imperative and in others merely advisory: ... and the tendency
to take them as a standard can easily develop into a tendency to apply rejection of evidence as in some sort a sanction for a failure
by a police officer to obey the rules of his own organisation,
a matter which is of course entirely for the executive
[emphasis added]
2.30 More recently, the departure from police guidelines or instructions has been described as a secondary consideration to the consequences
which flow from their breach in terms of the fairness of the investigation. The courts have suggested that a departure may, in fact,
be warranted depending on the “exigencies of a particular investigation”.
2.31 An example of a case in which evidence actually
been excluded is
R v Warrell
in which investigating police in Victoria complied technically with police instructions relating to the interrogation of people with
an intellectual disability by arranging for an “Independent Third Person” to attend the police interrogation. Although
the police had “complied with the letter of the Instructions”, their failure to allow the accused to confer with that
person prior to interrogation meant that a statement which was relied on as a confession was held to be wrongly admitted on the ground
of fairness to the accused. Although such instructions were said to create only internal standards of conduct, and as such did not
have the force of law, they indicated a standard of care to be taken in the particular circumstances to redress the inherent disadvantage
of people with an intellectual disability within the investigative process.
2.32 In the Queensland case of
where confessions were obtained from a number of young Aboriginal accused in breach of the appropriate police guidelines, it was
argued that the judge had:
a residual discretion to reject the [disputed] confessional material because it was obtained illegally, in the sense that certain
procedures laid down by the Police Commissioner for dealing with children and Aborigines were not observed, those procedures being
prescribed by law. ... The basis of this discretion is, it seems, partly based upon the need to show curial displeasure at illegal
conduct in police investigations. ... However, this discretion applies to all illegally obtained evidence including, but not limited
to, confessions. It is clear ... that there will be very few cases calling for the exercise of this residual discretion to exclude
confessions where the discretion to exclude for unfairness is not also appropriate.
2.33 His Honour Justice Dowsett stated it had been conceded that the police are legally bound by the administrative directions of
the Police Commissioner and that “a failure to comply with them is an unlawful act.”
The Judge rejected the argument that these directions were only guidelines for the police and did not have the force of law.
The confessions were excluded on the grounds that they were not
having regard to the circumstances in which they were said to have been made, and the mental capacities and ages of the accused. Also,
it was held that the unlawful failure to comply with the administrative directions of the Police Commissioner attracted the discretion
to exclude on two other grounds: (1) unfairness, which cast doubt upon the reliability of the confessional evidence obtained; and
(2) public policy, as an expression of “strong curial disapproval” was called for in the circumstances.
Conclusions: breach of the Instructions
2.34 In New South Wales, breach of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions, without more, usually will be insufficient to result
in the exclusion of any evidence so obtained. This area may be affected by the discretions to exclude evidence in Part 3.11 of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW), which is discussed further at paras 2.40-2.42 below. Generally, however, the Instructions are a weak tool to use to ensure
that safeguards for the accused are enforced in the courts or to achieve the less important purpose of providing the basis for a
complaint against the police. This leaves two alternatives: either more judicial notice should be taken of the Instructions or some
alternative system should be developed, with clear implications for the admissibility of evidence not obtained in accordance with
that system.
Codes of Practice
2.35 The need for adequate sanctions to ensure compliance with police guidelines is thus a fundamental issue. The most appropriate
and fair set of police procedures will be ineffective if there is no real sanction for their breach, whether involving disciplinary
action against individual officers or the exclusion by the courts of evidence obtained without following the authorised procedures.
This issue was addressed in relation to all police investigation procedures in the Commission’s Police Powers Report, which
suggested that it may be more beneficial to identify precisely those provisions the breach of which should attract external sanctions,
by placing them into a separate public and enforceable document.
2.36 As an alternative to the Instructions, the Commission recommended that certain police procedures, particularly those in relation
to detention, investigation and arrest, be developed: as a “comprehensive set of rules governing the conduct of criminal investigations,
with a basic legislative framework supplemented by detailed Codes of Practice”
with sufficient resources and accountability mechanisms to ensure that these procedural requirements and the protective features
and safeguards are regularly available in practice. (See the summary of the recommendations made in the Police Powers Report at Appendix
A of this Paper.) The Report recognised that many of the matters in the Instructions refer to internal matters and that it was appropriate
that these be retained in an Instruction format, with only those criminal procedures which directly affect the public being contained
in Codes of Practice.
2.37 The Commission used the English scheme as a model for its recommendations. That system arose from the 1981 Report of the Royal
Commission on Criminal Procedure.
The recommendations of that Report were codified in the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984 (UK) and the Codes of Practice established pursuant to s 60, 66 and 67 of that Act. Codes can be issued or amended by the Secretary
of State preparing and publishing a draft Code or draft amended Code, considering representations about the draft and, where appropriate,
modifying the draft and then seeking the approval of both Houses of Parliament. The Code is brought into operation by order made
by statutory instrument once approved by both Houses of Parliament.
Any breach of the Code can lead to disciplinary action against the police involved
and can be taken into consideration by the courts.
In the Police Powers Report the Commission lauded the public process involved in the development of these Codes.
This is in marked contrast to the development of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions. There are five Codes of Practice
providing guidelines in the following areas:
Stop and search;
Detention, treatment and questioning of persons by Police Officers;
Identification; and
Tape recording.
2.38 The Commission’s reasons for preferring a Code of Practice approach over the existing system of Police Commissioner’s
Instructions can be summarised as follows:
the Codes of Practice would have the status of New South Wales regulations, giving them force of law and allowing for “formal,
open, legal regulation of the criminal investigation process for the first time”. Such Codes could not be amended by the unilateral
decision of the Police Commissioner and would, like the English Codes, carry considerable weight in the courts. This would be a contrast
to the position of the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions, which are rarely cited by the courts in New South Wales or seen
as having significant legal effect;
developing the Codes should involve extensive community consultation and input, allowing the process of consultation to be an opportunity
for legislative scrutiny of policing practices. In England the extensive public consultation created “widespread confidence
in the fairness of the proposed Codes of Practice, and their promulgation did not become a party political issue”;
there can be provision, as in the English Codes, for their periodic review
which allows the Codes to be kept up to date; and
the Codes could, and should, be available for purchase by members of the public, and displayed and accessible in every police station.
Breach of a Code of Practice
2.39 The development of such a Code or Codes will be ineffective without clear consequences for breach. The Commission stated in the
Police Powers Report that attempts to ensure compliance by punishing errant police officers (administratively or through the criminal
justice system) rarely have proved to be effective. The only effective sanction was the exclusion of evidence obtained in contravention
of those procedures, subject to a discretion to admit, and the Commission accordingly made the following recommendation:
8.4 Illegally or improperly obtained evidence
8.4.1 Where evidence is obtained improperly or in contravention of a law or code of practice, or in consequence of an impropriety
or of a contravention of a law or code of practice, the evidence shall be presumed to be inadmissible.
8.4.2 Such evidence
may be admitted only where the desirability of admitting the evidence substantially outweighs the undesirability of admitting the
evidence having regard to the manner in which the evidence was obtained
. For the purposes of making this balance, the court shall take into account such matters as: the probative value of the evidence;
the importance of the evidence in the proceeding; the nature of the relevant offence or defence; the gravity of the contravention
or impropriety; whether the conduct concerned was deliberate or reckless; whether the conduct concerned was contrary to, or inconsistent
with, the human rights of a person [set out in an earlier recommendation], codes of practice regulating police treatment of persons
in custody, or any other applicable human rights legislation; whether any other proceeding (whether or not in a court) has been or
is likely to be taken in relation to the conduct concerned; and whether the evidence could have been obtained in some other, proper
[emphasis added]
2.40 A similar recommendation is now contained in the exposure draft of the New South Wales
Evidence Bill
1993, released on 27 August 1993. The relevant clause is cl 137, in Part 3.11, which is as follows:
(1) Evidence that was obtained:
(a) improperly or in contravention of an Australian law; or
(b) in consequence of an impropriety or of a contravention of an Australian law,is not to be admitted unless the desirability of admitting
the evidence outweighs the undesirability of admitting evidence that has been obtained in the way in which the evidence was obtained.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), evidence of an admission that was made during or in consequence of questioning, and evidence
obtained in consequence of the admission, is taken to have been obtained improperly if the person conducting the questioning:
(a) did, or omitted to do, an act in the course of the questioning even though he or she knew or ought reasonably to have known that
the act or omission was likely to impair substantially the ability of the person being questioned to respond rationally to the questioning;
(b) made a false statement in the course of the questioning even though he or she knew or ought reasonably to have known that making
the false statement was likely to cause the person who was being questioned to make an admission.
(3) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account under subsection (1), it is to take into account:
(a) the probative value of the evidence; and
(b) the importance of the evidence in the proceeding; and
(c) the nature of the relevant offence, cause of action or defence and the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding; and
(d) the gravity of the impropriety or contravention; and
(e) whether the impropriety or contravention was deliberate or reckless; and
(f) whether the impropriety or contravention was contrary to or inconsistent with a right of a person recognised by the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; and
(g) whether any other proceeding (whether or not in a court) has been or is likely to be taken in relation to the impropriety or contravention;
(h) the difficulty (if any) of obtaining the evidence without impropriety or contravention of an Australian law.
2.41 It could be argued that, in light of the prevailing judicial practice of admitting evidence despite its improper or unlawful
procurement, stronger wording is needed in cl 137(1) to clearly reverse the legal presumption and the actual practice. Clause 137(1)
does specify that improperly or unlawfully obtained evidence “is not to be admitted”, but judicial discretion to admit
is maintained where “the desirability of admitting the evidence outweighs the undesirability of admitting evidence that has
been obtained in the way in which the evidence was obtained”. Clause 137(3) lists a number of factors which the court may take
into account in making this balance. The Commission is concerned that the balance still will usually come down on the side of admission,
and would prefer a clear indication in the legislation that unlawfully or improperly obtained evidence normally should
be admitted, absent a finding that special circumstances exist or where it is imperative in the interests of justice.
2.42 Part 3.11 of the New South Wales
Evidence Bill
provides a general discretion to exclude evidence if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of it being unfairly
prejudicial, misleading or confusing, or if it might cause or result in undue waste of time [cl 134];
allows the court to limit the use of evidence if there is a danger that the particular use might be unfairly prejudicial, misleading
or confusing [cl 135]; and
requires the court to exclude prosecution evidence in criminal proceedings if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice to the accused. [cl 136]
Implementation of the Police Powers Report
2.43 Key portions of the police detention regime recommended in the Commission’s Police Powers Report have not been implemented,
although commentators are still calling for clarification of the such issues in New South Wales. For example, the Chief Justice of
New South Wales, the Hon A M Gleeson, recently commented that the law in relation to arrest and detention was:
one important area in which the law imposes stringent requirements upon police officers but in respect of which the legislature could
well assist them by defining more precisely their powers and obligations. ... Plainly, the exigencies of arrest and detention and
of what might be an ongoing process of police inquiries can, in practice, make it very difficult to know when a police officer passes
beyond the area of apprehension and lawful investigation and into the area of unlawful detention. In other places there are statutory
provisions and regulations which lay down clearly defined standards in this regard, including time limits for bringing an arrested
person before a justice.
The law and practice in New South Wales on this subject should, in my view, be clarified in the interests of all concerned
[emphasis added]
2.44 As discussed in Chapter 1, in August 1993, the Attorney General of New South Wales, the Hon John Hannaford MLC, released a statement
proposing legislation to clarify the powers of police to detain persons following their arrest. These measures will be implemented
through amendments to the
(NSW) to be introduced in the next session of Parliament. Little detail has been provided about the form these amendments will take,
but certain recommendations of the Commission in the Police Powers Report have been specifically rejected, notably fixed periods
of detention. The issue of a Codes of Practice regime is not raised in the Attorney’s press release.
“Vulnerable” persons in police custody
2.45 As discussed in Chapter 1, the Commission also recommended that guidelines and practices be developed for police investigations
involving people in the community who may be particularly vulnerable or at risk in police custody, for example as a result of language,
culture, age or disability, and that these also be formalised in legislation and Codes of Practice.
In the Issues Paper the Commission again sought submissions about the need for the publication of a Police Code of Practice dealing
with the arrest, detention and interrogation of people with an intellectual disability. Submissions in favour of such a Code included
the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service;
the Law Society of New South Wales;
the Legal Aid Commission of NSW;
the Commonwealth Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
and the New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
who commented that:
[s]uch a publication will increase the likelihood that such a code will be both be known to and followed by police. It would also
assist people with intellectual disability and their advocates to better understand their rights in relation to contact with the
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: THE POLICE COMMISSIONER’S INSTRUCTIONS AND CODES OF PRACTICE
Nature of Codes of Practice
1. Codes of Practice which set out the police procedures for conducting criminal investigations should be developed, modelled on those
in use in the United Kingdom. The Codes would replace the relevant NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions in this area. These
Codes should contain procedures in relation to police investigations involving people with an intellectual disability, whether as
suspects, victims or witnesses, the detail of which will be considered later in this Discussion Paper.
2. The Codes of Practice should be statutory instruments, prepared as regulations under an enabling Act, promulgated only after the
public exposure of, and debate over, draft codes, and should be subject to the normal rules of parliamentary disallowance. A Working
Group should be established to manage the development of the Codes of Practice. The Group should consist of police representatives,
as well as representatives of interested groups and the general community appointed by the responsible Minister or Ministers.
3. The Codes of Practice should be made widely available to the public generally, and readily available at all police stations for
consultation by police officers, detained persons and other interested persons.
Breach of Codes of Practice
4. Where evidence is obtained improperly or in contravention of a law or Code of Practice, or in consequence of an impropriety or
of a contravention of a law or Code of Practice, the evidence should be presumed to be inadmissible. Such evidence may be admitted
only where the desirability of admitting the evidence substantially outweighs the undesirability of admitting the evidence having
regard to the manner in which the evidence was obtained.
5. Until such time as proposal 1 is implemented, there must be clear and effective implications arising in relation to evidence obtained
in breach of the Police Commissioner’s Instructions, apart from the existing threat of disciplinary action against the police
officer involved. As proposed in relation to the Codes of Practice, evidence obtained in breach of certain designated Instructions,
including those sections central to investigations, arrest and detention, should be presumed to be inadmissible, although again the
courts will retain the discretion to admit the evidence where the desirability of admitting the evidence substantially outweighs
the undesirability of admitting the evidence having regard to the manner in which the evidence was obtained.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990) at para 1.72.
. P Sallmann and J Willis
Criminal Justice in Australia
(Oxford University Press, Melbourne, 1984) at 16, cited in NSWLRC Report 66 at para 1.72. See also S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 47, who similarly commented: “[t]he development of the criminal law has focussed
primarily upon the course of the criminal trial to the detriment of the area which can seal the fate of the vast majority of criminal
charges - the investigatory phase.”
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Consultations
(Research Report 3, 1993), especially Ch 3 - Pt 6, and Ch 4.
. G Hyson “Police involvement: what are the problems?” (1988) 2 (4)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
. According to Hyson, at 13: “Participants in this survey were either living independently within the community, or with family,
or in supervised accommodation. From the survey population, 53% were given the diagnostic label mild intellectual disability, 41%
moderate intellectual disability, and 6% severe intellectual disability.”
. Hyson at 14.
. NSWLRC Report 66, in particular, paras 1.65, 6.2, 6.6 and New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper 8, 1992) at para 4.4.
. New South Wales Police Service
(7 September 1992) at 1.
[1986] HCA 88
(1986) 161 CLR 278.
. See NSWLRC Report 66 at para 1.41, especially footnote 61.
. Senior Sergeant Terry O’Connell, Deputy President of the NSW Police Association “Police Authority, Police Responsiveness
and the Rights of the Individual: What is the Right Balance”, paper presented at a Panel Session at the conference
Keeping the Peace: Police Accountability and Oversight
(Royal Institute of Public Administration Australia and NSW Office of the Ombudsman, Sydney, 20-21 May 1993) at 5-6.
. The New South Wales Police Service
(7 September 1992) commented, in relation to the Commission’s comment that the weakness of the Police Commissioner’s
Instructions was their lack of legislative force that: “The Instructions have legislative force, given that they are made pursuant
to section 8(4) of the Police Service Act 1990 and police are liable for a breach of the Police Service Regulations 1990, should
they fail to comply with their provisions.”
. Section 8(4).
. Hayes and Craddock at 61.
. Report of the Joint Committee on the Office of the Ombudsman
Inquiry upon the Role of the Office of the Ombudsman in Investigating Complaints Against the Police
(April 1992). The
Police Service (Complaints, Discipline and Appeals) Amendment Act
1993 (NSW), which came into force on 1 July 1993, repealed the
Police Regulation (Allegations of Misconduct) Act
1978 (NSW) and inserted a new Part 8A into the
Police Service Act
1990 headed “Complaints about Conduct of Police Officers”. One of the other aims of these amendments was to include all
principal legislation governing the police in New South Wales in a single Act.
Police Service Act
1990 (NSW), s 125-127.
. Section 125.
. Section 129.
. Section 153.
. Section 141(1).
. Section 140.
. Section 141(2).
. Section 141(6).
. Part 8A Division 3.
. Section 153, which came into effect on 1 July 1993.
. Section 155(2).
. Evidence given by the Ombudsman, Mr David Landa, to the Parliamentary Committee: Report of the Joint Committee on the Office of
the Ombudsman
Inquiry upon the Role of the Office of the Ombudsman in Investigating Complaints Against Police
(April 1992) at 13.
. The Ombudsman of New South Wales
Annual Report 1991-1992
. NSW Police Service, Internal Affairs Branch
Annual Report 1992
at 12. It is also worth noting that there were a further 49 (out of a total of 358) complaint issues for the offence category of “Breaches
of Instructions” which were investigated internally, even though the Ombudsman determined that such investigations were not
required: at 13.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Criminal Investigation
(Interim Report 2, 1975) at paras 164, 298; Australia. Law Reform Commission
(Interim Report 26, 1985) at paras 964-966; Australia. Law Reform Commission
(Report 38, 1987) at para 164.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Report 56, 1988) at para 2.38, adopting s 119 of ALRC draft Evidence Bill; and NSWLRC Report 66 at para 6.45.
. See, for example,
R v Ireland
[1970] HCA 21
(1970) 126 CLR 321
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54
Driscoll v R
[1977] HCA 43
(1977) 137 CLR 517.
For the most recent High Court consideration of these discretions see
(1993) 67 ALJR 550.
R v Robinson
[1969] 1 NSWR 229
[1950] HCA 25
(1950) 82 CLR 133
Collins v R
[1980] FCA 72
(1980) 31 ALR 257
at 313, 314, 324 per Brennan J; and
Van Der Meer v R
[1988] HCA 56
(1988) 82 ALR 10
at 15 per Mason C J, citing the statement on the Judges’ Rules made by Chief Justices of the Commonwealth, the Australian States
and New Zealand on 1 February 1965. See also
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 9 February 1989, CCA 436/1987 at 7.
R v Warrell
[1993] 1VR 671.
[1988] 2 Qd R 308.
. This situation arises, it was held, because, pursuant to s 11(1) of the
1937 (Qld), the
Police Rules
are to be treated as part of the Act. The Rules provide, at r 10(2)(1), that: “Each police officer is subject to and shall
comply with these rules and the general Instructions and shall obey all lawful orders from those in authority over him.”
. NSWLRC Report 66 at para 1.66.
. NSWLRC Report 66 para 6.7. See also the Australian Law Reform Commission Report
Complaints Against Police
(Report 1, 1975) at paras 138-143; which proposed a Police Discipline Code with “housekeeping” matters left to General
Orders, though with a provision in the Discipline Code relating to disobedience to Orders.
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
(HMSO Cmnd 8092, London, 1981).
. Section 67(1)-(7).
. Section 67(8).
. Section 67(11), s 78.
. NSWLRC Report 66 at paras 6.3, 6.6.
Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984 (UK), s 67(7).
. NSWLRC Report 66 at paras 6.1-6.7.
. NSWLRC Report 66, Recommendation 8.4 and paras 6.34-6.45.
. The Hon A M Gleeson “An Overview”, paper presented at the conference
Keeping the Peace: Police Accountability and Oversight
(Royal Institute of Public Administration Australia and NSW Ombudsman, Sydney, 20-21 May 1993) at 8.
. NSWLRC Report 66, Recommendation 6 and paras 5.47-5.52.
(16 October 1992) at 6.
(24 August 1992) at 3.
(24 July 1992) at 2.
(28 August 1992) at 3.
(September 1992) at 6.
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
3. Identification
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
3.1 One of the over-riding difficulties for police, and indeed all people coming into contact with people with an intellectual disability
in the criminal justice system, is the issue of identification of the person’s disability or special needs. The Commission’s
Local Courts Research Report
identified nearly one in four of the sample appearing before Local Courts on criminal charges as having at least a borderline intellectual
disability, but it was believed that only a small percentage of those people would have been identified as such by police, lawyers
or the courts. One of the reasons that people with an intellectual disability enter the criminal justice system without their disability
being detected is that they may attempt to hide their disability “often motivated by feelings of shame, embarrassment, fear,
or because in the past it has been the cause of what they perceive as ‘trouble’ ”.
As well, many people, whether police or otherwise, appear to expect that a person’s disability will be obvious from their
appearance or manner, but this is not necessarily the case, except perhaps in the case of Down Syndrome, which has distinctive physical
characteristics.
3.2 The Commission has been provided with many examples, including from people working in the criminal justice system with considerable
an intellectual disability, even after spending significant periods of time with the person. In one case, where two lawyers with
expertise and interest in intellectual disability issues were conducting an interview, it was not until a psychological assessment
was undertaken for another reason that the interviewee’s disability was identified. Therefore, it is unlikely that the average
police officer, who may only have a brief contact with a person, will always recognise that the person being questioned may have
an intellectual disability and respond accordingly.
Lack of recognition by police
3.3 As discussed in the Issues Paper, police may interview a person in relation to an offence and not recognise the person’s
disability for a variety of reasons; for example, the good presentation skills of the person, the person’s denial of his or
her own disability or general community ignorance about intellectual disability. It also has been suggested, by a police officer
with considerable experience in this area, that the criminal justice system as a whole relies heavily on the background of an offender:
If the person has been diagnosed at birth or in early childhood as having an intellectual disability then they accept this evidence.
But rarely does the system accept the offender as being intellectually disabled if there is no prior history of his disability ...
Many of the people with an intellectual disability who become involved in the criminal justice system, whether as a suspect, witness
or victim, will not have a formal diagnosis of intellectual disability.
3.4 Police also may misinterpret the answers given by some people with an intellectual disability as “smart arse” behaviour
or believe that the person is hiding something - for example, when the person cannot say where they live. People with an intellectual
disability therefore may be wrongly categorised as being uncooperative, mentally ill, or as being under the influence of drugs or
alcohol, and thus will be dealt with inappropriately. As victims, people with an intellectual disability may, as a result of this
mistaken understanding or their poor communication skills, have their complaint taken less seriously.
POLICE GUIDELINES
3.5 In the Police Commissioner’s Instructions there are identification guidelines in relation to
, which are discussed in Chapter 9 below, but these are not repeated in the sections of the Instructions dealing with
. The relevant section of these guidelines are:
A person with an intellectual disability has a capacity for intellectual functioning which is lower than the norm.
People with an intellectual disability may or may not have a physical disability.
Intellectual disability is not a psychiatric illness.
The range of intellectual disabilities is diverse and may not be immediately evident.
Indicators of intellectual disability include:
short attention span
difficulty understanding questions and instructions
responding inappropriately or inconsistently to questions.
Details such as a person’s work, school, residence, or social security entitlements may be indicative of intellectual disability.
Submissions have supported the repetition of these guidelines in the sections of the Instructions dealing with investigation and arrest.
Screening tests
3.6 It was suggested in the Issues Paper that there are screening tests for intellectual disability with a simple question/answer
format (for example, the Kent E-G-Y Test) which could be introduced into police training and practice. Such tests have their limitations,
however, and may produce both false positive and false negative results. There are a number of other practical procedures involving
tasks which are likely to be difficult for people with an intellectual disability and which could easily be administered, such as
asking the person to look up a number in the telephone directory, to give street directions or to distinguish colours. The Commission
sought comments on the appropriateness and efficacy of introducing these or other tests into police practice. The Legal Aid Commission
of New South Wales submitted that:
[p]olice should receive proper training to enable them to identify people with an intellectual disability and the use of simple “identification”
tests by virtue of their existence, may serve to raise this as a factor to be considered when dealing with a suspect.
3.7 The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability suggested that:
police may not be appropriate to administer any formalised “test” as to a person’s disability. So too, there may
be some questions as to how / when / who administered such a test, and the validity of the results, and what may then follow as a
result of such a test, eg if the police decided the person did not have a disability, but later evidence proved otherwise, what happens
to any statements obtained without full compliance with the Police Commissioner’s Instructions? If the “test”
appears to reveal the existence of a disability, how will this information be then treated by the police? The person may only be
a suspect or a witness. The person may have been further labelled by the administration of such a test.
It may be more appropriate for police to ask questions such as: where do you live? who lives with you? what school did you go to?
do you work and where? do you get money from the Department of Social Security? is it a pension? If police are unsure, it is suggested
they err in favour of protection of the person’s rights and follow the relevant instructions.
Standard questions
3.8 Other submissions have supported the preparation of a standard series of questions for police to use if they have any suspicion
that the person may have a disability, for example: police could obtain a list of local services for people with disabilities and
ask the person questioned whether they have any contact with any of those services; or police could ask whether the person interviewed
is receiving any sort of pension or benefit.
The Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service submitted that the focus should be shifted from testing, however:
[r]ather than “tests” the police should develop strategies by which police can elicit information which may suggest that
a person has an intellectual disability - for example by asking what school that person attends, or where that person works or lives.
It must be made clear to the police that the purpose of such questions is not to give people with an intellectual disability “special
treatment” but rather it is designed to make sure that the special needs of people with an intellectual disability are addressed
and their rights are safeguarded.
3.9 In the Victorian Police Training Package, discussed further in Chapter 4 below, the Manual sets out some sample questions to assist
the police officer to determine whether the person has an intellectual disability, for example:
(a) Ask the person to identify themselves (both verbally and in writing) by:
telephone number;
date of birth.
(b) Ask the person for direction to his/her home address.
(c) Can the person tell the time? Intellectually disabled people can often read a digital watch, but not one with a traditional “face”.
Ask what time the person left home that morning, how long did it take to get to the current location, what time do they usually eat
dinner etc.
(d) Can the person identify denominations of money and attribute value to them? Use a set of coins or notes and ask the person to
add up the money and to give change. Use everyday examples.
(e) Can the person count/identify numbers?
(eg how many days in a week?)
(f) Is the person able to recognise/read a word on its own and then recognise the same word in a paragraph?
(g) Can the person answer the question, “What day of the week will it be a week from today?”
3.10 The barrister Mark Ierace, in his book
Intellectual Disability: A Manual For Criminal Lawyers,
has provided useful guidelines for lawyers in relation to identification, which would be just as helpful and applicable for the police:
A person who has an intellectual disability cannot be relied upon to alert the solicitor to it. ... Silence, rote agreement to questions
asked, brevity of answers, and becoming hostile when asked questions that they cannot answer, are various ways in which the cover
is laid. It is also possible that a client has a mild disability which has not been formally diagnosed, and of which he or she is
There is no certain method for determining whether a client has an intellectual disability. Even if it is evident that the client
has a significant mental abnormality, it may not be clear whether it is in fact an intellectual disability. The solicitor should
be aware of indications that the client
have such a deficiency in intellectual functioning as to be significantly disabled. A professional assessment can then be arranged
to test the suspicion.
The principal signal is likely to arise from the manner in which the client interacts socially. The following are some characteristics
which are frequently associated with persons with an intellectual disability. If the client manifests some of these, it may be prudent
for the solicitor to make further inquiries and seek the client’s consent to psychological testing. These are not constant
factors, so the presence or absence of some does not conclusively indicate whether or not the person has an intellectual disability.
Communication difficulties
a restricted vocabulary;
short attention span, easily distracted;
difficulty in understanding questions;
responding to questions either inappropriately or with inconsistent answers;
memory difficulties;
difficulty with abstract thinking and reasoning.
inappropriate social distance (for instance, being overly friendly and anxious to please);
acting in a way which is appropriate to a significantly younger age than the client’s age group;
dressing inappropriately for the season or occasion.
Task performance
Difficulty with such tasks as:
reading and writing;
identifying money values or calculating change;
finding his or her own phone number in the telephone directory;
giving directions to a place he or she would be expected to know (though the client may be able to take you there).
Social information
The solicitor may become aware from the client, or from the client’s family or friends, that the client:
has received the invalid pension (on the basis of an intellectual disability);
has attended a special school or a special class (OA or OF) at school;
has worked in a sheltered workshop or work training program;
lives in a group home or hostel for people with an intellectual disability.
[Footnote references deleted]
3.11 The Commission accepts both the strength of comments about the inappropriateness of police administering psychological “tests”,
and the comment that reliance on any one test is probably insufficient.
The Commission suggests that a more appropriate approach is one which provides guidelines with indicators of intellectual disability
through a descriptive passage (such as that by Mark Ierace set out above) and listing appropriate questions, the answers to which
may also suggest that the person being questioned has an intellectual disability. Police would need to be aware that people who do
not have an intellectual disability, for example people with limited English or some people with a mental illness, will not always
be able to answer such questions. It must be also remembered that many people with an intellectual disability involved in the criminal
justice system are not connected to any service or are on unemployment benefits, rather than a disability support pension, so questions
of questions as a definite “test”. If they then receive the “correct” answers they may decide that the person
definitely does not have an intellectual disability and ignore any other indicators. Any guidelines produced would need to make this
clear and stress the need for appropriate expert assistance if in doubt. The guidelines must also state that police should always
err on the side of caution if there is any indication that the person may have an intellectual disability. If a police officer has
any reason to believe the person has an intellectual disability, they must follow the relevant police procedures.
Access to support for police
3.12 Most officers would not knowingly have had much contact with people with an intellectual disability, and guidelines such as those
discussed above may be insufficient. In a review of the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984 (UK) it was stated that:
the criminal justice system was and remains vulnerable to many forms of mental handicap ... The dimensions of this continuing problem
can be stated relatively simply: the diagnostic expertise to identify special vulnerability is in short supply and even if the police
do their best to seek special help they may be unable to obtain it. Moreover it may be that unless a very high degree of expertise
is available in the cell block, investigating officers will not become aware that they are dealing with mental handicap.
3.13 Police do not currently have ready access to expert assistance to help them identify whether or not a person has an intellectual
disability. Police have expressed to the Commission their concern about being expected to make an assessment in relation to a person’s
disability. They naturally do not feel qualified to undertake such a task, nor should they be expected to do so. Providers of services
to people with disabilities are often asked by the police about how to identify intellectual disability. There is no easy answer,
as there are many different kinds and levels of disability. Some police have suggested in informal discussions with service providers
that one solution would be for service providers to supply lists of people with an intellectual disability residing in the area.
Some parents have suggested similar lists so that they will be contacted when their child comes into contact with the police. Such
a list would be an invasion of the person’s privacy. Furthermore, many accused persons with an intellectual disability are
not known to agencies so a list would have limited value. Before considering such a system there would have to be an evaluation of
whether any advantages would accrue to people with an intellectual disability (
the police) from the use of such a list, and whether these advantages would outweigh the invasion of privacy.
3.14 Perhaps an alternative to a “list” system is the availability of a contact and referral service on a 24-hour basis,
to confirm police identification, assist in enquiries or provide information.
It has been suggested that, during office hours, police could telephone their local branch of the Department of Community Services
(“DOCS”) for assistance in relation to identification, as they have expertise in the area of intellectual disability
and have offices throughout the State. This option is not, however, available on a 24-hour basis. In addition, many police are not
aware that DOCS could play a role in this regard. Police need access on a 24-hour basis, at least by telephone, to expert assistance
implications of setting up such a facility are likely to be extremely high for the Police Service, if there is no existing expertise
in this area. The Commission seeks further information about the availability to police, if any, of expert assessments and any suggestions
in relation to modification of the existing procedures. However, the Commission suggests that DOCS is the appropriate body to provide
a 24-hour service in relation to identification and other information as it is the major service provider to people with an intellectual
disability throughout New South Wales.
RIGHTS ASSISTANCE CARD
3.15 One attempted solution, in Wagga Wagga, to the difficulties in this area has been the release, in August 1992, of a “Rights
Assistance Card”. The card, which is carried by the person with an intellectual disability, can be produced when being questioned
by police, for example if the person is having difficulty in the interview. It is not just designed for contact with the police,
but also for use when in contact with other services such as hospitals and public utilities. The two sides of the card are shown
PLEASE STOP THIS INTERVIEW
I MAY NOT FULLY UNDERSTAND YOUR QUESTIONS,
OR MY RIGHTS
MY NAME: __________________________________________________________
MY ADDRESS: _______________________________________________________
IF MY ADVOCATE IS UNAVAILABLE CONTACT:
DISABILITY ADVOCACY NETWORK
PHONE: (069) 21 9225
Printed with the assistance of Independent Commission Against Corruption
and NSW Police Service.
PLEASE STOP THIS INTERVIEW
I MAY NOT FULLY UNDERSTAND YOUR QUESTIONS,
OR MY RIGHTS.
IN MY INTEREST AND TO ENSURE ACCURACY DURING THIS
INTERVIEW, PLEASE CONTACT AN ADVOCATE ON MY BEHALF.
MY ADVOCATE IS: ___________________________________________________
ADDRESS: ___________________________________________________________
PHONE: _____________________________________________________________
3.16 Some disability groups do not believe that the carrying of such a card is helpful for people with an intellectual disability
as it may be seen as improper “labelling”. It also has been suggested that many people with a disability would not wish
to carry such a card, either because they do not believe that they have a disability or because they regard the description as discriminatory
or demeaning. However, one submission, from a family member of a person with an intellectual disability, suggested that the existing
disability support pension travel/concession card, which is usually carried by the person with a disability, should also contain
a coded system indicating the level of disability:
this code would then allow an authority to really know that the person has a minor or severe intellectual disability. Therefore legal
procedures from the beginning of an offence being committed can be treated with special attention.
3.17 Cards have, however, been designed for use with the police, without apparent controversy, in other contexts. For example, the
Ethnic Affairs Commission in 1992 supported the introduction in New South Wales of a card which states that the holder needs an interpreter,
indicates the language required and provides a contact number for the Ethnic Affairs Commission.
3.18 Mark Ierace suggested an alternative version of a card:
If the client has a history of being arrested, it may be to his or her benefit to carry a document stating his or her intention not
to answer questions unless a solicitor is present, and containing the appropriate phone numbers for that solicitor to be contacted.
The card might also (or instead) request that the police contact a particular relative or welfare worker. The client could be advised
to produce it to police officers when questioned. Such a card, or statutory declaration, may not of itself result in the court exercising
its general discretion to exclude confessional material, but it may assist in persuading the jury or bench that he or she did not
make, or freely make, the alleged admissions.
The document could also indicate that the person has an intellectual disability, so as to further warn the police of the need for
a solicitor and/or relative to be present during any questioning, and refer to the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions.
Although every police station has a copy of these Instructions, many police officers are unfamiliar with them.
There still remains the difficulty of determining the criteria for the issue of such a card.
3.19 Another submission, while appearing to accept the use of a card if the bearer had sufficient intellectual capacity to know when
to use the card, rejected other alternatives, such as the wearing of some form of identification:
It would be undesirable and stigmatising for an intellectually disabled person to wear any badge indicating his/her disability; even
if some neutral “badge” were adopted eg indicating membership of some association or group, it would be likely to become
identified in time as relating to an intellectual disability.
The same submission suggested instead the need for an education campaign for police which should:
include advice on recognising the presence of intellectual disability;
sensitising police to the particular approach needed and the likely problems to be faced;
bringing police into contact with persons with intellectual disability and those caring for them to familiarise police with the needs
problems and reactions of people with intellectual disability; and
hopefully removing misconceptions and prejudices which may be present (reflecting attitudes of many in the general community).
3.20 It is the tentative view of the Commission, as a result of the concerns set out above, that a card system would not be of assistance
for the majority of people with an intellectual disability. Apart from the fact that many people with an intellectual disability
are unlikely to wish to carry or use such a card, the Commission believes a card-based identification system would have other difficulties,
for example deciding who should (or should not) receive such a card and arranging for its issue. This would be particularly difficult
as many people with an intellectual disability are not connected to any service. There is also the possibility that police could
use the absence of a card (if a person did not have one or forgot to produce it) as sufficient reason for not using the established
safeguards for people with an intellectual disability in police questioning. There is nothing to stop, of course, an individual handing
a prepared card, along the lines of the “Rights Assistance Card” referred to above, to a police officer but the Commission
does not believe such procedures should be formalised. The Commission, however, still seeks submissions about appropriate ways of
assisting both police and people with an intellectual disability in relation to identification of a person’s disability.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: IDENTIFICATION
6. Police should have 24-hour access to experts to provide advice, answer specific questions or arrange assessments about whether
or not a person in custody or being questioned has an intellectual disability.
7. The Commission suggests that the Department of Community Services (DOCS) is the appropriate body to provide such a service in relation
to identification and other information as it is the major service provider to people with an intellectual disability throughout
New South Wales. The same 24-hour service would be able to provide other useful information, such as: the availability of services
for people with an intellectual disability in the area; and advice about intellectual disability generally. The Commission believes
that liaison between the police and DOCS is crucial in this area. The type of information which could be released and the assistance
which could be provided through such a 24-hour service will need to be developed after further consultation in relation to issues
of privacy and confidentiality.
8. A Code of Practice (or the Police Commissioner’s Instructions) should repeat (or at least cross-reference) the guidelines
currently provided for identifying and interviewing
with an intellectual disability in the section of the Instructions relating to questioning
with an intellectual disability.
9. These guidelines should be amended to include indicators of intellectual disability and some suggested questions about the person’s
background and education, together with some tasks and observations, which can be used to indicate to the police that a person may
have an intellectual disability. However, it must be made clear that such factors are only to serve as a guide and there must be
expert assessment to identify properly intellectual disability.
10. The guidelines should specify that if a police officer has any reason to believe that the person being questioned has an intellectual
disability, the officer must follow the procedures for questioning a person with an intellectual disability, such as the presence
of a lawyer and Support Person. In other words, police should err on the side of inclusion, to ensure that the necessary safeguards
are put in place for vulnerable persons.
11. A card-based intellectual disability identification system is not considered appropriate or beneficial, and should not be encouraged.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances Before Local Courts
(Research Report 4, 1993).
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 7.
. Senior Constable P Fernandez
(8 December 1991) at 2.
. Police Commissioner’s Instruction 67.06.
. Legal Aid Commission of NSW
(24 July 1992) at 3.
(September 1992) at 6-7.
. See Illawarra Disabled Persons’ Trust
(10 August 1992) at 2-3.
(16 October 1992) at 6-7.
. Victoria Police
Intellectually Disabled Offenders and Victims
(Law and Procedure Publication Section, 1990) at 6-7.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 3.
. B L Irving and I K McKenzie
Police Interrogation: The Effects of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
(The Police Foundation, London, 1989) at 234.
. See Mr P Hutten
(14 July 1992) at Appendix A.
. Illawarra Area Consultative Committee meeting (12 August 1992) at 4.
Confidential Submission
(24 July 1992).
R v Merritt and Roso
(1985) 19 A Crim R 360.
. Ierace at 22.
. Mr W Everson, ACT Council on Intellectual Disability
(20 July 1992) at 1-2.
(20 July 1992) at 2.
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
4. Training
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
4.1 The difficulties for police involved in identifying whether a person has an intellectual disability leads to the issue of police
education and training. Unless police are trained to recognise the possibility that the person has an intellectual disability, police
guidelines for appropriate questioning of such a person will be ineffective. In its submission to the Commission, the Kingsford Legal
Centre commented that they:
support the need for police to be better educated as to the nature, needs and abilities of people with an intellectual disability.
In our experience police inability and lack of understanding in dealing with intellectually disabled people has had highly detrimental
consequences.
4.2 The same submission provided an example where a client with an intellectual disability, defending assault proceedings,
became very anxious and frustrated about the court process, presumably aggravated by his lack of understanding of formal requirements.
In expressing his frustration he became quite loud inside the Court and the Court precincts. The reaction of police was to threaten
further charges rather than to assist in calming the situation.
4.3 Other submissions made comments such as: “the importance of training for police cannot be emphasised too highly. At present
it is totally inadequate”;
and have provided examples of inappropriate treatment of people with an intellectual disability by the police: for example, refusing
to take statements from victims on the assumption that the person will make an unreliable witness.
EXISTING TRAINING PROGRAMS
New South Wales
4.4 In New South Wales there is very little formal training for police officers in relation to intellectual disability. It is not
included, for example, in the detective or investigators training programs. Police recruits in New South Wales undertake the Police
Recruit Education Programme (“PREP”), which consists of both full-time training at the NSW Police Academy at Goulburn
and field training. The present course consists of five phases over a period of 18 months, of which 24 weeks are spent at Goulburn.
As discussed in the Issues Paper, there is not a specialised segment on intellectual disability; rather social and disadvantage issues
are considered within the community policing unit. The course trains new recruits to identify people who are behaving “unusually”
in the circumstances in which they are found. Networking with local community organisations is encouraged. The Academy also is participating
in research, referred to in para 2.7 above, in relation to this area. Junior police officers, however, still receive much of their
training “on the job” from senior officers.
4.5 Staff Development Days also occur at each Police Station, but the amount of time which can be given to issues such as intellectual
disability will be limited and affected by police priorities. The Commission is not aware of any Staff Development Days which have
been run in relation to intellectual disability. On-going training is controlled by District Training Officers, who are responsible
for identifying problems and developing appropriate programs.
4.6 The Initial Response Officers Course (“IROC”) is designed to train police officers dealing with sexual assault and
child abuse. The IROC training takes place in Sydney, or at the Academy in Goulburn for country officers. The police officers apply
to undertake the course and are selected by the district or region. They undertake pre-residential reading and questionnaires before
a two week residential intensive training program. They then return to their region for field work over approximately 18 months.
While in the field they are supervised by officers who already have completed the IROC course in their region or by other experienced
officers. The officers are assessed by a panel as to their field work and general attitude and, if successful, are accredited. They
are then allowed to take statements in sexual assault cases and can supervise other IROC trainees. There is a two hour guest lecture
in the course about victims of sexual assault with intellectual disabilities. Such a course has its limitations; for example, it
only focuses on victims and it does not deal with the generally perceived reluctance of victims with an intellectual disability to
report crime. The proposed Safe Custody Programme, designed to train custody officers, will also include a component on the special
needs of people with an intellectual disability, as a separate issue to the psychiatric and medical issues dealt with under this
new course.
4.7 As discussed in the Issues Paper, in Victoria there has been more extensive training of police in relation to intellectual disability
issues, following the Victorian Office of Public Advocate’s 1988 Report
Finding the Way.
The Report led to a requirement in the Victorian Police Instructions that an Independent Third Person (“ITP”) be present
at police interviews of persons who have an intellectual disability. This requirement was extended in January 1991 to include people
with mental illness, acquired brain damage and senile dementia. The role of the ITP is discussed in Chapter 6, below.
4.8 In 1989, the Office of Intellectual Disability Services instituted training programs for police throughout Victoria, “to
The Constables’ Training Course at the Police Academy and at Airlie College Training Course were also revised to place more
emphasis on these issues.
Much of this training has been in relation to the establishment of the ITP Program, which provides police with 24-hour access to
4.9 Victoria Police has produced, with the assistance of Community Services Victoria and the Victorian Office of the Public Advocate,
a training kit entitled “Intellectually Disabled Offenders and Victims” (1990). It includes:
a forty-five minute training package based on the Force Instructions, including information on the role of the ITP and the categories
of disability for which an ITP must be used;
a thirty-two minute video highlighting four scenarios where police interviewed a person with an intellectual disability and illustrating
the use of the ITP;
a blue information card designed to be carried by police;
a brochure clarifying the role of the ITP;
a set of overhead slides produced in the standard Police format, highlighting key issues; and
a handout for police members providing contact names and addresses.
4.10 Each of these components provide information about intellectual disability (distinguishing it clearly from psychiatric illness),
indicators of intellectual disability, the relevant Force Instructions and the role of the ITP, together with guidelines for interviewing
a person with an intellectual disability and appropriate referrals. The manual also provides some sample questions for police to
use to assist them in identifying whether the person has an intellectual disability. From June 1990 to June 1992 the training package
was delivered to 2,474 police, representing 40 per cent of operational Victorian Police.
Training has occurred at all levels: at the Police Academy, at Detective Training School, in the Community Policing Squad and as
part of district training, with a priority on training the District Training Officers.
Training has also been provided for the volunteer ITPs involved, but this is discussed further in relation to the role of a third
person in police questioning in Chapter 6, below.
WHAT TRAINING IS APPROPRIATE?
4.11 A sexual assault worker who has trained police about intellectual disability issues has commented on the need to explode the
myths about intellectual disability and sexuality, such as “who’d want to have sex with them anyway?” She said
many members of the community believe these myths and that community attitudes are reflected by the police. “Debunking”
some of the myths about intellectual disability must be an important part of any training program.
4.12 It has been stated that training programs should make it clear to police the consequences of failing to recognise the disability,
both for themselves and for the person concerned (whether suspect, witness or victim).
Police should be taught about the implications of inappropriate questioning and the possibilities of unfairness and exclusion of
evidence. The advantages of appropriate procedures for the effective investigation and collection of evidence should be stressed.
4.13 According to some submissions, training in relation to disability issues should not merely be directed towards the new recruit.
One police officer commented that:
education must start with the police already working in the field then flow onto the Trainee leaving the Goulburn Academy. The reason
for training the people in the field first is because they will in turn be trainers of the younger police. The younger police are
very susceptible to attitudes and knowledge on the part of the experienced street police person. Changing the existing attitudes
will have a more concrete effect than starting over and hoping ten years down the line the attitude would have taken hold through
younger police.
4.14 Many of the submissions to the Commission, while stressing the importance of police training, commented upon the need to measure
the effectiveness of police training and suggested that training without subsequent reinforcement and the backup of sanctions for
inappropriate behaviour can not be sufficient. It also has been suggested that it may be unrealistic to expect to train
police, and that it may be more effective to:
train some officers from relevant sections of the police force, and to establish procedures which ensure that trained officers are
called in to deal with intellectually disabled people. Such a system could operate in a similar way to that of specially trained
officers being available to assist victims of sexual crimes.
Such a system, however, still requires the untrained officer to identify when the person being questioned has an intellectual disability,
in order to set the appropriate procedures in train.
4.15 The Commission believes that training about the special needs and vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability should
not just be directed to the level of the new recruit, but should be included in the training provided for custody officers and detectives,
at other specialist training courses dealing with areas in which police are likely to come into contact with people with an intellectual
disability, and in Staff Development Days. It believes that the following issues are relevant for police training:
identifying whether a person may have an intellectual disability;
the distinction between intellectual disability and mental illness;
the relevant Codes of Practice or Police Instructions;
the particular vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability in police questioning;
available services for people with an intellectual disability, especially local services; and
the consequences of failing to deal appropriately with offenders with an intellectual disability, both for the person with an intellectual
disability and for the police officer involved, such as the possible exclusion of evidence.
The Commission seeks submissions about what other issues must be canvassed and about the time required for such training.
The role of people with disabilities in police training
4.16 Many submissions have referred to the importance of people with disabilities being involved in training the police. The University
of Sydney’s Community Disability and Ageing Program, for example, places an emphasis on personal contact with people with disabilities
in its Disability Awareness Workshops. This issue was also reflected strongly in the Commission’s consultations with people
with an intellectual disability, which concluded that:
[m]ost participants felt that the police did not know much about intellectual disability and that they should have to undertake some
sort of special training to learn about it, including how to react or respond to a person with an intellectual disability. Personal
or participate in discussions with them (such as the consultation groups conducted by the Commission), to gain an understanding about
people with an intellectual disability and how to communicate effectively with them. Some participants indicated a willingness to
speak to the police and referred to the benefits that such contact would afford. It was also suggested that this understanding could
be achieved by people with a disability working with the police on a voluntary basis to increase understanding on both sides. Specialist
units, consisting of officers who had been specially trained about intellectual disability was raised as an option by one participant.
Another suggested that there should be a police officer who has experience with people with disabilities at police stations.
4.17 One organisation which already has undertaken such a role is Self Advocacy,
originally formed in Parramatta as the Western Region Rights Committee. It is a group of people, all with an intellectual disability,
who wish to speak for themselves about their needs rather than through a service provider. The aim is to increase the assertiveness
and self-esteem of people with an intellectual disability. The organisation does have some support workers without an intellectual
disability, such as a person with accountancy training. Self Advocacy members talk to community groups to increase awareness of intellectual
disability and to teach people to communicate effectively with a person who has an intellectual disability. The organisation also
gives talks on communication skills to students entering the disability area and to the Community Disability and Ageing Program’s
Disability Awareness Workshops. They have also worked with organisations such as Qantas about how to treat passengers with a disability.
Other such organisations have now been set up outside Sydney. Individual members of Self Advocacy have expressed their interest to
the Commission in talking to police and lawyers about intellectual disability.
CONCLUSIONS
4.18 The Commission seeks further information and comments from the Police Service about the issues raised in this chapter. The Commission
recognises that the development of detailed training programs is a complex matter, which must take into account many internal factors.
Therefore, this Discussion Paper does not set out detailed proposals for reform in relation to training, but suggests instead that
the existing training about intellectual disability should be assessed and proposals for amendment be later developed in consultation
with the Police Service. The Commission does, however, provide general comments about what it sees as the crucial areas involved
in police training. It recognises that training is an area which should have regular monitoring and input to ensure that the information
given is correct and the suggested procedures and terminology used are appropriate, particularly in an area such as intellectual
disability.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: TRAINING
12. The detail of training programs is primarily an internal matter, based upon an organisation’s particular systems and procedures.
Therefore the Commission proposes that an audit of current police training in relation to intellectual disability be undertaken.
Training about the special needs and vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability should not just be directed to the level
of the new recruit, but should be included in the training provided for custody officers and detectives, at other specialist training
courses dealing with areas in which police are likely to come into contact with people with an intellectual disability, and in “Staff
Development Days”. Some of the relevant issues in this area are:
identifying whether a person may have an intellectual disability;
the distinction between intellectual disability and mental illness;
the relevant Codes of Practice or Police Instructions;
the particular vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability in police questioning; available services for people with an
intellectual disability, especially local services; and
the consequences of failing to deal appropriately with offenders with an intellectual disability, both for the person with an intellectual
disability and for the police officer involved, such as the possible exclusion of evidence.
13. People with disabilities should be involved in this training so that police officers have personal contact with people with an
intellectual disability and the benefit of their insights and experiences. This may assist to decrease some of the misunderstandings
14. Training about intellectual disability should have regular monitoring and input to ensure that the information given is correct
and the suggested procedures and terminology used are appropriate.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 2.
. See, for example New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 3.
. Victoria. Office of the Public Advocate
Finding the Way: the Criminal Justice System and the Person with Intellectual Disability
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1987).
. Victoria Police Corporate Planning and Review Department
(31 August 1992) at 2; L M Osman
Finding New Ways: A Review of Services to the Person with Intellectual Disability in the Victorian Criminal Justice System
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988) at 11.
. Osman at 11; Victoria Police Corporate Planning and Review Department
(31 August 1992) at 1-2.
. Community Services Victoria (Staff Development Branch)
Statewide Victoria Police and Independent Third Person Training Project Report
(5 April 1993) at 4.
. Community Services Victoria at 4.
. Community Services Victoria at 4-6.
. Ms Susan Kendall
Oral Submission
(23 July 1993). Ms Kendall has given lectures for the IROC course.
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 54.
. Senior Constable Pedro Fernandez
(8 December 1991) at 15.
. Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 2.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Consultations
(Research Report 3, 1993) at para 4.10.
. This body should not be confused with Citizen Advocacy, which is involved in recruiting people to act as advocates for people with
an intellectual disability, on a long term and one-to-one basis. Citizen Advocacy also has some crisis advocates but this is not
the main focus of its work.
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
5. Administrative Initiatives
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
5.1 Co-ordination of services and information is crucial to making effective reforms involving people with an intellectual disability.
There is currently much uncertainty about who, or which department, is an appropriate contact, provider of services or source of
information. Therefore, it is particularly important that procedures to allow the flow of information or co-ordination of the (always
limited) resources are established within the Police Service, both internally and externally, and in association with other government
departments and public and private service providers.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POLICE POLICY
5.2 It has been suggested that before police officers can be expected to take disability issues seriously there needs to be an official
police “policy” on disabilities which can be implemented “from the top down”. The existence of a policy will
affect how earnestly the issue is taken up at the training or local levels. One submission expressed concern that there was no mention
of people with disabilities and their needs in the NSW Police Service’s booklet
What are the Police doing?,
which sets out how the Police Service has tried to meet the community’s needs.
5.3 One possible reason for the lack of a policy on intellectual disability is that the issue is not seen as large enough to warrant
the diversion of scarce resources. However, the generally accepted over-representation and vulnerability in the criminal justice
system of people with an intellectual disability, both as offenders and as victims, must be considered in this context. The Standing
Committee Report on Juvenile Justice recommended in relation to juveniles:
That a specialist police policy unit be established within the Head Office of the New South Wales Police Service with responsibility:
to oversight the work of Police Youth Officers in relation to practices and procedures for the policing of young people,
for the co-ordination and development of policies and programs relating to the policing of young people,
to determine the nature of training and development required for all police officers in relation to policing young people, and
to monitor and evaluate procedures and practices relating to policing juveniles throughout the state.
A similar unit could also be established for people with disabilities.
SPECIALIST UNITS OR OFFICERS
5.4 At both the policy and the operational level, a major problem appears to be the absence of any formal liaison between the police
and the disability community, including carers of people with an intellectual disability, with resulting ignorance, and perhaps suspicion,
on both sides. The need for more contact, to assist understanding, was referred to in the Commission’s consultations with people
with an intellectual disability.
Liaison and consultation, particularly within local communities, would assist people with an intellectual disability, not only when
they find themselves being questioned in a police station but when people wish to report crimes and are unsure of who to go to or
whether they will be believed. It is clear that police can also play an important coordination role between the person in the street,
whether a suspect or a victim, and appropriate services, such as drug and alcohol or sexual assault counselling.
5.5 At the operational level, there already have been some individual patrol initiatives; for example, the working arrangements set
up between the Ipswich local police and what was then the Intellectual Handicap Services Branch of the Queensland Department of Health.
This was designed to provide procedural agreements for police and the staff of the local “Alternative Living Service”,
which supports people with an intellectual disability living in the community. These procedural agreements set out their respective
duties and responsibilities in the areas of, for example, missing persons, public nuisance, accidents, recording of complaints and
a contact officer within the police if police counselling or police mediation was required.
Existing and proposed alternatives
Intellectual Disability Liaison Officer
5.6 The New South Wales Women’s Co-ordination Unit’s Report
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
recommended that a police officer be identified as the “Intellectual Disability Liaison Officer” in every district, to
ensure liaison between people in the community and the police and to provide education for people with an intellectual disability
This recommendation has not yet been implemented. The Committee also referred to the need for a central unit or identified officer
with expertise in this area, as exists for domestic violence and sexual assault:
[t]his unit/this person needs to have a background and understanding in the area. Such a person/unit would take responsibility for
ensuring updates on the issues reach all officers and that training is updated.
General Duties Youth Officer Program
5.7 One of the more recent innovations in the New South Wales Police Service was the introduction, in 1988, of a General Duties Youth
Officer program, replacing the “Police in Schools” Program. According to a submission to the New South Wales Legislative
Council Standing Committee on Social Issues’ Report
Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
the objectives of this program are to:
analyse what creates police work with young people in Patrols and recommend and implement strategies to reduce the work,
advocate on young people’s issues in the patrol, and
liaise with schools and other community agencies in the patrol to develop a multi-agency approach to crime prevention.
According to the Standing Committee:
[i]n particular, the duties of a General Duties Youth Officer are determined in consultation with his or her Patrol Commander and
the local community. Such duties generally include maintaining contact with young people on the streets and in youth clubs and liaising
between youth agencies, the police and young people.
5.8 General Duties police are uniformed officers who have day-to-day contact with people in the community. According to the Standing
Committee Report, General Duties Youth Officers had, at the time of that Report, been appointed within 100 of the 170 patrols across
New South Wales. The Committee recommended:
[t]hat at least one position of Police Youth Officer be a requirement for each police patrol area. The number of such officers would
be related to the population, proportion of young offenders and the history of juvenile offending in a particular area.
The Commission believes there may be scope for the adaptation of this idea for people with intellectual disabilities.
The Wagga Wagga Special Needs Unit
5.9 A similar concept has been operating in Wagga Wagga, as discussed in the Issues Paper. The Wagga Wagga Police Beat Section’s
Special Needs Unit was created in late 1990 to interact with and assist members of the community with either intellectual or physical
disabilities in their contact with the police. After the creation of this Unit, the Special Needs Liaison Officer met with local
community organisations which provided services to people with an intellectual disability. As a result of these meetings four areas
were identified as requiring attention by the Special Needs Liaison Officer:
preventing crime against people with disabilities through education of people with disabilities in such areas as personal safety;
assisting people with disabilities who are victims of crime to report crime through awareness of their rights and greater dealings
with police;
preventing crime by people with disabilities; and
promoting a helpful image of police to people with disabilities - to overcome the limited knowledge of and interaction with police
and, sometimes, their resultant fear of the police.
5.10 Suggested ways of dealing with these issues included:
visits to disability organisations and schools by the police with as much personal contact as possible between the police and people
with disabilities in those visits;
crime prevention workshops (run by police and community representatives) on issues such as sexual assault, personal and home safety,
drug and alcohol problems and social behaviour; and
the attendance of the Special Needs Liaison Officer upon victims of crime to provide appropriate support and assistance and, depending
on the severity of the crime, to minimise trauma to the victim.
5.11 One police response to a person with an intellectual disability caught offending is to merely return the person to their place
of residence, on the basis that they do not understand what they are doing. Such a course of action, without any explanation that
the person has broken the law, has unfortunately led some people to believe that they can repeat the offence with impunity. It has
been suggested that the police may have a valuable role in explaining to the person that what they have done is wrong and the consequences
of their continued behaviour. The Special Needs Liaison Officer has undertaken this task in some instances by showing an offender
around the police station and stressing upon him or her the seriousness of the conduct.
5.12 Wagga Wagga presently has the only Special Needs Unit in the NSW Police Service. There are possible advantages and disadvantages
of Special Needs Units or Officers, including the question of whether having such a unit will encourage other police officers to
avoid all disability issues. There are also difficulties if the person filling that role does not have a proper understanding of
the issues involved or proper training. It may be appropriate to consider why the Special Needs Unit has been effective in Wagga
Wagga; for example, whether it was affected by the size of the community. If so, it may be best to trial the concept in similarly
sized towns.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: INTERNAL ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM
5.13 The Commission believes that for effective change to occur within the Police Service there must be consideration of the issue
at both the Head Office and the operational levels, and an established system of contacts at both these levels. To allow this to
occur, the Commission makes the following proposals for internal administrative reform.
15. There should be a general police policy - and a Policy Unit or Policy Officer - dealing with issues affecting people with an intellectual
disability, so that the issue can be considered at Head Office level. This also will provide an appropriate contact at this level
so that difficulties can be considered and reform implemented on an ongoing basis.
16. At the operational level, the development of a district-based General Duties Disability Officer or a patrol-based Special Needs
Unit or Special Needs Officer should be considered.
INTER-DEPARTMENTAL AND INTER-AGENCY INITIATIVES
5.14 As discussed above, co-ordination between the police and other agencies (whether government departments or otherwise) is crucial,
particularly in relation to expert assistance for the police in identifying whether a person has an intellectual disability. The
need for co-ordination between police and the Department of Community Services (DOCS) has been constantly raised in the Commission’s
consultations. The need for more services for people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system has also been
commented upon. The Commission has already suggested (see proposal 7) particular services which may be most appropriately provided
by DOCS, but the overwhelming need for coordination between services in this area should not be overlooked.
5.15 Recently, an inter-departmental committee has been set up, as an initiative of the Social Policy Directorate within the Department
of Community Services. Two meetings have already been held to exchange ideas and improve channels of communication between agencies.
The Commission believes that the whole issue of people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system must be tackled
on an on-going basis at an inter-departmental level, including the establishment of policies and guidelines as to departmental responsibilities.
This inter-departmental liaison must occur at the local and policy levels. The involvement of non-government agencies should also
be considered.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: EXTERNAL PROCEDURES
17. At both the operational and the policy level, effective channels of communication, consultation and responsibility between the
Police Service and the Department of Community Services must be established.
18. A permanent inter-departmental Committee should be established to develop and update policy guidelines in this area. Such a Committee
should be independent of any particular Department and should consider the involvement of non-government community organisations.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. New South Wales. Standing Committee on Social Issues
Juvenile Justice in New South Wales
(Parliament of NSW Legislative Council, Report 4, May 1992): Recommendation No. 32.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Consultations
(Research Report 3, 1993).
. See D Beckey “Working Arrangements with the Police and the Intellectual Handicap Services Branch of the Queensland Department
of Health”, in D Challinger (ed)
Intellectually Disabled Offenders
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Seminar Proceedings 19, Canberra, 1987) at 47.
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Final Report, 1990).
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit Recommendations 4.4 and 4.5.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 3.
. Standing Committee on Social Issues at para 3.6.2.
. Standing Committee on Social Issues at para 3.6.2.
. Standing Committee on Social Issues: Recommendation No. 31.
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
6. Police Investigations
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
6.1 This Part discusses the issues relevant to police contact with suspects with an intellectual disability. The particular problems
faced by victims and witnesses with intellectual disabilities are discussed in Part IV. This chapter begins by discussing some of
the difficulties faced by people with an intellectual disability, whether suspects, victims or witnesses, in police questioning.
Police questioning is an area which has been raised often in submissions, for example the Hunter Region Developmental Disability
Service commented that a major difficulty encountered by that service was:
the inability of police to understand the limitations that intellectual hardship can place on the client’s ability to understand
and answer questions.
6.2 It is generally thought
that people with an intellectual disability are likely to be overly influenced by authority figures and will respond to suggestive
questioning. For example, many people with an intellectual disability tend to answer “yes” to any question asked by an
authority figure.
This was the experience of the Commission in its own consultations with people with an intellectual disability.
This obviously would place such people at a disadvantage in police questioning. People with an intellectual disability also may
not comprehend the level of language used or common police questions/concepts such as those involving time sequencing or “the
right to remain silent”, and may also have difficulty in maintaining concentration for the long periods often involved in police
questioning. Police should also be aware of the difficulties people may have providing details such as times, dates and numbers.
Other common problems include speech and language disorders, which may be severe enough to require an “interpreter” to
enable the person to be properly understood.
Interviews in Victoria with police officers about their experiences interviewing people with an intellectual disability most commonly
reported the following difficulties in their interviews: comprehension of the caution; memory difficulties; interviewee anxious to
please; comprehension of questions; difficulty with time and place; and limited concentration.
6.3 There is a dual problem encountered in the misconceptions by police and others about the comprehension of people with an intellectual
disability. On the one hand, as illustrated by a study in the United Kingdom, police officers can over-estimate the quality of the
accounts received from suspects with an intellectual disability.
On the other hand, the ability of people with an intellectual disability to provide information or statements can be underestimated
by police and lawyers. Often the problem is one of communication, rather than unreliability.
6.4 In the Commission’s own consultations with people with an intellectual disability, participants called for police to be
more sensitive to the needs of a person with an intellectual disability when questioning them, that is, taking care with language
by not using inappropriate or suggestive language, not talking too fast and taking more time to question people.
It is generally acknowledged that questioning a person with an intellectual disability may take much more time than questioning
another person. Even when police have experience with people with an intellectual disability and are aware of their susceptibility
to, for example, leading questions, one study showed that police officers still felt uncertain about their ability to not only identify
a disability, but also to choose the appropriate interviewing procedure.
6.5 The Victorian Office of the Public Advocate’s Discussion Paper,
The Right to be Heard
analysed existing literature in relation to cognition, social learning, memory and questioning techniques in relation to people with
an intellectual disability, and some “issues for consideration”, including:
(7) Given that the intellectually disabled appear to rely more on external cues for the retrieval of information than the intellectually
non-disabled, and as a consequence seem more vulnerable to suggestion, great care should be taken not to influence their statements
by careless interview techniques.
(8) Controlled narrative or general open-ended questions containing only moderate prompting - “what did the man look like?”
- would seem advisable for intellectually disabled children because these have been found to give the optimal level of accuracy and
completeness. The situation is probably similar for intellectually disabled adults although more direct research may be required.
Research directly comparing the performance of the intellectually disabled and non-disabled with different question types and other
eyewitness tasks may also be required.
(9) If answers to interrogative or specific questions are required such questions should follow the general questions, however accuracy
is likely to decline.
(10) Specific questions or questions that are leading or suggestive in any way whether directly or indirectly, should preferably be
avoided. Answers to them may need to be treated with caution.
(11) The content and structure of questions should be kept as concrete, as simple and as non-suggestive as possible. Questions should
not require abstract thinking or inferences to be made. Intellectually disabled people may have special difficulties in specifying
the frequency and timing of events, and dialogue that is complex in subject matter. More information or research may be needed in
these matters. It is important to note that for each individual, what is remembered is also largely determined by the person’s
knowledge, interests and mental activities.
(12) Careful attention must be given to non-verbal as well as verbal aspects of communication as these play important roles in capturing
and maintaining attention, and in conveying information.
(13) Caution may be required in the use of representative props to re-enact events.
(14) Care should be taken so that preconceived notions of the interviewer do not unduly affect information conveyed and received in
an interview. ...
The Commission believes that such information should be included in police guidelines about questioning people with an intellectual
disability.
POLICE QUESTIONING OF SUSPECTS WITH AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
The NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions
6.6 Police are provided with specific procedures to overcome some of the possible difficulties with questioning referred to above.
Instruction 37.14 of the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions deals with questioning people in the course of an investigation.
Following a report by the Deputy Ombudsman, it was amended
on 10 August 1992 to read as follows:
Questioning of Developmentally Delayed or Drug Affected People
If you suspect the person being questioned is developmentally delayed or drug affected, question the person in the presence of an
appropriate adult, unless there is proper and sufficient reason for not doing so.
The term ‘appropriate adult’ means:
a relative, guardian, friend, or some other person responsible for the care or custody of the suspect concerned
a person who has professional experience in dealing with such persons but does not include a police officer or a person employed by
the Police Service.
If an appropriate adult is unavailable, use a responsible adult who is not a police officer or a person employed by the Police Service.
The term, ‘proper and sufficient reason’:
As a general rule the term proper and sufficient reason does not include mere difficulty in finding an appropriate or responsible
adult. However, it is recognised there will be instances when police will have to ask questions without an appropriate or responsible
adult being present, eg in cases of urgency or where police are not endeavouring to elicit legally admissible evidence.
General Advice
before questioning you should be satisfied that the person fully understands the caution and the implication of any [admissions] following
the caution: -
make it clear in simple terms that the person has the right to remain silent
take care when questioning to ensure that each question is understood
do not assume that the person understands even simple questions
phrase questions in a way that avoids a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer.
This will ensure the person has some understanding of the question.
6.7 It has been commented in relation to an earlier version of the Instruction that these guidelines:
could prove sufficient to protect the rights of an offender with a disability were they scrupulously adhered to. However, the true
situation appears to be that they are more often breached than they are followed. In fact, it seems that many police are unaware
of the existence of the instructions.
6.8 The Instruction does not, however, provide a definition of “developmentally delayed” or define the role of the “appropriate
adult”. The Instruction, therefore, does not overcome the problem of identification of a person’s disability and the
role of the “appropriate adult” remains a matter for discussion.
The “appropriate adult” or “independent person” in police questioning
6.9 The Commission seeks comments and submissions about the practical workings of this amended Police Instruction. Comments already
provided to the Commission about difficulties with the Instruction have concentrated on the role of the appropriate adult and referred
to cases where police failed to follow the requirement to have a third person present during the interview, often as a result of
not identifying the suspect as a person with an intellectual disability. In some cases this occurred even when the police were informed
the person had an intellectual disability, although it is not clear whether this failure flowed from ignorance of the Instruction
or a deliberate choice.
Other examples of difficulties encountered by the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service (“IDRS”)
are set out below:
A person with an intellectual disability was accused of a crime and was interviewed by the police in the presence of an advocate.
The person admitted having committed the offence. Later when we questioned the advocate she indicated that she was unsure whether
the accused actually understood the caution. However, she believed any person accused of a crime should tell the truth and not refuse
to provide information. Thus even the advocate did not fully understand the policy considerations behind the caution nor did she
understand that people are not obliged to answer police questions.
A person with an intellectual disability was accused of committing a serious criminal offence. Because of the serious nature of the
offence the person’s advocate wanted to ensure that the person had legal representation before speaking to the police. The
advocate had some difficulties obtaining legal assistance and the police became impatient about the delay and threatened to conduct
the interview, with or without the advocate being present.
6.10 The Division of Intellectual Disability Services in the Queensland Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander
Affairs has been involved in training police in the Sexual Offenders Squad. The Division commented, in relation to the presence of
a third party in police questioning (which it supports), that:
Discussions with the police, however, have indicated that from a practical viewpoint it is often difficult to locate a third person
and that often the offender may be “disconnected” from family and services. Strategies for involving a third person need
to take these concerns into account. For example, by formalising a “third person” as a service and providing adequate
resources, rather than by relying on existing non-paid resources such as family and service providers to act as a third person.
Who should be the “appropriate adult” or “independent person” in police questioning?
6.11 In the Commission’s consultations with people with an intellectual disability there was considerable support for having
a third person, such as a social worker or advocate, present in contacts with the police or other actors within the criminal justice
system. This was seen as particularly important in relation to the need to fill out forms. It was suggested that police maintain
a list of contact numbers for support people.
In the Issues Paper the Commission noted the view that a friend or relative of the interviewed person, though likely to be able
to communicate with the person, is not necessarily the best choice for this role for a number of reasons:
they may be just as unfamiliar with and overwhelmed by police procedure, and may therefore not be able to advise the person being
questioned or know whether or not the interview is being conducted fairly;
they may lack the necessary objectivity or be too eager to assist the police, to the possible detriment of the interviewed person;
their presence may suggest to the person being questioned that their friend or relative supports the police’s actions; or, if
the relative or friend is being used as a ‘translator’, “the effect on the suspect ... could then become, in his
or her eyes, one of answering a question asked by a relative, rather than a police officer for the purposes of evidence.”
6.12 One submission commented: “[i]t is noted that parents, relatives or carer may have their own interests in the outcome
of such an interview and would be inappropriate to be used in this role.”
Other concerns include the person’s possible reluctance to be interviewed before a family member. Alternatively the family
member may be unable to remain detached and may interfere excessively in the interview.
However, in many cases only a person who knows the suspect well will be able to assist them in this way and the introduction of
a stranger may add to the trauma of the situation. Other submissions have stressed the need for such a person to be well acquainted
with the person being interviewed, with knowledge of that person’s disability and the way it may affect that person’s
understanding of right and wrong and understanding of police questions.
The person being questioned should have some say in the choice of person present.
What should be the role of the “appropriate adult” or “independent person”?
6.13 Submissions have also stressed the need to clarify the role of the “appropriate adult” referred to in the NSW Police
Commissioner’s Instructions, as there are many possible interpretations: advocate; interpreter; substitute legal adviser; a
provider of “moral support” or a neutral observer role. The different roles expected of the third person may be contradictory;
for example, it has been argued that a person cannot fulfil both an interpreter and a support person role.
The submission of the NSW Council for Intellectual Disability has suggested that the term:
“independent third person” also should not be confused with “advocate”. One is seen very much in the role
of a communicator to assist in the interview process. The other is much more clearly identified with supporting, advising and assisting
the person and possibly intervening for the person with the police. Council believes that people with intellectual disability should
have the right to have an advocate present when being questioned by the police.
It is recommended that to reduce the possibility of a person not understanding this right, that the police be made to contact an appropriate
advocacy body, if the person is unable to indicate a person they would wish to have in attendance. The advocate would then have the
responsibility for explaining the right to have an advocate, and the role of the advocate, to determine the person’s wishes.
Police should be made aware of local services and organisations for people with intellectual disability, and generic services who
may also be of assistance for people with intellectual disability.
6.14 IDRS also believes that the role of the third party present in police questioning should be that of
not merely an interpreter or that fulfilled by the “independent third person” in Victoria. IDRS commented that such a
support person “should provide both moral support and, if the person is qualified, advice, and should be able to identify communication
problems between the police and the person with the disability.” IDRS also stated that it:
believes that any statements taken from a person with an intellectual disability without an appropriate
being present should be inadmissible in court or if admissible should be accompanied by a warning to the jury about its reliability.
We also note that any person who acts as an advocate should know the person with the disability, be acceptable to him or her and
understand the role that they are to play so that they can identify any communication problems as they arise.
6.15 Other people, including the police, could easily interpret the role of the “appropriate adult” in a less interventionist
way; that is, as merely an observer, without an active role to play in the process or, alternatively, as being there to assist the
police rather than the suspect. There is concern that the third person will be seen as a sufficient substitute for a lawyer and that
people with an intellectual disability will ultimately receive less, not more, protection through the presence of this person. Whatever
role is to be played by a third person, their role and its extent should be clearly spelt out for the benefit of all parties.
The position in other jurisdictions
6.16 Many other jurisdictions have provision for the presence of a third person in police questioning of a person with an intellectual
disability, for example: Victoria;
South Australia;
Western Australia;
Queensland;
Northern Territory
and England and Wales.
This list is not exhaustive and each procedure has some differences. The position in England and Wales and in Victoria is discussed
below. The “Anunga Rules”
are also discussed.
England and Wales.
One advantage of the English provisions is that the role of the “appropriate adult”
extends beyond mere questioning: a person who is “mentally handicapped” must not be interviewed or asked to provide or
sign a written statement in the absence of the appropriate adult unless the relevant guidelines for “urgent interviews”
are complied with.
The Code of Practice also states that the appropriate adult:
should be informed that he is not expected to act simply as an observer; and also that the purposes of his presence are, first, to
advise the person being questioned and to observe whether or not the interview is being conducted properly and fairly; and, secondly,
to facilitate communication with the person being interviewed.
It has, however, been commented that:
the above guidance begs an important question: how does the appropriate adult know when or whether the interview is being conducted
fairly? (an area over which learned judges, lawyers and even psychologists are regularly in dispute).
6.18 Any resulting action, such as laying charges, should be taken in the presence of the appropriate adult
and intimate searches may take place only in the presence of the appropriate adult of the same sex.
As well, if the appropriate adult considers that legal advice should be taken, the Code applies as if the “mentally handicapped”
person had requested access to legal advice.
The relevant provisions relating to “mentally disordered and mentally handicapped persons” are conveniently summarised
in an Annexure to the Code, and cross-referenced to the text of the Code. The use of the term “appropriate adult”, rather
than “appropriate person” has been criticised, however. It has been suggested that using the term “adult”
only reinforces the perception that people with an intellectual disability have a child-like status.
6.19 Even though the Codes of Practice have been in operation for a number of years, it has been commented that:
[t]here is evidence that the number of occasions on which the appropriate adults are summoned to the police station is very low by
comparison with the numbers of suspects known to be vulnerable by reason of mental disorder. Research study No 12, carried out for
the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, indicates a need for more training of the police in recognising mental disorder, and demonstrates
the difficulties faced by custody officers in obtaining suitable persons to act as appropriate adults.
6.20 The resource implications of the PACE Codes also should not be ignored:
Rights for vulnerable groups have been strengthened or created, and duties to provide and protect those rights have been placed legally
on police and informally on other agencies; however, the resources needed to make those rights into reality are inadequate.
It is also worth considering the position in Victoria in more detail due to the extensive development in that State of its Independent
Third Person (ITP) procedures. The Victorian Police Standing Orders require that, where a police officer believes a person may have
an intellectual disability (whether a suspect, victim or witness) the person should be interviewed in the presence of an independent
third person “to facilitate communication”. ITPs can be located, on a 24-hour basis, by contacting the Police’s
“D24” (communications) unit. The current procedures include the following:
Presence of Independent Person
3. Any witness or suspect believed to be intellectually or mentally impaired should be interviewed in the presence of an independent
person (such as a close relative, friend or an independent third person who is not associated with the inquiry).
4. The independent person should be contacted and allowed a reasonable time to be present before the interview is commenced.
5. In the metropolitan area, if a relative or friend cannot be located or is not suitable, D24 should be contacted to access an independent
person. D24 have been provided with a list of independent persons from the Office of the Public Advocate.
6. It is intended to have independent persons available through regional Communication centres in the future. However at this time,
country members will need to use relatives, friends or persons appropriate for the role, such as state or local government senior
staff or other persons of good repute within the local community.
Role of the Independent Person
7. The role of the independent person is to
facilitate communication
between police and the impaired person during the interview process. They may provide emotional support and ensure that the person
understands his or her rights and the caution.
However they are not the person’s legal counsel or advocate and should not make decisions on behalf of the person. It is a neutral
[emphasis added]
6.22 The Memo also includes information about appropriate contact organisations and advice on the form of the interview, the need
for the third person to also sign the record of interview and to be present during the taking of fingerprints or blood samples, and
the undesirability of referring a person with an intellectual disability to a psychiatric institution unless he or she also has a
mental illness. In relation to the form of the interview, the Memo states that:
9. If a member is aware in advance that the person to be interviewed may be intellectually or mentally impaired, the interview should
be conducted as soon as practicable.
10. Take particular care to ask questions which are understood by the person being interviewed.
11. Some intellectually or mentally impaired people are open to suggestion. Consider this when assessing the reliability of any answer
12. Take care to verify the facts presented and to obtain corroboration of admissions or statements made.
6.23 According to the Victorian Court of Criminal Appeal, in
R v Warrell,
these particular instructions:
represent part of a process which has been underway for some time to ensure that the principles that we have earlier mentioned [that
is, voluntariness, fairness and public policy] have practical operation with respect to the interrogation of intellectually disabled
persons and that the rights which the law states are possessed by every member of the community can, as a matter of practical reality,
be exercised by those who are so disadvantaged.
6.24 In that case it was argued that certain admissions made by the defendant should be excluded for reasons of fairness in the exercise
of discretion by the trial judge. The defendant in this case had an intellectual disability and was accused of raping a woman who
also had an intellectual disability. It was argued that the procedures in relation to the presence of an independent third person
had not been strictly followed in that the ITP did not have an opportunity to speak privately to the accused before the interview
was conducted. On appeal, counsel for the defendant/appellant referred to the rationale underlying the Victorian Police Standing
Orders in relation to people with an intellectual disability. According to the Court of Criminal Appeal:
He argued that, in part for the very reasons set out in the instructions, unless the third person was afforded a reasonable opportunity
to converse with and gain the confidence of the individual being interviewed, the presence of an additional person in the room might
not only constitute part of a meaningless ritual but could create a false sense of fairness. Indeed, the argument proceeded, the
intrusion of a person whose role was not clearly designated into the process might well increase the sense of pressure that the requirement
of the presence of an independent third person was intended to reduce. Consequently, a failure to give full effect to the letter
and, more importantly, the spirit of the instructions could, it was submitted, be seen to cast doubt upon the fairness of the interview
conducted. There is, in our view, considerable force in these submissions.
6.25 After consideration of the authorities in relation to voluntariness, fairness and illegally obtained evidence, the Court of Criminal
Appeal commented:
These concepts of voluntariness, fairness, and public policy are integral to the operation of our criminal justice system. They are
designed to ensure that any finding of guilt arrived at, on the basis of confessional evidence, is not only reliable but that the
evidence itself has been obtained in a socially acceptable fashion. It is important to keep in mind, in this context, that they are
concerned not only with the recognition and protection of the rights of those who may be suspected of the commission of criminal
offences, but that any such finding is not surrounded by an aura of possible injustice which compromises both the system and the
society which supports it.
It is against this background that, over recent years, there has been increased attention given to the problems encountered by specific
groups within our community with respect to our investigative and legal processes. The need for the adoption of special procedures
when dealing with children has long been accepted. In certain parts of the country, guidelines have been developed for the interrogation
of aboriginal offenders, (see R v Anunga
(1976) 11 ALR 412
, where the need for additional care to be taken in the interviewing of persons whose ethnic background may place them at a significant
disadvantage to other members of the community, was also identified).
More recently, the special position of the intellectually disabled has been receiving increased attention. The particular instructions,
to which attention has been directed in the present case, represent part of a process which has been underway for some time to ensure
that the principles that we have earlier mentioned have practical operation with respect to the interrogation of intellectually disabled
persons and that the rights which the law states are possessed by every member of the community can, as a matter of practical reality,
be exercised by those who are so disadvantaged. The instructions create, of course, purely internal standards of conduct for members
of the Police Force and cannot be attributed the force of law. Nevertheless, they do indicate the level of care which must, if the
integrity of the system is to be maintained, be taken in such situations.
6.26 Without making any finding in relation to voluntariness (which was not argued before the Court) the Court of Criminal Appeal
[b]y reason of his disability the applicant was in a position of disadvantage compared with other members of the community when being
interviewed by the police. On the evidence, he was effectively left without the assistance necessary if that disadvantage was to
be addressed. The lost opportunity of a private conversation with the independent third person, cannot now be remedied. Understandably,
because of the way the voir dire and its attendant submissions were conducted the judge, in our view, did not recognise the significance
of this lost opportunity when considering the fairness of admitting the confessional evidence. His Honour accordingly failed to take
into account a factor we consider was vital to the proper exercise of his discretion and evidence which was likely to have had a
significant bearing on the outcome of the trial was wrongly admitted. This ground is made out and the verdict of the jury must be
6.27 In Victoria the introduction of these instructions was supplemented by a training program for both police and the ITPs. Police
training is discussed in Chapter 4, above. There is presently a part time co-ordinator for the program based at the Office of the
Public Advocate in Victoria, responsible for locating, recruiting and training ITPs throughout the State. Originally the package
was presented to ITPs in a two hour session, but this was not found to be sufficient. The training now usually consists of two evening
sessions of two hours each, or a one-day program on weekends.
There are currently approximately 215 ITPs operating in Victoria, though a new recruitment is due to start in September 1993. They
are all volunteers and include Bail Justices, Justices of the Peace or service providers.
6.28 There have been concerns articulated about the operation of this program, however. Namely:
It has been stated, for example that the term “facilitate communication” is ambiguous and could be interpreted in three
(i) as creating a conducive atmosphere by the mere presence of a supportive person, or (ii) as playing a more direct and intervening
role in communication as would an interpreter or communication aide, or (iii) some combination of (i) and (ii). It is understood
that the term is designed to include a combination of functions, that is (iii), the new Police Standing Orders having been modelled
on procedures adopted in the United Kingdom.
It would therefore seem reasonably clear that the role of the third person in the Victoria Police Standing Orders is twofold, (i)
to actively interpret communication, and (ii) to provide support. It might be preferable if the Standing Orders indicated more clearly
that it is this combination of roles that is required. Whether the combination of roles will be successful, however, remains to be
seen. In many respects they represent distinctly different roles and functions that require different responsibilities and skills.
Unlike the position with respect to lawyer-client communications, discussions between a suspect and the ITP are not privileged. There
are a number of recent Victorian cases where the ITP has been called to give evidence, and this may operate to the detriment of the
person questioned. ITPs have been, or may in future cases be, questioned about the fairness of the interview conducted or the content
of discussions between themselves and the suspect before the commencement of the police interview.
Similarly, in England:
[t]here have been cases where social workers acting as appropriate adults have given information to the police. The British Association
of Social Workers (BASW) and the Association of Directors of Social Services (ADSS) both take the view that social workers have a
duty to assist in the prevention and detection of crime and are therefore justified in passing such information on to the police
and, if asked, should certainly pass it on.
It has been suggested that the role of the ITP may affect the role of the police discretion. Depending on one’s perspective,
reducing police discretionary powers may have both advantages or disadvantages. It may have particular advantages for victims, see
Chapter 9, below. In Victoria, in interviews with police officers:
Three members [of the Police Force] noted the creation of the ITP program had a significant impact on their discretionary powers,
their presence pushing members into a formal investigation of matters previously dealt with summarily. In one case detailed by a
member, a minor altercation occurred in a local institution between two residents. At the insistence of two ITPs (also Community
Visitors) two members spent hours investigating only to reach the same conclusion they made on arrival - that charges were unable
to be laid and the matter should be dealt with through civil proceedings. The member, although anxious to appear reasonable, was
clearly frustrated by his experience.
The other danger of an ITP program is that it will create the appearance of fairness without the actuality. As discussed above, there
is concern, for example that the ITP procedure will become a substitute for a right to legal assistance and will ultimately lead
to a second rate justice.
The Anunga Rules.
The “Anunga Rules” were introduced in 1976 by the Northern Territory Supreme Court to provide guidelines to police interrogating
Aborigines.
Failure to follow these rules can result in any statement being excluded from the evidence presented at the trial. The rules require
the presence of a friend of the accused during police questioning and for the careful administration of the caution. In Victorian
courts, it has also been suggested that the “Anunga Rules” extend to situations where a suspect is under some serious
disadvantage, including “some intellectual or other handicap”.
The Victorian Court of Criminal Appeal continued, however, that:
[w]hilst the particular guidelines set out in
case may not be appropriate in dealing with other disadvantaged persons, directed as they are to the difficulties which may be confronted
by members of a particular group, nevertheless, in situations where a police officer becomes aware of the reasonable possibility
that a person who he desires to interview may be suffering under some such disadvantage or disability, it is to be expected that
particular care will be taken in relation to any such questioning. In circumstances where doubt exists as to the suspect’s
knowledge of his rights under the law, or as to his ability to respond adequately to questions asked of him or as to his capacity
to choose freely to speak or remain silent, a failure to take reasonable steps to ensure that such knowledge or capacity exists may
provide part of the basis for a finding of unfairness and result in the discretionary exclusion of any statement made.
6.30 The Anunga Rules have been interpreted as providing a broader protection than that found in the requirement for an ITP, in making
a distinction:
between the two major roles that may be required of third or extra persons in police interviews. With regard to the latter, the Anunga
Rules distinguish what can be termed an active, “interpretive” role, from a more passive, “supportive” role.
This is achieved by introducing a third and fourth person into the interview, one to interpret, the other to provide support. The
Police Standing Orders, on the other hand, essentially propose that a single or third person perform both the “interpretive”
and “supportive” roles to “facilitate communication”.
6.31 The question arises whether both these roles are necessary, and, if so, whether they can both be filled by the same person. Both
the New South Wales and the Victorian instructions only envisage that there be one extra person at the interview (though not excluding
the presence of a lawyer). Obviously the more people required, the greater the logistical difficulties in obtaining such people at
every interview. Police are also likely to oppose the presence of a number of people in an interview. The Anunga Rules are not binding
in New South Wales.
Conclusions: presence of a third person at police interviews
6.32 The Commission believes that no interrogation of a person with an intellectual disability should take place unless a third person
is present. Taking into account all the concerns referred to above, the Commission proposes that the role of that person should be
to support the suspect with an intellectual disability, but not to be their lawyer or the guarantor of their rights. It is unrealistic
(and dangerous) to expect a person without legal training to fulfil such a role. The person should be clearly attending for the suspect’s
benefit, rather than to assist the police, and should not be a neutral or passive observer of the proceedings. The third party should
be known as a “Support Person”, reflecting the role envisaged by the Commission for that person. The Commission suggests
that the terms “appropriate adult”, with its implications of a child-like role for people with an intellectual disability,
and “independent third person”, with its implications of a neutral and passive role, should be avoided, though the Support
Person should be at least 18 years of age.
6.33 The Support Person should play a limited “interpretive” role if necessary, for example, assisting to explain the
police caution, or suggesting the police rephrase a question if the suspect is having difficulties, or explaining what the suspect
means by a particular word. Of course, the police should try to confirm such information provided by the Support Person with the
suspect. The Support Person should not be seen as an interpreter in the sense that the word is used for people who do not speak English.
In most cases the police should be able to directly address their questions to the suspect.
6.34 The Support Person should preferably be a person chosen by the suspect with an intellectual disability. It is anticipated that
such a person will know the suspect well, whether as a family member, guardian, carer or friend (though these categories are not
exclusive), and have the trust of the suspect, and be able to communicate easily with that person. The Support Person should not
be a police officer or anyone likely to be involved in the alleged offence; for example, as a witness. If the chosen person is unavailable,
unwilling to assist, or inappropriate due to their potential involvement in the investigation, or the suspect cannot nominate a person,
police should have access to a list of people with experience with the special needs of people with an intellectual disability in
their area who would be prepared to fulfil such a role from time to time.
6.35 The development of such a list will take some consideration but the Commission believes that it is crucial that such people be
available out of office hours and are easily accessible to the police. For example, ideally police would not have to make numerous
telephone calls, but there would be a single telephone number for the police to ring which could either inform the police of the
available people or, out of office hours, divert the call to the person on duty. It is meaningless to have such a requirement for
police if it is almost impossible to find a person to fulfil it. The Commission seeks further submissions as to the logistics of
developing such a list and the organisations which should be involved in its operation. Different procedures may be appropriate for
both city and country areas.
6.36 The Commission makes no proposals at this stage about the specific training which may need to be undertaken for such Support
Persons. It will be impossible for most Support Persons, as friends or family, to be so trained and it would be inappropriate to
create a distinction between “trained” and “untrained” Support Persons. However, a pamphlet or other information,
for example a short video, should be prepared setting out clearly the role of the Support Person. The information should be given
to the Support Person before the commencement of the interview.
6.37 The Commission also believes that there should be additional protections in relation to the role of the Support Person, for example:
the presence of a Support Person should not be seen as a substitute for the right of the person being questioned to have a lawyer
the Support Person should have an opportunity to speak to the suspect in private before the commencement of the interview, as is presently
the case in Victoria;
the Support Person should remain present for all aspects of the police interview, including fingerprinting, charging, bail and other
procedures. If an intimate search is required the Support Person should be of the same sex as the suspect;
all matters in relation to the attendance of a Support Person, including the appropriate contact telephone numbers and names of organisations
(particularly local services), should be clearly set out in police guidelines, preferably in a Code of Practice; and
the Support Person should be a competent but not compellable witness in respect of any hearing relating to the content and conduct
of the interview, to overcome the possibility of the Support Person being called to give evidence against the suspect.
The Commission seeks further comments and submissions about the further implications of the role of the Support Person and any additional
appropriate safeguards.
Attendance of a lawyer
6.38 Despite the benefits of a Support Person, the Commission believes, for the reasons discussed above, that such a person is inappropriate
and insufficient to protect the legal rights of a person with an intellectual disability. As well, due to the difficulties faced
by police when interviewing a person with an intellectual disability, it may be in the interests of the police to ensure, to the
extent that they are able, that any evidence obtained is not excluded by a court for reason of involuntariness or unfairness to the
accused. It has been suggested to the Commission that a lawyer, preferably with experience with people with disabilities, must also
be present at police interviews. Realistically, there may be few experienced lawyers available in this area. The American Bar Association’s
“Model Adult Act”, for example, does not refer to the need for a third person but rather states that a suspect “shall
not be interrogated in the absence of counsel when there is reason to believe that he or she has a developmental disability.”
This provision appears to be based on the perception that the usual police warning will be insufficient to ensure a valid waiver
of the right to remain silent during police questioning.
6.39 In the Police Powers Report, the Commission discussed the importance of a true “right” (that is, an enforceable right
rather than an ideal or a discretionary safeguard) to legal assistance during police questioning and made recommendations designed
to increase the accessibility of such advice.
According to that Report:
The purpose of the right to legal advice whilst in custody is to ensure that the arrested person is treated fairly by the criminal
process. The recognition of such a right not only helps to ensure that the right to silence and the privilege against self incrimination
receive due attention, but also means that if a statement is made by the arrested person it cannot be later objected to on the ground
that it was involuntarily made or unfairly obtained.
6.40 The Commission, therefore, recommended that a person must not only be informed of the right to communicate or attempt to communicate
with a lawyer but must also “be given the opportunity to meaningfully exercise that right”.
The Commission also recommended that a 24-hour duty solicitor scheme be established.
For a person with an intellectual disability, more may be required. Not only are such persons less likely to understand the right
to (or the importance of) a lawyer, assuming they are informed of the right, but they are less likely to be able to exercise that
right in a meaningful way. The Commission suggests that this protection needs to be ensured for a person with an intellectual disability
by requiring that a lawyer be present for police questioning. The Commission suspects that the police are likely to oppose such a
proposal, due to a fear that the requirement of the presence of a lawyer will hinder or unduly delay the investigation. It is worth
noting that a survey of police officers in England found that the majority (72%) of police officers “reported that a legal
adviser’s presence did not affect - at all or very much - the way they conducted police interviews”.
The Commission seeks further information about the advantages and disadvantages of this proposal.
BREACH OF GUIDELINES IN RELATION TO POLICE QUESTIONING
6.41 As raised in Chapter 2, there remains the issue of a sanction if the police guidelines (whether the Police Commissioner’s
Instructions or the proposed Code of Practice) are not followed. In relation to people with an intellectual disability police may
be tempted to breach the guidelines to obtain a confession. According to Associate Professor Susan Hayes:
As the situation stands if police breach the guidelines and obtain a confessional statement, there is extensive legal argument about
the admissibility of the confession and as likely as not, the confession will be admitted as evidence. Therefore the police are willing
to take the risk that the confession will be admitted as evidence, no matter how it is obtained.
6.42 Hayes and Craddock have commented that perhaps the exclusion of evidence is the only solution:
Whatever the makeup of the [New South Wales Law Reform Commission’s] reform package, it will not be likely to effect real change
unless it grapples with the issue of the consequences of breach of the law by police. Such has been the level of subverting of the
existing rules that it must be accepted that forms of discipline other than the exclusion of illegally obtained evidence do not work.
Whilst the courts may not be the most appropriate body for regulating police actions, the reality is that police are more likely
to refrain from overstepping the mark when it is apparent that doing so will result in the exclusion of evidence.
6.43 The Legal Aid Commission has commented:
To some degree the court can act as a safeguard to unfair questioning by police, but the wide discretion which magistrates and judges
have to exclude unfairly obtained evidence means that much relies on the understanding of intellectual disability that the judicial
officer has and the information provided to the court in that regard.
The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability argued that the consequences of non-compliance with the Police Commissioner’s
Instructions should be more serious; for example, the automatic exclusion of evidence so obtained and disciplinary action by superiors.
The Commission refers to proposal 4 and the discussion in Chapter 2, above, on this issue.
HE POLICE CAUTION AND THE RIGHT TO SILENCE
6.44 The police caution refers to one of the most important safeguards for people being questioned by the police, namely the right
to silence. The merits or otherwise of this right have been canvassed extensively elsewhere and the Commission has stated its strong
support for the retention of the right.
This right may be of more than usual importance for the person with an intellectual disability, due to the added disadvantages they
face in police questioning. One commentator has suggested that, in his opinion:
the problems associated with police interrogation of suspects who have an intellectual disability are so considerable that a solicitor
should not lightly advise the client to participate.
6.45 Hayes and Craddock have commented on the importance of the right to silence:
[a]n intellectually disabled suspect may need more than others to be able to rely upon the right to silence. Such a person may be
unable to cope with questioning which is designed to obtain a confession or incriminating material rather than to search for the
answers which will exculpate the suspect. The intellectually disabled accused may be simply too inarticulate or too overwrought to
ensure that the innocent explanation is made clear in order to balance or outweigh the incriminating circumstances. Having time to
think, take advice and give a coherent account should not be equated necessarily with a desire to fabricate a false story.
6.46 The purpose of the caution is to remind suspects of their legal rights in this regard. The caution in New South Wales does not
refer, as is commonly believed, to the right to a lawyer or to make a telephone call (as is the case in some American states). It
was suggested in the Issues Paper that the mere reading of the police caution to a person with an intellectual disability may be
an empty exercise and there should be a real attempt to ensure genuine understanding. In the Police Powers Report the Commission
recommended that the requirement of a caution be formalised in legislation and stated that:
the caution
must be given to the person in custody in a language which he or she understands
before any statement is taken or questioning is commenced. (This applies in respect of deaf and hearing impaired persons and
others with profound communication difficulties
as well as those with limited comprehension of English.) [Recommendation 2.5.2 - emphasis added]
By analogy there must be an attempt to administer the caution to a person with an intellectual disability in terms which he or she
will understand. However, as the Australian Law Reform Commission has commented:
... Any system which pays lip-service to the existence of rights yet does nothing to ensure that they are known and understood - and
indeed which may depend on their not being understood - is a system that discriminates against the weak, the unintelligent and the
uncomprehending in favour of the strong-willed, the smart and the linguistically competent.
6.47 According to the Police Commissioner’s Instructions, the caution to be used before questioning a person suspected of committing
a crime is as follows:
I am going to ask you certain questions. You are not obliged to answer unless you wish to do so, but whatever you say may be used
in evidence. Do you understand that?
The caution ends with a question inviting a “yes” or “no” response, which could invite a person with an intellectual
disability to answer “yes” without actually comprehending its meaning.
In the Commission’s own consultations some people with an intellectual disability, when read the police caution, nodded or
immediately answered “yes” even though they had been told just to listen and not to respond at this stage.
6.48 A person with even a mild level of intellectual disability may have difficulty in fully understanding this caution.
Words such as “obliged” may not be understood and other phrases, such as “may be used in evidence”, may
be understood literally, but not their intended meaning and the consequences.
At the Commission’s consultations, when asked to explain what they understood by the caution, and the meaning of the word
“evidence”, the participants gave answers which showed clearly some of the possible misunderstandings.
The answers given to the question “Do you think some people would answer “yes” to this question even if they did
not understand it? Why?” were particularly revealing:
A number of participants thought that some people, including themselves (“yes, I would say yes”) would sometimes answer
“yes” but usually said that they should not do this ... Others thought people would be too scared to say “no”:
“the police might not believe you ... you are scared to tell the truth”, or be influenced by the situation, for example:
“The police might keep repeating the question until the person gets the idea to say ‘yes’ “;
“They might be afraid to say ‘no’ in case they think that they are silly”;
“They might be in a hurry to get away ... out of the police station”; and
“If they are not sure, the volume of the policeman’s voice may convince them to say ‘yes’ ... without really
understanding.”
6.49 It also has been noted that:
, Forster J added that some Aboriginal people find the standard caution quite bewildering even if they understand that they do not
have to answer questions. After all, if they do not have to answer questions, then why would someone in a position of authority be
asking them. This may also be a difficult concept to explain to intellectually disabled people and highlights the need for a communication
aide or specially trained interviewer or communication aide and/or supportive person to facilitate understanding of this concept.
6.50 The participants in the Commission’s consultations made a number of suggestions about how the police could check that the
person has understood the caution, for example checking with the third person present or asking the person being interviewed “would
you like me to explain it again” or “explaining it in different or simpler words and then asking them if they really
understand it and taking time to do this.”
6.51 One police officer with considerable experience in dealing with people with an intellectual disability, Senior Constable Pedro
Fernandez, commented that in his experience no suspect with an intellectual disability has been able to understand the standard caution.
He did not believe that a standard caution or record of interview could be created that would be appropriate for all people with
an intellectual disability, due to their varying communication abilities.
He continued:
The only way to achieve a proper balance of justice, yet record an admission by an offender is to simplify the caution to suit each
individual to the point where it satisfies the court or jury.
6.52 It is also important to recognise that a person with an intellectual disability may not only need to have the right to silence
explained to him or her but also may need to be reminded regularly during the course of the interview of that right. This may lead
to some conflict between the police and the lawyer involved.
One person who has acted as an “Independent Third Person” in Victoria commented in this regard that:
I am quite sure that five minutes later there wouldn’t be five of the people that I have sat with that could fully explain it
[the caution] back to me because they simply don’t have the retention. At the point you explain it to them ... I am one hundred
per cent sure that all of them understood ... But none of them had the power to recall five minutes later ...
The Commission, therefore, believes that guidelines will need to be developed for the repetition of the caution at appropriate times
for the person with an intellectual disability.
Admissibility
6.53 As discussed in paras 6.41-6.43, guidelines in relation to the administering of the caution will be futile if there is no sanction
if the guidelines are not followed. Similarly, guidelines naturally will be ineffective if the suspect did not have the mental capacity
to understand the
of the right to silence. Associate Professor Susan Hayes has contrasted the New South Wales situation with that in the United States
where one court has held that:
[w]hen expert testimony indicates that a defendant could have intelligently understood the waiver of his constitutional rights only
if it were simply and clearly explained, the record must expressly and specifically establish that such an explanation was given.
Professor Hayes commented that the recording or documenting in relation to the giving of the police caution of “the elaborated
explanation and the client’s responses as part of the record of interview gets around the vague explanation often proffered
by police that they ‘explained it to him in simpler terms, and he understood’.”
6.54 The caution is likely to have more significance than before if cl 190 of the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) is enacted into legislation. It reads as follows:
(1) An investigating official must not in the course of official questioning ask a person who the investigating official has reasonable
grounds to suspect has committed an offence (the “suspect”) a question unless the investigating official has cautioned
the suspect.
(2) The caution must be to the effect that, except so far as the suspect is required by law to give specified information to the investigating
official, the suspect need not say or do anything, or answer any questions, in connection with the investigation, but that anything
the suspect does say or do may be used in evidence.
(3) The caution must be given in, or translated into, a language in which the suspect is able to communicate with reasonable fluency,
but need not be given in writing.
6.55 In relation to the issue of the suspect’s understanding, a Discussion Paper prepared by the National Council on Intellectual
Disability for the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission stated:
There is some judicial weight to the claim that for a record of interview to be admissible, an accused must understand the right to
silence and be capable of exercising choice:
R v Buchanan
[1966] VicRp 3
[1966] VR 9.
There is also authority for the proposition that evidence of an interview is not admissible where an accused has not understood the
administered caution:
R v Langdren
(New South Wales Supreme Court, per Mathews J, unreported 15.2.88). It is submitted that this must go further than a reliance on police
goodwill and the judicial discretion to exclude. Urgent amendments to the law of evidence are required to provide that where an accused
lacks the capacity to understand the caution administered to him or her and/or where an accused cannot effectively exercise the right
to surrender his or her right to silence, any record of interview will be inadmissible.
6.56 In the Issues Paper it was suggested that a similar problem of understanding arises in relation to the standard questions which
the police are required to ask at the end of an interview where a statement has been taken to ensure that the suspect “adopts”
the document (as required by the common law before the record can be tendered by the prosecution) as an accurate record. The Police
Commissioner’s Instructions
use the wording of the
(NSW) s 410, and include such questions as:
Q. Were you cautioned before making this statement that you were not obliged to make this statement unless you so desired, as anything
you did say may be taken down in writing and may be used in evidence?
The use of long or complex sentence structures and the conceptual nature of the language used means that such questions are unlikely
to be understood by a person with an intellectual disability. Such questions may well elicit a “yes” or “no”
answer from the suspect, without indicating his or her lack of comprehension.
The Commission believes that such questions will need to be asked in language appropriate for the person with an intellectual disability.
6.57 The Police Commissioner’s Instructions provide that the suspect have the opportunity to read the record of interview or
to have it read aloud.
Mark Ierace has commented that:
[a] suspect with an intellectual disability may have considerable difficulty in verifying the document’s contents. If he or
she has a poor short-term memory, reading it or listening to it read aloud may not ensure that the document is an accurate and
record of all that was said.
Ierace then made the following recommendations in relation to the role of the lawyer present at such an interview:
The lawyer should take particular care that the record is accurate, either by observing the contemporaneous recording on the typewriter,
or by making an independent record of all that is said. Further, the lawyer should ensure that the record of interview is read back
slowly, and that the suspect is frequently invited to comment on whether or not it is correct. Police officers are often reluctant
to depart from standard procedures, so if they insist on asking the ‘adoption’ questions in the usual form rather than
simplifying the language, the lawyer should at the first opportunity ask the client the same questions in an appropriate form, and
record the answers.
This difficulties involved in reading back the record of interview to a suspect will be largely overcome by the electronic recording
of interviews, which is discussed later in this chapter.
Conclusions: the police caution
6.58 The Commission suggests that it may be impossible to draft a standard caution which can be understood by all people with an intellectual
disability. Mark Ierace, for example, has suggested an alternative caution for an adult in the mild to moderately disabled range.
He commented:
It is a lengthy and cumbersome alternative. ... The objective of the wording is to communicate all the elements of the formal caution
and to balance the tendency of the situation to discourage an intellectually disabled person from refusing to answer questions.
His suggested procedure for a solicitor explaining the caution to his or her client is as follows:
At each step the client should be asked to explain back in his or her own words what has been said. If necessary, explain what a court
is, and what happens at court with people charged with an offence. Describe the alleged offence, so far as the police have divulged.
‘These police officers think you did (the alleged offence).’
‘They want to ask you some questions.’
‘The questions will be about what happened at (place of alleged offence) at (time of alleged offence).’
‘You don’t have to answer their questions.’
‘If you don’t want to answer their questions, that’s all right.’
‘If you do answer their questions, they’re going to write down (or type) [or record] everything that’s said.’
‘Then they’re going to make their minds up about whether you did it.’
‘If they think you did it, you will have to go to the court.’
‘These police officers will go to the court too. They will tell the court everything you said.’
‘The court will have to make up its mind about if you did (the offence).’
‘When the court is making up its mind, it’s going to know what you tell these police officers.’
‘That might help the court make up its mind about whether you did (the alleged offence).’
‘If you don’t want to say anything at all, these police officers won’t mind.’
‘If you do answer their questions, you can still change your mind and stop answering them. Just because they ask you a question,
you don’t have to answer it.’
6.59 A number of alternatives have been suggested to ensure that a person understands the police caution, for example:
(a) The police officer should ask the suspect to explain the caution back in his or her own words; or
(b) A final question should be added where the answer “no” is required to indicate understanding of the caution, for example:
“Do you have to answer any of the questions the police ask you?” This is intended to overcome the tendency to answer
“yes” to any question asked by an authority figure;
(c) A simplified version of the caution should be used,
for example: “The police want to ask you questions. You do not have to answer them. If you do, the police will write them down.
Later on, whatever you said can be read out in court and used to help the court show you broke the law”;
(d) an alternative form of the caution is required, breaking it down into a simple question/answer format, as set out above.
6.60 Although the Commission believes that police should take care to ensure that a person understands the caution, there are dangers
in the use of the above methods: the fact that a person with an intellectual disability answers “No” to the question
“Do you have to answer my questions?” does not mean that the person has understood the
of the right to silence. The Commission seeks further submissions in this regard but proposes that police officers should be aware
that, where they suspect a person has an intellectual disability, the person may be unable to understand the concept of the right
to silence which underlies the requirement of the police caution. They should be aware that a confession obtained in such a case
may be later held to be inadmissible on the grounds of voluntariness or unfairness. The issue of inability to understand the caution
is considered further in relation to confessions, below.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: POLICE QUESTIONING
19. Police must use appropriate methods of dealing with suspects with an intellectual disability. Police should be aware of the special
susceptibility of people with an intellectual disability to authority figures and of their tendency to give answers that they believe
are expected of them. Police also should be aware of the difficulties people with an intellectual disability may have with details
such as times, dates and numbers. Leading or repetitive questions should be avoided and an attempt made to pitch the language and
concepts used at a level which will be understood. These matters should be clearly spelled out in police guidelines, preferably in
a Code of Practice.
The police caution
20. Where a police officer suspects that a person has an intellectual disability, the officer should be aware that the person may
be unable to understand the concept of the right to silence which underlies the requirement of the police caution. The officer should
be aware that a confession obtained in such a case may be later held to be inadmissible on the grounds of voluntariness or unfairness.
Presence of a lawyer
21. No interrogation of a suspect with an intellectual disability should take place unless a lawyer representing the person is present.
Presence of a “Support Person”
22. No interrogation of a suspect with an intellectual disability should take place unless a third party is present. (This is exclusive
of the legal adviser referred to in the preceding proposal.) The name, role and identity for that person are as follows:
The third person should be known as a “Support Person”. This name reflects the role envisaged by the Commission for that
person. The Commission suggests that the terms “appropriate adult”, with its implications of a child-like role for people
with an intellectual disability, and “independent third person”, with its implications of a neutral and passive role,
should be avoided.
The role of the Support Person is, as its name suggests, to be supportive of the suspect with an intellectual disability, but not
to be their lawyer or the guarantor of their rights. It is unrealistic (and dangerous) to expect a person without legal training
to fulfil such a role. The Support Person clearly should be attending for the suspect’s benefit, rather than to assist the
police, and should not be a neutral or passive observer of the proceedings. The Support Person should play a limited “interpretive”
role if necessary; for example, assisting to explain the police caution, or suggesting the police rephrase a question if the suspect
is having difficulties, or explaining what the suspect means by a particular word or phrase.
The Support Person preferably should be a person (above the age of 18 years) requested by the suspect with an intellectual disability.
It is anticipated that such a person will know the suspect well, whether as a family member, guardian, carer or friend (though these
categories are not exclusive) and have the trust of the suspect. The Support Person should be able to communicate easily with, and
be able to assist, that person. The Support Person should not be a police officer or anyone likely to be involved in the alleged
offence; for example, as a witness. If the chosen person is unavailable, unwilling to assist, or inappropriate due to their potential
involvement in the investigation, or the suspect cannot nominate a person, police should have access to a list of people with experience
with the special needs of people with an intellectual disability in their area who would be prepared to fulfil such a role from time
23. The Support Person:
should have an opportunity to speak privately with the suspect before the interview commences;
should remain present for all aspects of the police interview, including cautioning, charging, fingerprinting, bail and other procedures;
if an intimate search is required, should be of the same sex as the suspect.
The presence (or absence) of the Support Person in relation to each of these procedures should be recorded, by the Custody Officer.
24. All matters in relation to the attendance of a Support Person, including the appropriate contact telephone numbers and names of
organisations (particularly local services), should be set out clearly in police guidelines, preferably in a Code of Practice.
25. A pamphlet or other material (such as a video) should be prepared which sets out all relevant information about the role of the
Support Person. This material should be provided to the Support Person before the commencement of any interrogation.
26. The Support Person should be a competent but not compellable witness in respect of any hearing relating to the content and conduct
of the interview, to overcome the possibility of the Support Person being called to give evidence against the suspect.
Repetition of the caution and the adoption of the statement
27. People with an intellectual disability who are capable of understanding the concepts involved in the police caution should be
reminded periodically of the caution, particularly after any substantial break in the questioning.
28. The standard “adoption” questions asked at the end of an interview should be asked in language appropriate to the
person with an intellectual disability. If the interview is not electronically recorded, the person also should be given the opportunity
of having their record of interview read back to them slowly, and should be asked frequently whether it is correct.
CONFESSIONS
6.61 As discussed above, the explanation of the caution would not, in itself, be sufficient to protect the person with an intellectual
disability. The Legal Aid Commission of NSW stated that:
... it is often the case that an offender denies ever having received such a caution or they simply did not understand its importance
and therefore forgot the fact of the caution because of the overall stress and anxiety of being arrested.
6.62 It was suggested in the Issues Paper that police should be aware of the prevalence of unreliable confessions from
people with an intellectual disability for a number of reasons. These include: being overly impressed by authority figures and anxious
to please; failing to understand the questions asked or the consequences of their “confession”; not wishing to appear
stupid; or wishing to conclude the matter as quickly as possible.
The High Court has made similar warnings, for example in
[t]he uneducated - perhaps semi-illiterate - man who has a “record” and is suspected of some offence may be practically
so great and so over-powering that a “statement” may be “taken” which seems very damning but which is really
very unreliable.
Such warnings will have even greater force for a person with an intellectual disability.
6.63 In Instruction 37, headed “Doubtful Confessions”, the Police Commissioner’s Instructions also state that:
[m]any people, from psychopathic or other causes, confess to crimes they did not commit, therefore, closely examine confessions before
accepting them as statements of fact.
Before charging a person with a criminal offence on the basis of a confession, carefully investigate further to adduce independent
corroborative evidence of the complicity of that person in the crime.
If you cannot find such corroboration, refer the matter to a senior officer for review, preferably one with detective experience,
before preferring a charge.
6.64 In response to this Instruction, Hayes and Craddock have commented that:
[e]xperience shows, however, that charges are quite frequently laid against persons who are mentally abnormal or intellectually disabled,
entirely on the basis of their own admissions. The breach of the instruction is easily explained by an assertion that the confession
did not seem doubtful. The instruction lacks any guidance as to the circumstances which might suggest that the confession is “doubtful”,
and as indicated before, there is no sanction for breach.
Other submissions to the Commission have expressed concern that people with an intellectual disability may be seen as an easy target
for police “clear-up rates” and that there are examples of alleged confessional statements containing language levels
well beyond that person’s expertise.
Consideration of confessions by the courts
6.65 There remains the question of how (alleged) confessions by people with an intellectual disability should be treated by the courts.
This issue has already been referred to in Chapter 2, above, in relation to questioning which is not carried out in accordance with
the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions. Australian courts have tended to be unwilling to use the rules of criminal procedure
and their discretion to exclude probative evidence to ensure police compliance with the law governing investigations or to enforce
police discipline.
6.66 Even where the police have scrupulously complied with all relevant protections, there remains the question of whether the confession
should be excluded on other grounds. As discussed, the court
exclude involuntary confessions, and has the
to exclude unfair or overly prejudicial evidence. These discretions have been exercised in relation to statements or confessions
by persons with mental disabilities which the trial judge believes are fabricated or unreliable,
and are now contained in the
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW). The principles in relation to the consideration of confessions by people with an intellectual disability are set out
by the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal in
R v Parker,
which were summarised in the headnote as follows:
The fact that an accused person suffered some unsoundness of mind or psychiatric disorder at the time that a confession was allegedly
obtained from the person:
(a) does not necessarily make evidence of the admission inadmissible;
(b) may be relevant to whether evidence of the confession is inadmissible on the ground that the confession was not made in exercise
of free choice or was made under duress;
(c) may be relevant to whether the trial judge should in his discretion exclude the evidence;
(d) may be relevant to the weight to be given to the confession and to whether a verdict founded on it is unsafe and unsatisfactory;
(e) should lead a trial judge in his summing-up to draw to the attention of the jury the possible danger of basing a conviction on
such evidence unless it is confirmed by other evidence.
6.67 It is also worth noting that it has been held in New South Wales that the defendant’s lack of awareness of his right to
silence did not justify, on its own, the rejection of a confession on the ground that it was not voluntary.
However, recently in the District Court of New South Wales a statement which has relied on as a confession was excluded on the
ground that it was “not made voluntarily within the meaning of the law as now laid down, that is that they were made in the
exercise of a free choice to speak or remain silent.” Judge Dent made this finding on the basis of expert evidence that the
accused did not have sufficient verbal intelligence to understand the right to remain silent.
This issue also arose in the Queensland Court of Appeal case of
which is discussed in Chapter 2, above. In that case, in relation to voluntariness, Dowsett J commented that:
once it is shown that the accused have defective understandings of verbal communications, it becomes difficult to assess to what extent
any so called admissions can be said to be voluntary in the sense that the various warnings must be of doubtful value. Further, one
is left in serious doubt as to what reliance can be placed upon such confessions if they are admitted.
6.68 In this case, most of the accused were children and all of the accused were of Aboriginal descent. The children did not have
an intellectual disability but their level of comprehension of spoken English was lower than their chronological ages.
The confessions were excluded on the grounds that they were not voluntary, having regard to the circumstances in which they were
said to be made, and the mental capacities and ages of the accused. The fact that a proper warning was not given was held to affect
the voluntariness of a confession, “particularly in the case of children and other people not experienced in our social and
legal system.”
Similar comments may be applicable by analogy for the accused person with an intellectual disability.
Alternative protections
6.69 The National Council on Intellectual Disability has questioned whether the existing protections go far enough:
To protect the offender with intellectual disability it appears that judicial discretion may be insufficient. Whilst education of
judicial officers about intellectual disability may strengthen the protection provided by the discretion to exclude, provisions may
need to be inserted into the law in each jurisdiction to ensure that a record of interview adopted by a person who lacked sufficient
understanding to knowingly do so should be prima facie inadmissible.
6.70 The American Bar Association’s standards provide for the admission of expert evidence in relation to the effect of a person’s
intellectual disability on the reliability and voluntariness of their statement and the validity of any waiver by that person of
their rights before giving the statement.
There is also support for the admissibility of expert evidence in relation to the reliability of such a confession in Australia.
6.71 In England the weight given to a confession is affected by the absence or presence of an “appropriate adult” in police
questioning. According to s 77 of the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act
(1) Without prejudice to the general duty of the court at a trial on indictment to direct the jury on any matter on which it appears
to the court appropriate to do so, where at such a trial-
(a) the case against the accused depends wholly or substantially on a confession by him; and
(b) the court is satisfied-
(i) that he is mentally handicapped; and
(ii) that the confession was not made in the presence of an independent person,
the court shall warn the jury that there is special need for caution before convicting the accused in reliance on the confession,
and shall explain that the need arises because of the circumstances mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b) above.
Evidence Bill
1993 (NSW) also provides, at cl 164, that a judge may warn a jury about the unreliability of certain evidence, including “evidence
the reliability of which may be affected by age, ill-health (whether physical or mental), injury or the like”, though it does
not specifically refer to intellectual disability.
6.72 The Commission believes that the courts should use particular care in relation to confessions made by a person with an intellectual
disability, particularly where that confession is not corroborated. Where a confession is admitted into evidence the court should
issue a warning to the jury of the danger of convicting on the basis of the confession alone where the person has an intellectual
disability. The Commission seeks further submissions about what further protections may be appropriate.
TENTATIVE PROPOSAL FOR REFORM: CONFESSIONS
29. In light of the recognised vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability, the court should take extra care to determine
whether the statement was truly “voluntary”, and to determine whether a voluntary admission should nevertheless be excluded
in the exercise of the court’s discretion on the basis of unfairness or prejudice to the accused. Expert evidence is likely
to be relevant on this point. Where a confession is admitted into evidence, a statutory provision should require the court to issue
a warning to the jury of the danger of convicting on the basis of the confession alone where the person has an intellectual disability,
because of doubts about the reliability of such material.
ELECTRONIC RECORDING OF POLICE INTERVIEWS
6.73 The new system of electronic recording of police interviews may be particularly useful in relation to people with an intellectual
disability and may reveal, far more clearly than through a transcript, the nature of the person’s response, including non-verbal
responses and level of understanding. The difficulty of “reading back” a statement to a person with low or no literacy
skills is also avoided. It has been stated that:
[t]he need for tape or similar recording of interviews would seem essential so that a permanent and exact account of the interview
could be accessed when required. Such recording in combination with later analysis might help to eliminate some of the problems associated
with interpreting interviews where communication may be a problem. As recommended for interviews with children, the interpretation
of responses by the police as a record of interview would also not be advisable for interviews with the intellectually disabled given
the special expertise that may be required in interpretation of them.
6.74 The Legal Aid Commission of NSW strongly supported the use of electronically-recorded or videotaped interviews for people with
an intellectual disability.
The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability also recommended that entire interviews be taped, but did not see this as
a complete solution as there was still the possibility of misinterpretation of the actions or reactions of the person with an intellectual
disability being interviewed by later viewers of the tape.
6.75 All interviews of people suspected of committing a Commonwealth crime must be tape recorded.
In New South Wales the changes in relation to electronic recording of police interviews, which were foreshadowed in the Police Powers
have largely been implemented. The system currently in use is known as the ERISP (Electronic Recording of Interviews with Suspected
Persons) system. Over the last two to three years the purpose-built recording machines have been installed at over 300 locations
throughout New South Wales. These machines simultaneously record one videotape and three audio tapes. The interviewing officer merely
has to switch the machine on and off; the camera does not require manual operation. Date and time coding on the tapes and sealing
procedures minimise the risk of tampering with the tapes. The suspect also receives one copy of the audio tape for his or her own
record. Portable machines (which record three audio tapes) are also available. In addition, a “field” video team can
be requested to record “walk through” interviews outside the police station; for example, at the scene of the crime.
All interviews of suspects in relation to indictable New South Wales offences (which includes all serious offences) should now be
recorded. Electronic recording also has been used to take statements from victims, for example, in relation to child and sexual assault
victims. The use of electronic recording of victims and witnesses is discussed further in Chapter 9, below.
6.76 Electronic recording appears to be popular with the police, for it is not only a very effective prosecution tool but also, by
removing the necessity for one officer to manually record the interview, allows for shorter interviews. Shorter interviews may also
be helpful for the person with an intellectual disability, many of whom find concentration for long periods difficult. It also protects
police from some allegations of inappropriate behaviour.
6.77 In Victoria all confessions and admissions in relation to indictable offences must be tape recorded, unless there are exceptional
circumstances.
The Victoria Police has considered this issue as follows:
It is standard practice in Victoria to tape record in all instances of indictable offences and for certain serious indictable offences
to video tape interviews. Since the High Court decision in
McKinney and Judge v R
[1991] HCA 6
(1991) 65 ALJR 241
provision of tape recordings in respect of all confessions and admissions in cases where there may be doubt has led to stricter scrutiny
of police practices in relation to all offences in Victoria. It is considered that the decision in
could have profound consequences in cases of confessions made by intellectually disabled persons. Although there is no legislative
requirement to tape record non-indictable matters in Victoria it would be considered standard policy that wherever possible in cases
where a person was intellectually disabled, an independent third party or tape recording would be employed whether the offence in
question was indictable or not. There are however, certain minor summary offences which may be dealt with expeditiously at the scene
and provide fewer problems for the person involved and police - the trauma of bringing a person into a police station can be avoided
for instance. Exercise of police discretion in such circumstances and better training of police in identifying and dealing with intellectually
disabled persons will be of benefit in such cases.
Disadvantages
6.78 Videotaping of interviews should not be seen as the perfect solution to all concerns about the police interview. Its potential
abuses have been well documented.
In fact, by its appearance of fairness and verisimilitude, it can provide the jury with a confidence which may be unjustified in
the accuracy of all contained within the interview. It may also work against the suspect with an intellectual disability who has
a high level of verbal skills, in that the jury may not believe, on viewing the video, that the person does, in fact, have an intellectual
disability. It has been stated by a New Zealand commentator that:
[t]he advantages to the prosecution of a videotaped interview and disadvantages to the suspect are so manifest that the key issue
to be faced by the practitioner called to advise a suspect before a videotaped interview is whether or not to allow it to take place
at all. ... Suspects need to be told plainly that the jury will treat the video as the defendant’s evidence whatever warnings
or directions are given by a trial Judge. There is no comparison whatever between the impact on a jury of a video of an interview
and the recital by a detective of his or her record of an interview from a notebook.
6.79 There is also a growing number of cases on the vexed issue of the treatment of statements which are not so recorded:
The very weight and importance to be given to the videotaped interviews and the central importance that they will have at trials will
mask and detract from any exchanges between a member of the police and suspect that have gone on
the videotaped interview. If there has been any
exchange that has involved improper pressure on a suspect ... then that is unlikely to be manifested on the taped interview. Further
if the interview appears normal as to content and manner, and follows the procedural guidelines, it can only reinforce evidence of
proper behaviour in favour of the police member. Its own content will be held against the suspect.
[emphasis in the original]
6.80 In the Police Powers Report the Commission commented that there were also:
questions about the propriety and fairness of taping staged re-enactments of the crime, visits to the scene of the crime and other
presentational/non-discursive modes of investigation.
For such reasons, the Commission recommended that a detailed Code of Practice be developed to regulate tape recording, as is the
case in England. The NSW Police Service has prepared a manual about the ERISP system and the “field” video unit has its
own procedures manual. The system, however, is not yet governed by any New South Wales legislation, apart from an amendment to the
Listening Devices Act
(NSW) to allow a recording to be made without the consent of a suspect for the purpose of recording the suspect’s refusal to
be electronically recorded.
The draft New South Wales
Evidence Bill
1993, released on 27 August 1993, however, includes provisions covering this area.
The ERISP Manual includes an amended caution for electronic recording as follows:
“you are not obliged to say
anything unless you wish to do so, but whatever you say
will be recorded and may be used in evidence. Do you understand that?” [emphasis in the original]
TENTATIVE PROPOSAL FOR REFORM: ELECTRONIC RECORDING
30. Police interviews with a suspect with an intellectual disability in respect of
criminal offences, should be videotaped as the words, gestures, phrasing and the intonation used may be of special significance.
IDENTIFICATION PARADES
6.81 It was suggested in the Issues Paper that identification parades should not be used where the suspect has an intellectual disability,
as some people with an intellectual disability may be particularly obvious in such parades. There were varied responses to this issue
in submissions. Victoria Police, for example, disagreed with the suggestion:
Identity is the first of all points to prove in a prosecution case. Whilst it is true that a person with an intellectual disability
be obvious in a parade, it is also a point of [the Commission’s Issues Paper] that such a person should be treated as responsible
for an action (though with some special consideration). As such it is considered that an intellectually disabled person should not
be excluded from identification parades (perhaps with the proviso that the suspect intellectually disabled person was not the only
intellectually disabled person on the parade - logistics though may be difficult). If there is doubt in relation to identification
evidence as a result of the parade it is considered that it should be a matter for the court to direct of the danger of such identification
evidence rather than remove such an investigatory process.
6.82 It is not within the scope of this reference to consider the general advantages and disadvantages of identification parades.
Police procedures for identification parades are found in Instruction 37.19 of the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions.
The Instruction requires that identification be carried out “fairly” and the other members of the line-up be “persons
of similar age, height, appearance, and class of life, to the suspect.” In order to overcome the concern that a person with
an intellectual disability may be particularly obvious in such a parade, special care must be taken by police to ensure the fairness
of the procedure in the particular circumstances. This consideration should take place in terms of the factors set out in the Instructions.
TENTATIVE PROPOSAL FOR REFORM: IDENTIFICATION PARADES
31. Identification parades should not be used for people with an intellectual disability in circumstances where unfairness to the
suspect is likely to result, due to the unusual manner or appearance of the particular suspect.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. Hunter Region Developmental Disability Service
(2 July 1992). This service, therefore, has decided to produce its own policy statement about procedures to be followed when their
clients come into contact with the police.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper 8, 1992) at para 4.9.
. J Bright “Intellectual disability and the criminal justice system: new developments”
Law Institute Journal
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Consultations
(Research Report 3, 1993) at paras 3.57, 3.60, 4.5, 4.26.
The Right to be Heard: Obtaining Evidence from Intellectually Disabled People
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, Discussion Paper, 1988) at 24-25. Feben concluded, at 26-27, that “there may be a
need for a person to perform an active, interpretive role in police interviews” with people with an intellectual disability.
Sitting on a See-Saw: An Evaluation of the Independent Third Persons Program
(Unpublished Thesis, University of Melbourne, 1992) at 44. Note that the total number of interviews was very small, only nine police
officers, though all had at least seven years’ experience in the Force. Only those difficulties reported by four or more of
the police officers are recorded here.
. B Tully and D Cahill
Police Interviewing of the Mentally Handicapped. An Experimental Study
(The Police Foundation, London, 1984), cited in S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 55.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at para 4.12.
. D Indermaur, J Cockram and R Underwood “Police and the intellectually disabled” at 9, cited in Deane at 14.
. Feben at 65-66.
. By Circular 92/27.
. National Council on Intellectual Disability
The Rights of People with Disabilities: Areas of Need for Increased Protection
(Discussion Paper, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, 1988) at 59.
. For example Mr P Hutten
(14 July 1992) at 3.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 7.
. The Division of Intellectual Disability Services, Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs, Queensland
(18 August 1992) at 3.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at para 4.11.
. L M Osman
Finding New Ways: A Review of Services to the Person with Intellectual Disability in the Victorian Criminal Justice System
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988) at 17.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 17.
. New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(September 1992) at 7.
. Deane at 49.
. Mr W Everson, ACT Council on Intellectual Disability
(20 July 1993) at 2.
. Feben at 30-31.
. New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(September 1992) at 7.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 7 (emphasis in original).
. FCM 92.2.26. Note that a Force Circular Memo is issued pursuant to the powers of the Chief Commissioner under the
Police Regulation Act
1958 (Vic) and in the exercise of his Office under the
Public Service Act
(Vic). They remain in force generally until a specific date unless they are earlier revoked or incorporated in Standing Orders or
the Police Manual.
. South Australia Police General Orders: General Order 3580 at para 9.1-9.3, which is as follows:
9.1 Prior to commencing an interview on a specific issue with a person who appears to be suffering some mental illness, disorder
of the mind, psychological impairment or intellectual retardation, members must satisfy themselves that the person is able to comprehend
sufficiently to enable the interview to be conducted. When there is any doubt about the level of comprehension, members should arrange
for a relative, guardian or other suitable third party to be present before the interview proceeds.
9.2 Whenever a person suspected of being mentally ill or intellectually retarded is interviewed in relation to an offence, the member
conducting the interview must, whenever practical, ensure that a relative or guardian is present.
9.3 Whenever a person suspected of being mentally ill or intellectually retarded is reported or arrested the members concerned must
take steps to inform a relative or guardian of the person as soon as practical.
. Western Australia Police Manual at paras 3-3.44 - 3-3.46, which is as follows:
3-3.44 Where the accused is a child, or someone under a disability, more persuasive evidence is needed than ordinarily is required
to prove that a confession is voluntary. It is always advisable in such cases to conduct the interview or obtain subsequent verification
of the voluntariness of the confession or other statement of admission in the presence of a third person such as the accused’s
parents, other relative, friend, welfare officer, justice of the peace, etc or a senior police officer, not involved in the investigation.
3-3.45 The presence of such an individual should be recorded, as should any exchange between that person and the accused. Such exchanges
or the giving of advice should not be prevented unless it amounts to disruption of the interview.
1-3.46 Where the accused will not have a person other than the investigating officers present during or after interview, he may not
be forced to do so but his refusal should be recorded. Any request for an independent observer which was found to be reasonably impracticable
to comply with, and the reason why the request could not be satisfied, also should be recorded.
. Commissioner of Police’s Memorandum of Conduct: 4.54A.
. Northern Territory Police, General Order “Questioning and Investigations”, Q1 at para 14.
Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984 (UK) (s 66):
Codes of Practice
(revised ed, HMSO, London, 1991) (the “PACE Codes”). Code C: “Code of Practice for the Detention, Treatment and
Questioning of Persons by Police Officers”, at para 3.9. The advantages of a Codes of Practice approach are discussed in Chapter
. Defined in PACE Code C at para 1.7(b).
. PACE Code C at para 11.14. Note that the Code provides, at para 1.4, that “[i]f an officer has any suspicion, or is told in
good faith, that a person of any age may be mentally disordered or mentally handicapped, or mentally incapable of understanding the
significance of questions put to him or his replies, than that person shall be treated as a mentally disordered or mentally handicapped
person for the purposes of this code.”
. PACE Code C at para 11.16.
. B L Irving and I K McKenzie
Police Interrogation: The Effects of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
(The Police Foundation, London, 1989) at 60.
. PACE Code C at paras 16.1.
. PACE Code C, Annexure A, at para 4.
. PACE Code C at para 3.13.
. C Williams
Crime Against People with Learning Difficulties: What is happening?
(Norah Fry Research Centre, University of Bristol, 1993) at 26-27.
. P Fennell “The Appropriate Adult” [1993] 90 (19)
The Law Society’s Gazette
. D Dixon, K Bottomley, C Coleman, M Gill and D Wall “Safeguarding the rights of suspects in police custody” (1990) 1
Policing and Society
115 at 120.
. FCM 92.2.26.
R v Warrelll
[1993] 1 VR 671.
. At 678-679.
. Victoria. Department of Community Services
Statewide Victoria Police and Independent Third Person Training Project Report
(Department of Community Services, Report 5, April 1993) at 8.
. Feben at 28-31. Note that Feben, at 31, thought that the ITP could, however, fill the role of both support person and interpreter
in most cases.
. Deane at 42.
. Fennell at 20.
. Deane at 59.
(1976) 11 ALR 412.
The guidelines are set out in the headnote to the case as follows:
“In rejecting the tender by the Crown of typewritten records of interview between Aboriginal accused persons and investigating
police officers in two cases heard by Forster J of the Supreme Court of Northern Territory, his Honour was joined by Muirhead and
Ward JJ in laying down the following guidelines as an expression of the view of the court:-
(1) An interpreter should be present to ensure complete and mutual understanding.
(2) Where practicable “a prisoner’s friend” should be present during interrogation. The “prisoner’s
friend” should be someone in whom the prisoner will have confidence, by whom he will feel supported.
(3) Care should be taken in administering the caution; and after the interrogating police officer has explained the caution in simple
terms, he should ask the prisoner to tell him, phrase by phrase, what is meant by the caution.
(4) Care should be taken in formulating questions so that, so far as possible, the answer which is wanted or expected is not suggested
in any way.
(5) Even when an apparently frank and free confession has been obtained, police should continue to investigate the matter in an endeavour
to obtain proof of the commission of the offence from other sources.
(6) The prisoner, if being interrogated at meal time should be offered a meal, and, where facilities so permit, should always be
offered tea or coffee. If there are no facilities he should always be offered a drink of water. Further, the prisoner should always
be asked if he wishes to use the lavatory.
(7) No interrogation should take place while the prisoner is disabled by illness, drunkenness or tiredness. Further, interrogation
should not continue for an unreasonably long time.
(8) If sought, reasonable steps should be taken to obtain legal assistance for the prisoners.
(9) If it is necessary to remove the prisoner’s clothing for forensic examination, steps must be taken to supply substitute
(10) The guidelines are not absolute rules, but the consequence of their non-observance may be the exclusion of statements of persons
questioned. They might also provide guidance in interrogating migrants.”
R v Narula & ors
[1987] VicRp 55
(1986) 22 A Crim R 409
at 426, per Vincent J.
. At 426-427.
. Feben at 19.
American Bar Association Model Statute
s 4(4) cited B D Sales, D M Powell, R Van Duizend and Assoc
Disabled Persons and the Law: State Legislative Issues
(Plenum Press, New York, 1982) at 727-728. The American Bar Association model rules and statutes do not have force of law unless
they are implemented into federal or state legislation; however they are highly respected and regarded as setting certain standards
for the legal system, and there is a good record for implementation over the years.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990) Report 66 at paras 5.20-5.36 and Recommendation 5.3.
. NSWLRC Report 66 at para 5.24.
. Recommendation 5.3.1.
. Recommendation 5.3.5.
. Dixon at 124. For a full report of the research see K Bottomley, C Coleman, D Dixon, M Gill and D Wall
The Impact of Aspects of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 on Policing in a Force in the North of England: Final Report
(Centre of Criminology and Criminal Justice, University of Hull, 1989).
. Associate Professor S C Hayes
(7 May 1993).
. Hayes and Craddock at 78.
(24 July 1992) at 3.
(September 1992) at 7.
. NSWLRC Report 66 at para 5.1, 5.9-5.14.
. Ierace at 15.
. Hayes and Craddock at 69.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Criminal Investigation
(Report 2, 1975) at para 99, cited in NSWLRC Report 66 at para 3.39.
. Instruction 37.14. Note that the same Instruction also provides a slightly longer version of the caution to be used when the answers
are to be recorded, that is: “I am going to ask you certain questions which will be recorded (on typewriter, in shorthand,
on a tape recorder, etc., as the case may be). You are not obliged to answer unless you wish to do so, but whatever you say will
be recorded and may be used in evidence. Do you understand that?”
. Ierace at 17.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at para 3.57.
. The Commission has already discussed the police caution and its effectiveness in NSWLRC Report 66 (1990), particularly paras 3.38-3.47,
and NSWLRC IP 8 at paras 4.13-4.15.
. Ierace at 17.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at paras 3.58-3.59.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at para 3.60.
. Feben at 40.
. NSWLRC RR 3 at para 3.61.
. Senior Constable P Fernandez, Wagga Wagga,
(8 December 1991) at 19.
. Fernandez at 19.
. Ierace at 19.
. Quoted in Deane at 35.
Hines v State
384 So 2d 1171
, 1181 (Ala Crim App 1980).
(7 May 1992) at 1.
. National Council on Intellectual Disability
The Rights of People with Disabilities: Areas of Need for Increased Protection
(Discussion Paper, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, 1988) at 58.
. Instruction 37.16.
. Ierace at 21.
. Instruction 37.16.
. Ierace at 21 (emphasis in original).
. Ierace at 21-22.
. Ierace at 18.
. Ierace at 18.
. Bright at 933.
. This was raised in a number of submissions, for example the New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(September 1992) at 7.
. This was prepared for the Commission’s consultations with people with an intellectual disability.
(24 July 1992) at 3.
. NSWLRC IP 8 at para 4.16.
[1950] HCA 25
(1950) 82 CLR 133
. Hayes and Craddock at 62.
. NSWLRC Report 66 at para 6.36.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
(Interim Report 2, 1985) Vol 2 at para 143, cited in NSWLRC Report 66 at para 6.32.
(1990) 19 NSWLR 177.
(1991) 56 A Crim R 414.
Note that the Court of Criminal Appeal did, however, comment, at 419, that “[i]t is unnecessary for present purposes to consider
whether there might not be some circumstances in which the personal condition of an accused will alone be such as to render a statement
involuntary: cf
(1979) 44 CCC (2d) 498
”; and later at 420 “[j]ust as the fact that a person is mentally handicapped may be of relevance to an argument that
his will has been overborne, so also the fact that a person is unaware of his legal rights may, in combination with other facts and
circumstances, be relevant to such an argument. However, mentally handicapped people can make voluntary admissions (
[1946] HCA 55
(1946) 73 CLR 316)
and so can people who are unaware of their legal rights.”
(unreported) District Court of New South Wales, Dent J, 21 September 1992 at 6-7.
[1988] 2 Qd R 308.
. At 317-318.
. National Council on Intellectual Disability
The Rights of People with Disabilities: Areas of Need for Increased Protection
(Discussion Paper, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, 1988) at 59.
. American Bar Association Criminal Justice Standards Committee Task Force
Standards on Competence and Confession
(American Bar Association, August 1988) cited in Hayes and Craddock at 59.
[1989] HCA 28
(1989) 167 CLR 94
R v Jackson
[1962] HCA 49
(1963) 108 CLR 591
(1990) 50 A Crim R 13
Toohey v Commissioner of Metropolitan Police
[1965] AC 595
, cited in Hayes and Craddock at 59, (see footnote 31).
. Feben at 35.
(24 July 1992) at 4.
(September 1992) at 7.
. Tape recording can be by way of audio recording, video recording, or both:
Crimes (Investigation of Commonwealth Offences) Amendment Act
(Cth), s 23B(1), 23U, 23V.
. NSWLRC Report 66 at paras 6.14-6.18.
. See s 464H
. Victoria Police Corporate Planning and Review Department
(31 August 1992) at 3.
. See, for example, M McConville “Video taping interrogations” (1992) 142
New Law Journal
960-962; New South Wales. Criminal Law Review Division
A Proposed System of Electronically Recording Police Interviews with Suspected Persons
(Attorney General’s Department, 1986).
. J Rowan “Electronic recording of police interviews in New Zealand (II)”
New Zealand Law Journal
. Rowan at 402.
. NSWLRC Report 66, at para 6.18.
Section 5(e)
, inserted by
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No 3)
1989 (NSW) Sch 1.
. See cl 85.
. Victoria Police Corporate Planning and Review Department
(31 August 1992) at 3-4.
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
7. Diversion
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
7.1 There is one view that people with an intellectual disability should not be put through the criminal justice system because of
their lack of understanding of the consequences of their actions or of the procedures involved in bringing a person to trial, and
because of the inappropriateness of the sanctions provided by that system. Concerns have often been expressed, for example, about
the vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability in a prison or other custodial setting. It has been suggested that they
should be “diverted” into some other system and the response to their “crime” should be counselling or other
social services, rather than punishment. For example, in the United States it has been stated that:
Diversion programs are increasingly being considered the most appropriate option for many mentally retarded individuals who are incompetent
to stand trial. In fact, by 1980 a survey revealed that 20 out of 36 state court systems had begun to make alternative placement
recommendations for such persons ...
7.2 Diversion from the criminal justice system is difficult to define precisely because many “alternatives” have now been
incorporated within the mainstream criminal justice system (for example, the use of mediation or other forms of alternative dispute
resolution, or offender rehabilitation programs). Also, a number of measures sometimes described as “diversionary” may
be better seen as alternative penalties. The following definition has been offered:
Diversion is commonly defined as any deviation from the ordinary criminal justice process before an actual prosecution which suspends
the case without the court actually making a judgment, and which makes the offender participate in some type of non-penal program.
7.3 Diversion schemes are sometimes used when it is believed that the usual punishments would be inappropriate or ineffective; for
example, in relation to juveniles, drug offenders and certain types of sex offenders. The advantages and disadvantages of the different
forms of diversion have been discussed extensively elsewhere.
The Commission was asked, by its terms of reference, to consider:
whether, and to what extent, the intellectually disabled should be diverted from the criminal justice system, including consideration
of the custodial and non-custodial alternatives to the sentencing and detention of the intellectually disabled.
Diversion programs have been used throughout the world. This chapter will focus on the role of the police in diverting people with
an intellectual disability from the criminal justice system. Other options for diversion, occurring at different stages of the criminal
justice process, will be considered further in the Commission’s next Discussion Paper.
DIVERSION BY POLICE
7.4 Diversion from the criminal justice system can occur at the police level, as at some stage during the investigation of an alleged
offence the police must make a decision whether or not to charge the suspect.
The police have considerable discretion in this regard. Warnings and informal cautions may be given in a variety of circumstances.
It was suggested in the Issues Paper that police may be unwilling to charge a person with a documented history of intellectual disability,
especially if the offence is a minor one, and may return the person to his or her family or residential institution. Police may believe
that charging is inappropriate considering the person’s level of understanding or may believe that the case will not proceed
and that it will be a waste of their time, for example if the person is a repeat offender and previous charges have been dismissed
under s 32 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW).
Alternatively, it has been suggested that in England people may be prosecuted “in order to secure help for the offender which
cautioning does not provide (such as treatment for mental disorder)”. This position was contrasted with the availability in
Scotland of social welfare based diversion programs.
The decision to charge
7.5 The Commission’s Issues Paper referred to a report of the Victorian Office of the Public Advocate, which argued that a decision
by police not to charge because of a perception that people with an intellectual disability are childlike and therefore not “responsible”
for their actions, or in need of “treatment” rather than legal sanctions, is contrary to the principle of normalisation
and is not in the interests of the person (or the community). The Office of the Public Advocate stated that:
[w]hen a person is not charged, on [the above] grounds, they are being denied the right to an open examination of their guilt or innocence.
They are denied the possibility of acknowledgment of any mitigating circumstances in relation to the possible offence. They are possibly
condemned to periods of additional social control or restriction of possibilities for development which might otherwise be open to
them eg denial of participation in particular vocational or residential programs on the basis of a “difficult” reputation.
The right of the person with an intellectual disability to an open examination of the instances leading to an incident can only be
safeguarded by proceeding through the normal legal procedures of charging and trial.
7.6 By contrast, the New South Wales Attorney General’s Committee, which recommended that this area be referred to the Commission,
considered that:
[d]iscretion should be used prior to charging an intellectually disabled offender. Such discretion is available to police when administering
cautions for example, to children, rather than charging them. This diversionary process is a recognition of the suitability of such
a course and the inappropriateness of involving a young person in the criminal justice system. In certain situations it is equally
inappropriate to charge an intellectually disabled offender thereby involving him or her in the criminal justice system. It is not
proposed, however, that a lenient approach be adopted by the police as this may have the negative impact of reinforcing unacceptable
behaviour in an intellectually disabled offender. If it can be firmly impressed on the offender by the police that certain behaviour
is inappropriate and unacceptable, then diversion from the criminal justice system at this stage may be most beneficial.
7.7 Some submissions to the Commission have not fully accepted the Office of the Public Advocate’s approach. For example, the
Commonwealth Office of Legal Aid and Family Services stated that:
[i]t is inappropriate to involve people with intellectual disabilities in the criminal justice system, particularly in minor matters,
for the sake of applying the principle of normalisation. If we are to take the principle of normalisation to this extreme, then we
would also be advocating that people with intellectual disabilities should not be granted any special procedures when being interviewed
by police, appearing before courts and so on. In some cases a person’s intellectual disability may be an extenuating factor
in the crime, and should be taken into account when police are deciding whether or not to charge. The criminal justice system is
already pressured, and this pressure should not be increased with the inclusion of offenders in minor matters who could be warned
instead ...
We therefore support the Attorney-General’s Committee view that people with intellectual disabilities, when involved in minor
offences, should be diverted from the criminal justice system wherever possible.
7.8 It is unwise to make a blanket rule in relation to this issue. The Legal Aid Commission stated that the option of not charging
is appropriate for people with an intellectual disability in some cases, in the same way that police may exercise this option for
non-disabled people. The Legal Aid Commission commented that:
[b]eing arrested, charged and taken before the court is usually a very stressful experience for anyone. A person with an intellectual
disability may well face extra trauma and distress depending on the nature and extent of the disability.
7.9 An example of such trauma was provided in a submission to the Commission, which related the case of a person with an intellectual
disability (“X”) who was brought before a court, while still a juvenile, on a minor assault charge involving a family
friend. A member of his family commented that:
[t]he psychological trauma that this conviction caused will never be overcome by X. The long term effect has left him fearing “authority”,
especially members of the police force. As he was not “believed” by the police he now will not report any incidences
for fear of being reprimanded should someone blame him, even when he has had no part in them. Furthermore, the stress upon the family
was enormous. X felt he had failed in his parents’ eyes and his family felt helpless to assist him to understand his “wrong-doing”.
7.10 The family member made a number of suggestions for more appropriate ways of dealing with the situation; for example X should
have been reprimanded by the police rather than taken to court, being both a first and a minor offence; or using counselling for
the parents and an out of court settlement between the families involved. This presently occurs in NSW in some disputes brought before
Community Justice Centres for mediation (see below).
7.11 A number of years later X was charged with assault again, this time upon a person with an intellectual disability while X was
living at a residential service for people with an intellectual disability. According to his family X had been provoked, but all
the witnesses had intellectual disabilities and were not considered “reliable”. A family member commented that “his
treatment in both cases was a mixture of ‘normal’ and ‘disabled’ procedures”:
Firstly, his family was not notified until he was charged. So the support of the family to tell the truth was denied. The instruction
“providing for the presence of an appropriate adult” disadvantaged X as his behaviour towards authority, either a residential
supervisor or a member of the police force, were the same. The distinction between the level of authority is not made by X. Therefore,
he will agree to anything in order to please, which is common behaviour for people with intellectual disabilities.
Secondly, as his parents were not notified; the severity of the situation was not realised by X. ...
And thirdly ... X was charged as a “normal” person. Yet he was not given the right of receiving independent legal aid
like a “normal” person. Had [X] been represented by our family lawyer and [his] private psychiatrist these cases would
have had a fairer hearing. Therefore, in X’s case his family should have been notified where a family lawyer could attend so
that he felt some sense of familiarity and protection should the truth differ from what “authorities” wanted to hear.
People with intellectual disabilities are constantly reminded that they are not as bright as “normal” people. Therefore,
if they are put in a non-threatening, that is familiar, environment, recollection of an event has less chance of being biased due
to emotional instability or pressure.
Concerns in relation to police diversion
7.12 Concerns have been raised in recent years in relation to the use by police of certain “diversionary” programmes;
for example, the use, in Victoria, of a police “caution”, in the sense of giving a formal warning rather than proceeding
to a prosecution. Such cautioning programs are used for juvenile offenders and for shoplifting offenders, subject to police guidelines.
One commentator, Desmond Lane, has argued that the use of such a caution may be open to legal challenge as:
[a] whole class of apparently criminal conduct, which Parliament has decided should be punishable ... will not be brought before the
courts even in cases in which there is ... sufficient evidence to warrant prosecution. One may therefore ask whether it is lawful
for the police to make policies such as this.
Diversion, according to Lane, also raises a number of other important questions, such as: “What are its aims? Does it provide
sufficient deterrence? Is it fair? Does it widen the net of social control?”
7.13 Some commentators argue that diversionary schemes may affect the deterrent value of criminal sanctions.
Deterrence, whether general or particular, may be less relevant for persons with an intellectual disability than for other members
of society, as the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal acknowledged in
Fairness is also relevant - it has been argued that in many cases the diversionary scheme, though seen as a “soft” option,
may in fact impact unfairly or more harshly on the participant:
Any short cut in ... [the criminal justice] system inevitably, therefore, attracts scrutiny on the grounds of fairness. Diversionary
programmes particularly deserve attention because they involve significant trade-offs between procedural and substantive rights on
the one hand and leniency and expediency on the other, often with much at stake and in a context of unequal power.
7.14 Some diversionary procedures, such as using police guidelines to administer a caution, mean that the police are acting in effect
as investigator, prosecutor and judge, with no independent scrutiny of the process:
The reduction or removal of due process safeguards carries an increased risk that an innocent person will be sanctioned. ... The cautioning
can be seen as a deal in which suspects, supposedly voluntarily, waive due process rights in exchange for speedy, lenient and private
treatment. Like plea bargains and other such deals in the criminal justice system, the “conscionability” of this transaction,
in the context of a marked imbalance of power, must invite careful scrutiny. In particular, one must ask whether the transaction
is truly characterised by the voluntariness and leniency of treatment upon which it is predicated.
These arguments are particularly relevant for people with an intellectual disability, who may abrogate their rights without legal
advice and without fully understanding the consequences or their rights.
7.15 It also has been suggested that such procedures place an undue burden on the police:
The idea of pre-charge diversion seems to be bristling with difficulties. To combine the difficult discretions of the constable, the
prosecutor, the judge, and the difficult factual decisions of the jury into the hands of one person at the front line of law enforcement
seems fraught with difficulty and it is difficult to seriously entertain the argument.
7.16 Another common argument is that diversionary programs:
sweep into the criminal justice system cases which would otherwise have by-passed it or that they result in a higher level of intrusion
by the State than would otherwise have occurred.
This concern about “net-widening” is also raised for other forms of custodial sentences such as periodic detention, which,
rather than providing an alternative to imprisonment, may actually lead to the increased use of custodial options at the expense
of wholly non-custodial options.
7.17 Concerns also have been expressed about the interests of victims, when some diversion options are offered to an accused.
Many alternatives to the criminal justice system, however, such as mediation, are designed to meet the needs of both victims and
the accused. Advocating diversion as a means of protecting victims has also been criticised in the context of juvenile justice:
Marketing new approaches to juvenile justice as representing an advance for victims is thus emerging as a disguise for cutting costs
and disregarding procedural protections. The police are central players in this scenario.
Options for police
7.18 The remainder of this chapter considers some of the proposed and existing alternatives to the standard procedures of the criminal
justice system for people with an intellectual disability.
Admissions Centres
7.19 It was suggested in the Issues Paper that police should have available to them alternatives to arrest, including the ability
to take suspects with an intellectual disability to an Admissions Centre (separate and distinct from psychiatric Admissions Centres).
The Commission received a mixed response to the issue of Admissions Centres. For example, the NSW Council for Intellectual Disability
wrote that the Council:
is very cautious of the establishment of an “Admissions Centre” for people with intellectual disability. It is unclear
what benefits would flow from such a centre, especially where it is to be used as an alternative to arrest. It appears that people
with intellectual disability may once more be detained without the safeguards provided by the law. It appears to be creating a further
institution which is contrary to current approaches and research. If the intent is a way to guarantee entitlement to services, this
should be done in a way which least restricts the rights and freedom of the individual.
7.20 The Division of Intellectual Services in the Queensland Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs also
had a number of concerns in relation to Admissions Centres as an alternative to arrest:
Such Centres often serve to deny the offender with an intellectual disability the right to due process and create net-widening effects
ie police will intervene in situations where they normally would not because an Admissions Centre is available and the person can
be placed “out of the way”. Such centres in practice often do not protect the rights of offenders with an intellectual
disability.
Victoria Police, however, supported the use of Admissions Centre.
Admission to a hospital
7.21 The police have limited powers to take a person with an intellectual disability, or any other person, to a hospital if that person
is found in a public place and appears to be “mentally disturbed”. A police officer can only apprehend a “mentally
disturbed” person and take them to a hospital if that police officer has reasonable grounds for believing either:
(a) that the person is committing or has recently committed an offence and that it would be beneficial to the welfare of the person
that the person be dealt with in accordance with this Act rather than otherwise in accordance with law: or
(b) that the person has recently attempted to kill himself or herself or that it is probable that the person will attempt to kill
himself or herself or attempt to cause serious bodily harm to himself or herself.
7.22 Once a person has been taken to a hospital he or she must be examined by a medical superintendent as soon as practicable, but
in any event within four hours.
If the person is not certified as either mentally ill or mentally disordered, following the procedures laid down in the Act, the
person is to be released into the custody of the police. In some circumstances the person may instead be admitted as an informal
patient or released into the custody of a relative or friend.
If the person is certified to be “mentally disordered”,
he or she cannot be detained in hospital for that reason for more than three (working) days on three occasions per month.
Thus this procedure will have limited application for a person with an intellectual disability, although it may be of assistance
in relation to a person with an intellectual disability who is extremely distressed or
has a mental illness.
Programs for juvenile offenders
7.23 In New Zealand, the
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act
1989 (NZ) specifies the factors police may take into account to issue a warning rather than arresting a juvenile offender, including
the seriousness of the offence, whether there is a victim and the likelihood of rehabilitation through the family. When an arrest
is not effected the outcomes can be categorised as follows:
cases where the police simply issue a warning and take the matter no further;
cases where, after investigation by the Police’s Youth Aid Section, a written formal warning is issued;
cases diverted by the police after, for example, an apology, reparation, or other actions that expiate the offence;
cases where there is a referral to the Youth Justice Coordinator in the Department ... to arrange a formal Family Group Conference.
7.24 Family Group Conferences can be held in a number of contexts, but in this context they involve the young offender and his or
her family meeting with other involved persons
to determine an appropriate method for dealing with the young person and/or reparation to the victim, who is also entitled to attend
the conference. It has been commented that:
[p]articipation in the conference depends on the young person “choosing” not to have the matter brought before a court.
In doing so, the conference attracts criticisms that have been made of other informal methods of dealing with young offenders.
7.25 Similar systems have been used in Australia. For example, a recent program in Western Australia attempts to bring juvenile offenders
“face to face” with their victims, in appropriate cases, to ensure that the offender appreciates the consequences of
his or her actions. Special juvenile justice teams also assist offenders and their families in relation to problems which may lead
to crime; for example, putting the offender in contact with relevant services such as job and training programs. The scheme is designed
to have a deterrent effect on minor and first offenders, and relies on both police and court referrals.
In Wagga Wagga, the New Zealand scheme for juvenile offenders has been adapted and trialed, bringing victims and offenders together
for mediation. In South Australia the
Young Offenders Act
(SA) provides for a conference system similar to New Zealand, but, unlike the juvenile system in Wagga Wagga, provides for the additional
scrutiny of the Youth Court. It may be appropriate to consider the advantages and disadvantages of such a scheme for offenders with
special needs.
7.26 It has been argued, however, that such schemes should not be controlled by the police.
For example, the resource implications for other juvenile justice issues of such schemes:
endorsement cannot be divorced from the question of whether limited resources should be directed towards police conducting these conferences.
Once the conduct of such conferences becomes a police responsibility it will not readily be relinquished.
Use of a contract-based diversionary system
7.27 In Wagga Wagga a form of diversion has been developed by police and disability service providers, providing education for the
offenders with intellectual disabilities together with a role for the victims. This model, known as “cooperative contracting”,
was developed in response to the perception that, for a particular offender, the process of arrest and charging would be ineffective,
as he did not appear to understand the seriousness or consequences of his actions. The usual process of arrest and charging would
not ensure that the person received the services that he appeared to need. The developers of this model commented that:
[i]t was agreed that this man’s primary needs were education and support. He needed to learn about how the victim felt being
robbed, he needed to appreciate the “wrongness” of his actions, and he needed on-going assistance and support to avoid
actions that might result in his eventual imprisonment.
It was decided that an enhanced form of the contracting process might meet these needs. In consultation with all the involved parties
a written agreement was developed, and presented to the offender as a behavioural contract. The main goals of the process were:
a. appropriate diversion from the court system;
b. the promotion of empathy regarding the feelings of the victim;
c. the provision of clear, concrete, unambiguous information about the nature and possible or probable consequences of his actions;
d. the provision of clear and prescriptive guidelines for future behaviour; and,
e. the prevention of further offences.
7.28 The model consists of three elements:
1. A written agreement, setting out the offender’s future behaviour. The agreement is created through discussion with all parties
involved, including the victim (though the victim can choose whether or not to come into contact with the offender during these negotiations).
An independent person with experience in the disability field is also involved as “a protection against misuse of the model
and inadvertent abuse such as ‘exercising undue influence’ or acting on ‘false confessions’.” The independent
person also provides protection for the rights of the victim.
2. A process for imparting remorse through negotiation and counselling to allow the offender “to gain an understanding and appreciation
of how it feels to be a victim.” The authors of the process stated that:
Police involvement is seen as an important and essential component of the remorse inducing process. Apart from the authority their
presence lends to the process, the experience of a visit to the police station, a demonstration of what happens after arrest, and
a tour of the police cells, all serve to provide the offender with a convincing and meaningful appreciation of the terms arrest,
charge and detention. This step also serves to clearly link the crime with its potential consequences.
3. The establishment of a monitoring and support system for the offender, through the continued involvement of a counsellor and a
specially trained police officer.
7.29 Diversion is only considered in cases where the offender admits his or her guilt and the authors note that:
there are many circumstances where use of the model may be inappropriate: for example, the more serious offences, those where there
is reason to believe that the offender is highly resistant to change, and where the continued safety of the victim or the public
is in question. In these situations the usual due processes of law are followed.
7.30 The developers of the model recognise its limitations and welcome further input and research in this area. Despite the obvious
advantages in increasing the understanding of, and ensuring services for, an offender, there are difficulties in principle and in
practice with such a system.
The model involves police in the education of offenders and effectively requires the police officer to decide whether a person is
guilty or not guilty. It also has been suggested that it places too much responsibility on the victim and that it would be fairer
if the decision to use a contract was left up to a magistrate. Concerns also have been expressed about limiting the use of the contract
system to people with an intellectual disability, as other “different treatment” approaches have been criticised for
encouraging the idea that the usual rights and responsibilities do not apply for people with an intellectual disability.
7.31 Other problematic aspects of the system, which are recognised by its developers, include deciding which offences should be covered,
and defining the role of the “arbitrator”. The arbitrator’s role is to make sure that both the offender and victim
are dealt with fairly, to negotiate with appropriate services, and to formulate, monitor and review the contract which is signed
by the offender. It has been suggested that the arbitrator needs to be attached to some legal body such as the Attorney General’s
Department or the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service, to ensure that all parties are treated fairly.
7.32 Such a procedure may also actually disadvantage offenders with an intellectual disability, that is, as with police cautioning
of juveniles, there is concern that offenders will admit to guilt, even if they are not actually guilty, in order to get what they
perceive to be a better deal. The Commission suggests that this pilot diversion program at Wagga Wagga for offenders with an intellectual
disability should be the subject of an independent evaluation to determine its effectiveness and general appropriateness as a model.
Community Justice Centres
7.33 The Wagga Wagga model has similarities to elements of the programs discussed above used for juveniles and other “alternative
dispute resolution” methods. In New South Wales, Community Justice Centres (“CJCs”) established under the
Community Justice Centres Act
(NSW) have been created to mediate in minor civil and criminal disputes, primarily neighbourhood disputes. Police can refer people
to CJCs rather than resorting to criminal charges.
The CJC mediator assists the parties to negotiate and resolve the dispute, but does not impose a solution on them. Mediation has
been described as:
a non-authoritarian, voluntary process which uses a neutral third party, the mediator, to facilitate the disputants finding their
own solution to their dispute. The mediator encourages the disputants to take responsibility for their dispute and its solution.
The mediator does not impose a solution upon the disputants who must attend mediation sessions voluntarily and must voluntarily reach
their agreement.
7.34 Benefits of mediation where a criminal act is involved include less delay, low cost, an informal setting, the possibility of
an appropriate form of restitution or reparation for the victim without the need for further proceedings and the ability to deal
with the underlying basis of the dispute rather than the one particular act which may have brought the dispute to a head.
7.35 This approach is particularly appropriate for disputes between people with some ongoing relationship, such as family members,
neighbours and work-mates. In a submission to the Commission, the Director of the New South Wales Community Justice Centres commented
have found that mediation is very appropriate for people with an intellectual disability, provided the mediators are sensitive to
the special needs of the people. The suggestions [made by the Commission in its Issues Paper in relation to the Police] - support
persons, short sessions, specialist interpreter if necessary - are usually taken into account in these mediation sessions. Our mediators
are also trained to use language appropriate to the parties; in this case it means simple language, short questions, frequent checking
for understanding, and endless patience.
We would recommend early diversion from court for suitable matters, where the question of reparation can be considered at a mediation
session. Although this may seem to be dealing with only less serious offences, it is possible that mediation and reparation can prevent
establishment of a pattern of more serious criminal behaviour which might lead to custodial sentences.
7.36 The types of disputes mediated so far by the CJCs which have involved people with an intellectual disability include: harassment,
malicious damage, assault and apprehended violence applications. The mediator will, if appropriate, try to ensure that the person
with an intellectual disability has their advocate present and allows the advocate time to talk to their client. The CJCs’
submission suggested that a specialist program for people with an intellectual disability was not desirable, but rather urged the
referral of appropriate matters by the police and the courts in the usual way. Similar concerns arise in relation to mediation as
with other “diversionary” schemes in relation to people with an intellectual disability, such as lack of understanding
of the consequences of the mediation. One particular issue is the possible use of disclosures made during the mediation. Though these
cannot be used in court, they may be used against the person with a disability in other ways. If a mediator is concerned by a serious
imbalance of power in the mediation, however, he or she can stop the mediation and, if necessary, refer the matter back to court.
CONCLUSIONS
7.37 The National Council on Intellectual Disability in its submission to the Commission stated that a system needed to be established
which indicates to the person that they have committed a wrong and provides some consequences for that wrong, arguing that:
[m]ainstream guidelines will never be effective in rehabilitation terms because of the vulnerability of people with an intellectual
disability. A prisoner with an intellectual disability will almost invariably become the dupe of other prisoners due to higher needs
for acceptance: lower understanding of consequences: and trained subjection to authority figures.
7.38 There is an extensive literature relating to the advantages and disadvantages of diversion at all levels of the criminal justice
system, which is not possible to discuss in great detail in this Paper. However, it is clear from that literature that at least the
following list of issues should be considered in any proposal to divert people from the criminal justice system:
What is the principal goal of the proposed diversion; for example, is the goal more appropriate and humane treatment for the suspect,
or is it reparation for the victim?
Which type of suspects and which types of crimes should be involved in the program? For example, is there any reason why the program
should be limited to one group of people such as people with an intellectual disability?
What special protections are offered for the suspects or victims? For example, should there be a right of legal advice for the suspect
before her or she makes the decision to accept the diversion option?
At what stage in the criminal justice system should the program operate (before charge, before trial or after trial) and why?
Who should make the relevant decisions about diversion: should it be the police, the Director of Public Prosecutions, a court or
some other assessment agency, tribunal or panel?
Should the program be formalised in guidelines? If so, who should issue (and update) these?
Where should the suspect be diverted to (if anywhere)? The usual options are:
(a) to programs outside the criminal justice system, for example education or training;
(b) to some other form of control, for example compulsory counselling; or
(c) to nowhere in particular.
Has an assessment mechanism for the program been considered and established?
The Commission is concerned that a variety of diversion programs may be being developed or suggested without any consistent application
of principles. It believes that any such program should not be established without detailed consideration of at least the questions
listed above.
7.39 The Commission also seeks further input in relation to the models for diversion from the criminal justice system briefly set
out above. It believes that the possible types of diversion which could be undertaken by the police,
for all types of suspects can be loosely categorised into three types:
(1) the discretion not to proceed;
(2) the ability to issue an informal caution, rather than proceed to charging: and
(3) the diversion, before charging, of the suspect into some process other than the criminal justice system. This last category can
be divided into two sub-categories: (a) diversion into a process which does not involve a punitive decision by the police, for example
taking the person suffering from alcoholism to a detoxification unit or referral to a Community Justice Centre; or (b) a form of
diversion which involves the admission of guilt and some punitive element, for example, compulsory counselling. (The distinction
between these categories, however, is often difficult to draw and there may be elements of both in certain procedures).
7.40 The Commission’s preliminary view is that formal regulation is not needed in relation to categories (1), (2), or (3)(a)
above. The Commission’s view is that, in the interests of all parties, the procedures categorised under (3)(b) above would
be better supervised by a Court or judicial officer, rather than police, because of the “quasi-criminal” nature of the
process. The Commission suggests that the most effective way to create a formal diversion program for people with an intellectual
disability involving some form of punishment for minor offences would be one connected with the present powers of Magistrates pursuant
to s 32 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW). The Commission notes that these comments are not meant to refer to alternative dispute resolution processes such as Community
Justice Centres or to such bodies as the Guardianship Board, who have the ability to make orders in relation to forms of treatment.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: DIVERSION
32. Final decisions about the diversion from the usual course of laying of criminal charges by police to some form of punishment for
the suspect (including compulsory attendance at some service or program) should not be made by the police, but by an appropriate
board, tribunal or judicial officer. (The role of such bodies will be considered in the Commission’s next Discussion Paper.)
33. The pilot diversion program at Wagga Wagga for offenders with an intellectual disability should be the subject of an independent
evaluation to determine its effectiveness and general appropriateness as a model.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. E C Wertlieb “Individuals with disabilities in the criminal justice system: a review of the literature” (1991) 18 (3)
Criminal Justice and Behaviour
332 at 337-338.
. R Snashall (ed)
Pre-Trial Diversion for Adult Offenders
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Seminar Proceedings 10, 1986) at 2.
. See, for example, Snashall at 2-3 and the collection of articles edited by him.
. Where bail is granted or is not an issue, it is usual for police to “charge” a person with a criminal offence rather
than bring the person before a court for that purpose.
(NSW) refers to the charging of a person by a police officer and s 353A of the
(NSW) does this by implication. A strict reading of the common law and s 352 of the
, however, suggests that the power to formally charge a person with a criminal offence lies only with a court. For further details
as to charging procedure see New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990), particularly paras 1.50, 3.7.4, and 4.41.
. Section 32 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act
1990 (NSW) allows a Magistrate, if he or she believes a defendant is “developmentally disabled”, to make any order the
Magistrate thinks fit, including adjourning the proceedings, granting the defendant bail or dismissing the charge and discharging
the defendant.
. A Sanders “The limits to diversion from prosecution” (1988) 28 (4)
British Journal of Criminology
513 at 520.
. L M Osman
Finding New Ways: A Review of Services to the Person with Intellectual Disability in the Victorian Criminal Justice System
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988) at 19. See also D Carson “Prosecuting people with mental handicaps” [1989]
Criminal Law Review
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Issues Paper, 1991) at 12.
. Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 2-3.
(24 July 1992) at 3.
Confidential Submission
(24 July 1992).
. D Lane “The Victoria Police Shopstealing Warning Programme as alternative dispute resolution” (August 1992) 3 (3)
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
151 at 153.
. Lane at 153. See also D O’Connor “Legal aspects of pre-trial schemes” in Snashall at 35-40 in relation to legal
questions which must be addressed before diversion schemes can be implemented.
. Lane at 154.
R v Letteri
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 March 1992, CCA 60407/91.
. Lane at 155.
. Lane at 157.
. B Greenwood “Diversion and the Director of Public Prosecutions” in Snashall at 44.
. Lane at 158. See also J Tombs and S Moody “Alternatives to prosecution: the public interest redefined”
Criminal Law Review
. Tombs and Moody at 364; B Mason “Reparation and mediation programmes; the perspective of the victim of crime” (1992)
Criminal Law Journal
402-414, which discusses the recent Queensland victim/offender reparation and mediation scheme: the Beenleigh Court Crime Reparation
. D Sandor “Juvenile justice: the thickening blue wedge”
(1993) 18 (3)
Alternative Law Journal
. New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(September 1992) at 8.
. The Division of Intellectual Disability Services, Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs, Queensland
(18 August 1992) at 2.
. Victoria Police Corporate Planning and Review Department
(31 August 1992) at 2.
Mental Health Act
Section 29.
Section 37.
. Mentally disordered person is defined in
“[a] person (whether or not the person is suffering from mental illness) is a mentally disordered person if the person’s
behaviour for the time being is so irrational as to justify a conclusion on reasonable grounds that temporary care, treatment or
control of the person is necessary: (a) for the person’s own protection from serious physical harm or (b) for the protection
of others from serious physical harm.”
Section 35(1)
; see also the NSW Police Service’s Police Commissioner’s Instruction 38.02 and 38.03.
. G Maxwell and A Morris
A Statistical Overview of Juvenile Offending Before and Since the Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act, 1989
(1990) at 17, cited in Standing Committee Juvenile Justice Report at para 3.6.1.
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act
1989 (NZ), s 251.
. Sandor at 106.
. “Youths face up to crimes”
The West Australian
(12 July 1993) at 8.
. See Sandor at 106-107. See also Sanders at 526.
. Sandor at 107.
. A more detailed description of this program is provided in P Fernandez and D Ross “Cooperative contracting: empowering victims
and educating offenders” (1992/1993) 6 (2)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
. Fernandez and Ross at 6.
. Fernandez and Ross at 7-8.
. Fernandez and Ross at 8.
. Fernandez and Ross at 7.
. The Commission was greatly assisted in this section of the paper by two forums organised by the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual
Disability Rights Service to discuss the issues affecting people with an intellectual disability and the police. (December 1991 and
May 1993) The Commission wishes to thank all those who took part in those forums for their valuable ideas and discussion.
Community Justice Centres Act
. J David “Mediation: a viable alternative”
Criminal Law Journal
. David at 88-89.
. W Faulkes, Director, Community Justice Centres
(9 July 1992).
(18 December 1991) at 1.
. Courts have discretion to “divert” at a later stage, as well. For example, to suspend a sentence subject to the person
entering into some sort of therapeutic program. These issues will be considered further in the Commission’s next Discussion
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
8. Bail and Custody
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION: SUMMONS OR ARREST?
8.1 It was suggested in the Issues Paper that a person with an intellectual disability should not be arrested unless this course is
absolutely necessary in the circumstances, and that proceedings should be initiated by means of a summons or court attendance notice.
Such a proposal does not only have merit in relation to people with an intellectual disability, of course. The Commission has already
commented, in its Police Powers Report that the:
primary purpose of an arrest is the apprehension of a person suspected of the commission of a criminal offence. However, an arrest
should also be seen in context as a preliminary step in the process of the prosecution of a suspected offender. The ultimate purpose
of an arrest is to ensure the subsequent attendance of the arrested person before a court in the event that a prosecution is commenced.
Arrest is not the only means available to achieve this purpose, of course. Attendance can also be required by a summons (issued by
a justice), which states the matter of the information and requires the alleged offender to appear before a justice at a specified
time and place, or by the more modern procedure of the issue of a court “attendance notice” by a senior police officer.
The courts in New South Wales have recognised that the appropriateness of the exercise of the discretion to arrest must be measured
against the circumstances.
[footnote references deleted]
The Commission quoted, in this connection, the judgment of Samuels J A who queried the necessity to arrest for nude sunbathing and
commented that:
[a]rrest, for the great majority of people, is equivalent to an additional penalty. It is a means of setting the criminal process
in train which should be reserved for situations where it is clearly necessary, and should not be employed where the issue of a summons
would suffice.
8.2 For Commonwealth crimes, this issue is governed by s 8A of the
1914 (NSW) as follows:
Any constable may, without warrant, arrest any person, if the constable has reasonable ground to believe:
(a) that the person has committed an offence against a law of the Commonwealth; and
proceedings against the person by summons would not be effective
. [emphasis added]
The Commission believes a similar requirement, that a police officer must consider whether a summons would be effective before making
an arrest, would be appropriate in New South Wales. This would require an amendment to s 352 of the
8.3 It has also been suggested that:
there may be an even greater obligation on police officers effecting an arrest to ensure understanding of the grounds for an arrest
if there is any suspicion of mental disorder or retardation.... It is quite unconvincing to apply principles that excuse the arresting
officer from communicating the grounds for arrest because of some failure of a suspect to understand communicated grounds due to
the suspect’s mental disorder. The correct means for addressing the issue is to inquire whether the officer did all that was
reasonable in the circumstances to inform the suspect of the grounds for his arrest.
One submission
agreed that it was preferable to charge people with an intellectual disability by summons as an alternative to arrest. However, it
has been suggested to the Commission that a summons sometimes may be inappropriate if it is possible that it will not be understood
by the person it is addressed to, and if it removes the possibility for police intervention which may prevent future crimes. The
Commission seeks submissions about ways in which the procedure in relation to summons may be improved to increase understanding by
the recipients. The Commission does not believe, at this stage, that it should make any specific proposals in regard to the use of
arrest or summons for people with an intellectual disability other than to encourage the use of summons for all suspects unless the
police believe that commencing proceedings by this means would be ineffective.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: SUMMONS OR ARREST?
34. An amendment should be made to s 352 of the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) in terms that a police officer should only arrest a person if that officer has reasonable grounds to believe that proceeding
against the person by way of a summons or court attendance notice would not be effective.
8.4 If an arrest is made, it has been suggested that bail for people with an intellectual disability should be virtually automatic.
Bail may be granted at various times throughout criminal proceedings, from the time of charging or the initial court appearance through
to appeal bail following conviction. The defendant, the police, the informant or the Attorney General may at any time appeal any
decision to grant or refuse bail.
An “authorised officer” (an officer “of or above the rank of sergeant” or “for the time being in charge
of the police station”
) must, as soon as reasonably practicable after a person is charged, make a determination as to bail or cause that person to be brought
before a court.
If the police refuse bail or otherwise do not release the person on bail, that person is to be taken before a court as soon as reasonably
practicable, where a bail determination is then made.
8.5 In practice, the majority of bail determinations are made by police. Julie Stubbs
found that of a sample of 943 accused persons, 819 involved bail being determined by police (43 persons had bail determined by the
court, and 69 were taken by police directly to court where the charge was heard immediately, so no bail was required). Of the police
bail determinations, 53 (or 7.3%) resulted in refusal of bail.
A police prosecutor has estimated at 90% the proportion of persons arrested in South Australia who are released on bail by police,
with more than half of the remaining 10% remaining in custody for the sole reason that arrest was pursuant to a warrant of apprehension,
which precludes release on bail prior to a court appearance.
8.6 The allocation of the power to determine bail to both the police and the courts does not affect most of the issues touching on
that determination, and many of the factors involved may work to the disadvantage of a person with an intellectual disability in
either case. The Commission sought information about the practical effects of existing bail procedures on people with an intellectual
disability. The submissions received are discussed below.
Understanding of the bail process
8.7 As discussed in the Issues Paper, a police officer is required to “give the accused person such information in writing respecting
his entitlement to or eligibility for bail as is prescribed by the regulations”.
Depending upon the offence concerned, this information is provided either by Form 1: “Information as to Right to Release on
Bail in Respect of Minor Offences”, or Form 2: “Information as to Entitlement to Bail”.
The information in these forms is couched in the legal terminology of the
(NSW) (the “
”) itself, and so “is difficult for persons with no legal background to understand, and may be totally incomprehensible
to less educated persons and to young offenders”.
A person with an intellectual disability is highly unlikely to be able to read and comprehend such information.
8.8 Also, prior to the making of a bail determination, an accused person may be required to fill out a police questionnaire (Form
4: “Background and Community Ties Questionnaire”) to provide information as to his or her domestic and employment situations,
and prior criminal record.
This information is rated according to a prescribed scale of points and the interviewing officer’s own observations of the
accuracy and completeness of answers, and is used to assess the person’s suitability for bail.
The length and complexity of Form 4 is likely to render it incomprehensible to most people with an intellectual disability,
raising the possibility that favourable information will be excluded or unfavourable information unnecessarily disclosed to the disadvantage
of the accused. It is said that in practice the rating test is carried out rarely, if ever.
However, as there is nothing in the Act, Regulations or Commissioner’s Instructions specifying that the test is mandatory,
nor any requirement for an accused to be informed that compliance is voluntary, there may be confusion about when and whether the
information should be sought and/or given. In any event, a person with an intellectual disability is less likely than others to refuse
to complete the questionnaire if requested by police to do so.
8.9 Difficulty of understanding may disadvantage the accused with an intellectual disability in the determination process, an example
of which was provided by the Kingsford Legal Centre:
One of our solicitors was involved with a number of matters regarding intellectually disabled people and police whilst working as
a duty solicitor at a suburban Local Court. On one occasion an intellectually disabled client had been refused bail by the police
officer because of the intellectually disabled client’s inability to understand the requirements for entering bail and the
information that the police officer required in order for bail to be granted.
The determination of bail
8.10 There is a right to bail (with or without conditions) for certain minor offences defined by the Act.
This right is negated where, among other reasons, there has been a previous failure to comply with a bail undertaking or condition
imposed in respect of the offence; or the person is, in the opinion of the authorised officer or court, incapacitated by intoxication,
injury or use of a drug, or is otherwise in danger of physical injury or in need of physical protection.
With specified exceptions (for which bail nonetheless may be sought) there is a presumption in favour of bail for all other offences.
8.11 People with an intellectual disability who fail to comply with a bail undertaking may do so because of poor organisational skills
and understanding rather than deliberate avoidance. Also, the behaviour of a person with an intellectual disability, such as a failure
to understand simple questions, is sometimes mistaken for that of a person who is under the influence of alcohol or a drug.
In such a case the person with an intellectual disability may unfairly lose the right to release on bail. Where the presumption
of bail applies, bail is granted or refused according to criteria set out in s 32 of the Act. Many of these criteria may act to the
disadvantage of an accused with an intellectual disability. Considerations relating to prior failure(s) to appear and perceived incapacitation
by intoxication or drugs again become relevant. Others, such as those relating to the person’s background, community ties,
employment and residence,
may mean that a person with an intellectual disability is less likely to receive bail:
[i]f the applicant has an intellectual disability, the employment and accommodation history may be adversely affected by the factor
of the disability. An intellectually disabled person’s opportunities for employment are restricted. A lower income has ramifications
for the quality and circumstances of the applicant’s accommodation. Perhaps the applicant’s only accommodation option
is boarding house-type accommodation, and thus he or she automatically would score lowly in those two categories, suggesting, perhaps
quite erroneously, that he or she is not a good candidate for bail.
8.12 The Legal Aid Commission of NSW agreed that people with an intellectual disability often “do not have good family and community
support to enable them to meet bail conditions and, as a consequence, are often unnecessarily held in custody.”
Further, given that an intellectually disabled person’s social ties and supports “may be especially fragile” and
that their disability can be a disadvantage in their finding employment and accommodation, the negative effects of a period in remand
may be substantial and long-term: “a far longer period of time may be required to replace the applicant in his pre-remand position”.
These disadvantages also could act to hinder the funding and preparation of a defence.
8.13 Other determination criteria under the Act include those relating to the time which the person may be obliged to spend in custody
if bail is refused, the conditions of that custody, and the needs of the person in preparing for court and/or obtaining legal advice.
In custody the accused with an intellectual disability is especially vulnerable to discrimination and sexual assault.
Further, the special difficulties for lawyers in obtaining instructions from persons with an intellectual disability are exacerbated
under custodial conditions by security measures, a lack of privacy, and the impossibility of a trusted friend or relative attending
any conference.
Understanding and complying with bail conditions
8.14 The conditions, if applicable, under which bail may be granted are set out in the Act,
and may act to the disadvantage of the accused with an intellectual disability. Although the philosophy of the Act is to reduce reliance
upon monetary conditions, only two of the possible eight conditions are non-monetary, and the system operates primarily on a financial
Julie Stubbs found that of 198 police bail determinations, only 59 (30%) were granted under non-monetary conditions (although 93
(47%) involved the accused and/or an acceptable person agreeing, without security, to forfeit a sum of money in the event of non-compliance).
Many people with an intellectual disability rely on social security benefits or have low incomes, and so any sort of monetary condition
may be difficult, if not impossible, to meet. Where monetary conditions cannot be met, an accused may need to rely on family or friends
who may be similarly impecunious.
8.15 Of the non-monetary conditions which may be imposed, one involves the accused entering into an agreement to observe specified
requirements as to conduct when at liberty. The other involves an “acceptable person” who is acquainted with the accused
satisfying the court that they consider him or her to be responsible and likely to comply with any imposed conditions.
“Acceptable person” is not clearly defined: there is no definition in the Act; the Regulation only provides that a determination
may be withheld until the acceptable person’s name and address is verified;
and the Commissioner’s Instructions provide that a person need only be similar in name, age and description to a person with
an active criminal record in order to be unacceptable.
A lack of community ties and an unwillingness to disclose intellectual disability may restrict the number of persons that an accused
with an intellectual disability would be willing to nominate as an acceptable person. Even if a welfare worker or “citizen
advocate” is available, their role often is limited to giving support: “it may be unrealistic to expect them to make
themselves available as an acceptable person, or surety”.
Indeed, it has been stated that some government departments specifically disallow their welfare worker employees from acting as surety
or as an “acceptable person” for their clients.
8.16 Bail conditions, for example reporting weekly to a police station or limitations on a person’s movements, may be more onerous
for the accused with an intellectual disability to understand and comply with. Misunderstanding of bail conditions also may increase
the possibility of a breach of the bail undertaking. A failure to appear pursuant to a bail undertaking is an offence under the Act,
prejudices future bail determinations, and potentially exposes the accused to additional and perhaps harsher penalties than would
have applied otherwise. Submissions to the Commission have suggested, for example, that:
[m]ore effort needs to be taken in cases where a person with an intellectual disability is granted bail with conditions to ensure
that the person understands and can comply with those conditions. For example if the person is required to report to the police,
does the person understand the reporting requirements and does the person have access to the resources required to comply with the
requirements such as access to transport and money?.
8.17 Under the Act, any bail undertaking must be given by the accused in writing,
as must any agreement and/or acknowledgment regarding conditions imposed.
Usually, the conditions are merely read out and “a cursory acknowledgment sought” by the officer.
An accused with an intellectual disability may appear to comprehend the conditions, but may not in fact understand them.
Apart from requirements relating to the provision of written information before and after the bail determination,
and the requirement for an acceptable person to be warned of penalties for giving a false acknowledgment,
there is no requirement in the Act, Regulation or Commissioner’s Instructions that any conditions imposed on an accused be
clearly explained before an undertaking is entered or acknowledgment sought.
8.18 To overcome the difficulty for people with an intellectual disability in understanding bail conditions, it has been suggested
[i]t would be of some assistance if a court official or police officer had clear responsibility to explain any conditions attached
to bail to the person, and to make sure that the person understood them. Magistrates, solicitors and police also need to be made
more aware of difficulties which some individuals may experience in trying to comply with conditions, such as limited ability to
obtain or use transport, reliance upon others for assistance in fulfilling conditions and any costs associated with this.
The continued presence of the Support Person (referred to in relation to police questioning in Chapter 6, above) should be required
to assist the accused in this way.
8.19 The South Australian position, where a Magistrate may request a bail assessment by a court probation officer, has been suggested
as one way to overcome problems relating to bail. According to the Office of Legal Aid and Family Service’s submission, the
role of the probation officer is as follows:
That officer interviews the applicant and makes enquiries by telephone following up any information which has been supplied by the
applicant. This may involve details of accommodation, relatives, potential guarantors, etc. The probation officer presents an oral
report to the court as soon as enquiries have been completed, which is usually later on the day of appearance, hence avoiding long
periods of detention in custody. Duty solicitors have some capacity to perform a similar function, but the independence of the probation
officer tends to give more credibility to the information presented to the court. A further advantage is that probation officers
often have a greater range of resources available to conduct relevant enquiries.
This suggestion is perhaps more applicable to the court environment than to the police station. However, the concept of a specialist
bail officer within the police station has merit. Although not restricted in its application to persons with an intellectual disability,
the potential disadvantages faced by this group may suggest that specialised services are required, and that police should be required
to take an accused’s intellectual disability into account when assessing the likelihood of the accused understanding and complying
with bail conditions, their residential and employment status, and the burden upon the accused of any conditions. This role could
be fulfilled by General Duties Disability Officers or other specially trained police (see Chapter 5) within each station or across
a given locality, and should be set out clearly in the proposed Code of Practice.
Guardianship issues
8.20 The issue of whether a suspect has, or should have, a guardian may be raised at the bail stage, if it has not already been raised
in the police interview. In circumstances where the police are uncertain of the person’s capacity to understand or comply with
bail conditions, they may be willing to release a person into the custody of a guardian appointed for this purpose, pursuant to the
Guardianship Act
(NSW). A guardian’s role is limited, both by the terms of the order and by the fact that a guardian cannot make decisions about
services which do not exist. An appropriately appointed guardian could, however, authorise heightened supervision at the suspect’s
place of residence. A guardian could also assist in arranging for legal advice. The appointment of a guardian should not be seen,
however, as a convenient solution, and should not be considered for a person who does not require such an intrusion into his or her
Denial of bail due to inadequate services
8.21 The Commission has been told that even where a person has been bailed, their residential facility may refuse to take them back.
This may occur when police intervention and charging arises only at the end of a history of petty offending by a person with an intellectual
disability, where those offences have previously gone unpunished by the police or the residential facility: that is, when the course
of behaviour exceeds an “ ‘acceptable social nuisance’ level”.
In such a case, the accused with an intellectual disability is left without accommodation or services and it has been stated that
very clear guidelines about whose responsibility it is to provide accommodation and services for these people must be developed.
8.22 One organisation has commented that:
[i]t is noted that some individuals do not have anyone or any service who can be requested to assist them with accommodation and other
support while on bail. People are therefore being denied liberty due to lack of services.
It has been suggested that:
[i]n the case of intellectually disabled people who are denied bail on the basis of being homeless or without sufficient community/family
ties the use of ‘bail hostels’ with support workers should be considered. Such an arrangement would enable intellectually
disabled people to meet and maintain bail conditions as a reasonable alternative to custody. It is hard to know at this point how
many intellectually disabled people are denied bail in this way and therefore how useful a proposal this would be. However a pilot
service could be set up to begin with ie attach the service (bail hostel) to an already existing hostel or institution.
The Legal Aid Commission of NSW made a similar submission, stating that a bail hostel system similar to that recommended in the Royal
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody may be appropriate for the following reasons:
This would provide for controlled accommodation and some supervision which would enhance the probability of the person attending court
and reduce the possibility of offences being committed whilst on bail. At the same time it would avoid the trauma and risk of abuse
that bail refusal and incarceration poses for people with an intellectual disability.
8.23 Further, hostels also may provide some limited practical and social work assistance to residents, by encouraging them to use
remand time to establish employment and/or residential ties, or to provide exposure to beneficial programs and services.
These benefits also might flow on to affect positively a later determination of sentence. On an administrative level it has been
estimated that the cost of maintaining a person in a bail hostel is less than a third of the cost of keeping them on remand in prison.
The Commission suggests that a pilot scheme for a bail hostel for people with an intellectual disability should be established.
8.24 The adoption of bail hostels as an appropriate option would require consideration of several issues. One concern might be whether
or not hostels should be “open” or “mixed”, or specialised according to the perceived needs of the resident
needs of persons with an intellectual disability - yet a specialised approach may be contrary to the normalisation principle. A second
concern would be that the existence of hostels as a form of “halfway-house” of remand may result in some offenders with
an intellectual disability being refused bail when they would otherwise have been granted it. Lastly, any issues of public concern
as to the operation, geographic placement, and occupants of the hostels would need to be addressed.
Special bail provisions
8.25 A further consideration is whether special provisions of the
should be developed to counter the disadvantages faced by persons with an intellectual disability. There exists various provisions,
and recommendations for provisions, which are concerned specifically with juvenile and Aboriginal offenders in relation to the determination
of bail and procedures when bail is refused. In New South Wales the
provides that when determining bail for a juvenile, the authorised officer is to ignore the fact that the accused does not reside
with a parent or guardian.
Victorian legislation currently provides that bail cannot be refused to a young person because he or she has no or inadequate accommodation.
The Burdekin Inquiry recommended that legislation should establish a general presumption in favour of bail for children and provide
that a lack of accommodation should not be a sufficient criterion for refusing bail.
These provisions and recommendations recognise that the residential status of a child often is not a factor within the child’s
control, and so should not work to the child’s disadvantage in a bail application. The Queensland Law Reform Commission has
recommended that juveniles should be released into the custody of an appropriate person or organisation when the only reason for
denying bail is to protect the child’s welfare, and that the legislation should be amended to place onto police a duty to release
children on bail.
8.26 In relation to Aboriginal offenders, the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions provide that detention by police is to
be avoided where other procedures or facilities are available or where the accused is in custody “for intoxication or other
minor offences”; and that where appropriate, bail procedures are to be instituted as soon as possible.
Responding to the recommendations of the Royal Commission into Black Deaths in Custody, the Queensland Law Reform Commission has
recommended that: the practical operation of bail legislation be closely monitored to ensure that bail entitlements are being recognised;
communication with, and access for, the Aboriginal Legal Service be provided when police bail is denied to Aborigines;
and bail legislation be reviewed in relation to “any criteria which inappropriately restrict the granting of bail to Aboriginal
people” - including those relating to employment and residential status, and bail history.
8.27 Where bail is refused, the Law Reform Commission of Victoria recommended that a power exist under the State’s bail provisions
to remand a person aged 17-21 years to a Youth Training Centre, in appropriate circumstances.
The Burdekin Inquiry recommended that alternatives to custody before trial be established for children.
In New South Wales, legislation and the Police Commissioner’s Instructions provide that juveniles refused bail by police are
to be taken to a nominated detention centre appropriate to the class of person to which that person belongs, and can be detained
within the police station during the period after charging but before the first court appearance only if detention in such a centre
is impracticable.
Where an Aboriginal accused is detained, the Police Commissioner’s Instructions provide that the police are to make every
effort: to contact the accused’s relatives, friends or the Aboriginal Legal Service (ALS); to allow access to these parties;
and to follow set procedures regarding how the accused is to be detained and observed.
8.28 It may be that the extra burden placed upon police when a juvenile or Aboriginal accused is refused bail is sufficient to affect,
indirectly, the bail determination in favour of the accused, although there is no data to this effect. However, the very existence
of these options helps to alleviate the disadvantages faced by these two groups of vulnerable persons within the bail process. Similar
provisions could be added to a Code of Practice (or the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions) and the
, to ensure that persons with an intellectual disability are not disadvantaged either in obtaining bail, or coping with the burden
imposed either by conditional bail or remand. Of particular relevance are criteria relating to residential and employment status;
financial considerations; and any particular difficulties in the understanding of, or participation in, the bail process. The inclusion
of special provisions would not offend the normalisation principle, as their object is not to favour persons with an intellectual
disability, but to redress the disadvantages faced by those persons within a system which focuses upon specific criteria and processes.
The Commission seeks further comments about other special bail provisions which may assist the person with an intellectual disability.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: BAIL
35. A Code of Practice should include provisions (or the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions should be amended) to:
ensure that the Support Person (present during the questioning of a suspect with an intellectual disability) is present to assist
in the bail procedure, whether or not a lawyer also is present; and
confer on police a positive duty to take an accused’s intellectual disability into account when assessing the likelihood of
the accused understanding and complying with bail conditions, the importance of the accused’s residential and employment status
in that assessment, and the relative burden upon the accused of any conditions imposed.
36. A pilot scheme for a bail hostel for people with an intellectual disability should be established (along the lines proposed by
the Kingsford Legal Centre, namely attached to an existing hostel or institution).
37. The forms in Schedule 1 of the
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW) should be amended to provide comprehensive plain English explanations of the bail process, bail conditions, and the accused’s
rights and obligations in relation to bail.
(NSW) and the
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW) should be amended to specify whether the provision of information by an accused through the Background and Community Ties
Questionnaire (Form 4) is mandatory or voluntary, and in what circumstances it is required.
POLICE CUSTODY
Time limits
8.29 The Commission’s Police Powers Report dealt with the issue of imposing time limitations on the detention of suspects in
police custody for the purposes of questioning and other forms of investigation. The common law position is governed by the High
Court’s decision in
Williams v R,
which reaffirmed that police must bring an arrested person before a Justice “as soon as practicable”. In particular,
police are not entitled to delay this process for the purpose of questioning the arrested person or conducting any other form of
investigation into the suspected criminal activity of the arrested person.
8.30 It is interesting that in
the High Court invited legislative review of the current common law system. Legislative alteration of the common law rule has taken
two basic forms in Australia: the “fixed period” and the “reasonable period” of time for detention in police
custody. In 1985, South Australia introduced a “fixed period” system of investigative detention, limited to an initial
period of up to four hours. This followed the recommendations of the Australian Law Reform Commission
and accords with the later report of the Gibbs Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law Committee.
Federal law also provides for a fixed period of detention: see
which commenced on 1 November 1991. This Part deals with the investigation of Commonwealth offences and sets out procedures relating
to the period of arrest and the rights of the arrested person. In England and Wales the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984 (UK) (usually referred to as “PACE”) provides for a fixed period system, although the permissible periods of detention
far exceed what is generally considered acceptable in Australia. The fixed period system was also in operation in Victoria for a
time before a change, in 1988, to the “reasonable period” for detention, following strong lobbying by the police.
8.31 A “reasonable period” of detention is the main alternative to the fixed period approach: for example, the Northern
Territory also has a “reasonable period system”.
The position since 1988 in Victoria requires that every person taken into custody for an offence must be either released unconditionally,
released on bail, or brought before a bail justice or the Magistrate’s Court “within a reasonable time of being taken
into custody”.
Section 464A(4)(a)-(l) sets out the factors which may be considered in “determining what constitutes a reasonable time”,
which factors include:
(h) Any time taken by a legal practitioner, interpreter, parent, guardian or
independent person
to arrive at the place where questioning or investigation is to take place; [emphasis added]
8.32 In the Police Powers Report, the Commission rejected the “reasonable period” approach, which effectively gives the
police an enormous lawful discretion to detain suspects in custody for lengthy periods, legitimising the current practice to act
in breach of the common law and detain a person for the purpose of questioning. The Commission considers that this approach provides
insufficient guidance for the police and offers little in the way of accountability mechanisms. In its recommendations, however,
the Commission did not recommend that evidence obtained outside the time limit should be automatically excluded, but rather recommended,
as discussed in Chapter 2, that such evidence be presumed to be inadmissible, subject to judicial discretion to admit for a variety
of listed reasons.
8.33 At the present time, New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania, and Western Australia are still governed by the common law (that
case) in relation to post-arrest investigative detention. As mentioned above, however, the New South Wales Attorney General recently
announced that proposed amendments to the
(NSW) will mean that police can only detain suspects for a “reasonable time”, thus rejecting the Commission’s proposal
for a fixed period for detention after arrest before a person must be brought before a Justice or bailed. No details have yet been
provided about the proposed guidelines for the determination of “reasonable time” by the police.
A special rule for suspects with an intellectual disability?
8.34 The Issues Paper suggested that a strict time period should be considered for the period of interrogation and detention in custody
of suspects with an intellectual disability. The Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service argued that people with
an intellectual disability should only be held in police custody in exceptional circumstances, because:
[s]ome people with an intellectual disability have no concept of time or the criminal process at all and may suffer greatly emotionally
during this time. We are also aware of cases where a person with an intellectual disability held in custody has been harassed by
others. These pressures may cause the person to react in an inappropriate way further reducing the possibility of release.
The Commission has been told of other people with an intellectual disability who become particularly agitated when locked up and who
therefore may be more at risk in police custody than the general population. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
has recommended that strict time periods for police questioning would be of assistance for people with an intellectual disability,
though commenting that such issues are relevant for all people being questioned by the police.
8.35 Victoria Police commented in relation to length of custody:
Whilst Victoria Police agree that there should be limits on periods of interrogation and custody for persons with an intellectual
disability, it is not considered that such should be a strict legislative requirement. Checks and balances within the current Victorian
legislation are seen as adequate, as are Victoria Police practices and policy in relation to dealing with an intellectually disabled
person. Presence of independent third parties when an intellectually disabled person is a witness, victim or suspect does much to
assist Victoria Police in relation to reasonable time frames for the person concerned.
(Cth) provides special procedures for Aboriginal persons and Torres Strait Islanders
and for persons under 18.
No special procedures, however, are provided for a person with an intellectual disability suspected of committing a federal offence.
The Act limits the time during which a person can be held for questioning to two hours for Aboriginal persons, Torres Strait Islanders
and children,
and to four hours for any other suspect (including, necessarily, adults with an intellectual disability).
The period of detention can be extended to eight hours through an application to a magistrate or justice of the peace where the
subject offence carries a term of 12 months imprisonment or more.
The factors to be taken into account are listed at s 23D(4), but do not include factors such as the suspect’s intellectual
disability. The Commonwealth Act also provides the right to an interpreter for a person whom an investigating officer believes is
unable, because of an inadequate knowledge of the English language or a physical disability, to communicate orally with reasonable
fluency in that language.
However, this is unlikely to be of much assistance to most people with an intellectual disability.
8.37 The Commission has already expressed its preference for a limited period of detention for all suspects. If, as appears likely,
a “reasonable period” approach is adopted as the general regime for New South Wales, the Commission suggests that the
criteria for the determination of what is “reasonable” should take into account the vulnerability of the suspect, for
example as a result of his or her youth, Aboriginality, physical or intellectual disability, or mental illness.
Other custody issues
Custody Officers
8.38 In the Police Powers Report, the Commission recommended that the New South Wales Police Service consider the practicability of
the introduction in New South Wales of a formal system of “Custody Officers”, based upon the PACE system in England and
Wales, whose duties would be statute based (and which would extend beyond those of the present informal “custody officers”).
Custody Officers would be senior officers responsible for the supervision of suspects in custody, both before charging and while
on remand. The Commission summarised their role in England and Wales as follows:
When a person is brought to the police station, the custody officer must review the lawfulness and propriety of the arrest, and review
the sufficiency of the available evidence to determine if the person should be discharged. The custody officer then determines whether
or not a period of custodial investigation is necessary. The custody officer is responsible for the suspect’s treatment and
well-being for the period of detention, including ensuring that the person receives all of the appropriate safeguards provided by
law and the Codes of Practice, and that the custody records are diligently maintained. If disputes arise between the custody officer
and the investigating officers ... they are referred upwards to more senior officers for resolution.
[footnote references deleted]
The Commission still believes that there is merit in the Custody Officer system and that this issue is of particular importance for
people with an intellectual disability.
The NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions
8.39 Instruction 155 deals with people in police custody. Section 1, “Screening Prisoners”, deals with the importance
of identifying pain, illness, injury or the signs of potential suicide in a person arrested, but provides no specific guidance as
to identifying intellectual disability. The “Apprehending Officer” is required to make an initial assessment of the arrested
person and take note of the prisoner’s physical condition and mental or emotional state.
Medical issues
8.40 In the Issues Paper, the Commission commented that due to communication difficulties, police officers may be unaware that a person
with an intellectual disability is taking some form of medication and may require continual medical attention and regular supervision
for their own welfare. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability commented that:
[n]ot all people with intellectual disability take medication, however those who do so may have difficulty requesting it, or explaining
what it is for or when they need to take it. Council is aware of a case where a young man was placed in custody and had his epilepsy
medication taken from him. He was greatly agitated by the whole event, and disoriented - circumstances in which he was more likely
to experience a fit.
8.41 In the NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions the “Custody Officer” is given the following guidelines in relation
to “Mentally ill/handicapped/retarded prisoners”:
As soon as practicable inform the appropriate adult of the grounds for detention, and whereabouts, of a prisoner who is suffering
from mental illness or is mentally handicapped. Ask the adult to come to the station to see the prisoner.
In these circumstances, the appropriate adult means, either:
a relative, guardian or some other person responsible for the care or custody of the mentally ill person
someone who has experience of dealing with mentally ill or mentally handicapped persons but is not a police officer or employed by
the Police Service
failing either of the above, some other responsible adult who is not a police officer or employed by the Police Service.
Be aware that mentally retarded people may have difficulty understanding questions or comments because of a slowness in reacting,
short attention span, weak memory, or language problems. Exercise close supervision to ensure they are not victimised by other prisoners.
8.42 In the Issues Paper, the Commission also sought further information as to the effectiveness of this Instruction and as to other
necessary protective measures for people with an intellectual disability in police custody. Few submissions addressed this issue
in any detail. The Commission still seeks submissions about the difficulties faced by police when a person is detained in police
custody after charging and any particular amendments which need to be made in this regard. The Commission believes that there should
be special procedures for people with an intellectual disability detained on remand in police custody, but does not wish to make
any detailed proposals in this regard until it has had the opportunity to consult further.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: CUSTODY ISSUES
39. The NSW Police Service should consider the introduction of a formal system of “Custody Officers” in New South Wales
to operate the proposed custodial detention scheme.
Time limits for detention before charging
40. If the common law safeguards in relation to detention after arrest are abrogated by legislation and a “reasonable period”
approach for police detention of suspects is adopted, as proposed, the criteria for the determination of what is “reasonable”
must take into account the vulnerability of the suspect, for example as a result of his or her youth, Aboriginality, physical or
intellectual disability, or mental illness.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990) at para 1.12.
Lake v Dobson, Gault v Dobson
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 19 December 1980, cited in NSWLRC Report 66 at para 1.12. The footnotes
to that paragraph list further relevant sources.
. I G Campbell
Mental Disorder and Criminal Law in Australia and New Zealand
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1988) at 5.
. The Division of Intellectual Disability Services, Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs, Queensland
(18 August 1992) at 2.
. D Brown, D Farrier, D Neal and D Weisbrot
Criminal Laws: Materials and Commentary on Criminal Law and Process in New South Wales
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1990) at 226.
Section 18.
Section 20.
Williams v R
[1986] HCA 88
(1986) 161 CLR 278.
Bail Reform in New South Wales
(Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research, Sydney, 1984) at 52
. Stubbs at 11.
. F McAvaney “The Police (Prosecutors’) perspectives on bail” in D Challinger (ed)
Bail or Remand?
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Conference Proceedings 6, 1991) at 74.
s 18(1)(a).
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW), Schedule 1.
. Stubbs at 37.
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW), Schedule 1; NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions, Instruction 155 at 7.05.
(NSW), s 33;
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW), reg 8.
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989) at 31; Stubbs at 38.
. Ierace at 31.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992).
Minor offences are defined in
as those not punishable by imprisonment (except in default of payment of a fine), those arising under the
Summary Offences Act
(NSW) which are punishable by imprisonment, and various offences nominated by the Act and regulations.
. Section 8.
. Ierace at 29.
. Ierace at 29-30.
. Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales
(24 July 1992).
. M Ierace “Acting for the intellectually disabled offender” in D Challinger (ed)
Intellectually Disabled Offenders
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Seminar Proceedings 19, 1987) at 75-76.
. Ierace (1989) at 27.
. Ierace (1989) at 31.
. F Devine “Bail in Australia” in Challinger (1991) at 32.
. Stubbs at 16-17.
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW), reg 10A.
. Instruction 155 at 7.15.
. Ierace (1989) at 34.
. Ierace (1989) at 34.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992).
. Ierace (1989) at 34.
. Ierace (1989) at 34.
Bail Regulation
1979 (NSW), reg 4, 9; NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions
Instruction 155 at 7.05.
. New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(September 1992) at 7-8.
. Office of Legal Aid and Family Services
(28 August 1992) at 3.
. B Bodna “People with an intellectual disability and the criminal justice system” in Challinger (1987) at 19.
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 4.
. New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability
(September 1992) at 7.
. Kingsford Legal Centre
(29 October 1992) at 2.
. Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales
(24 July 1992) at 4.
. K White and S Brody “The use of bail hostels” [1980]
Crim Law Review
. Queensland. Law Reform Commission
To Bail or Not to Bail - A Review of Queensland’s Bail Laws
(Discussion Paper 35, 1991) at 30.
Children and Young Persons Act
(Vic), s 129(7).
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Our Homeless Children: Report of the National Inquiry into Homeless Children
(AGPS, Canberra
ecommendation
. Queensland. Law Reform Commission
(Report 43, 1993), Recommendation 29.
. Instruction 155 at 11.04.
. Queensland. Law Reform Commission
(Working Paper 41, 1993), Recommendation 89.
. QLRC WP 41, Recommendation 90; QLRC Report 41, Recommendation 27.
. QLRC WP 41, Recommendation 91.
. Law Reform Commission of Victoria
Review of the
Bail Act 1977
(Report No 50, 1992) at 15, Recommendation 7.
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, Recommendation 21.4.
Children (Detention Centres) Act
; NSW Police Commissioner’s Instructions, Instruction 155 at 9.02.
. Instruction 155 at 11.04.
[1986] HCA 88
(1986) 161 CLR 278.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Criminal Investigation
(Interim Report 2, 1975) paras 89-98, 328-329.
. Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law Committee (Australia)
Detention before Charge
(Interim Report, AGPS, Canberra,
. Inserted by
Crimes (Investigation of Commonwealth Offences) Amendment Act
Police Administration Act
1978 (NT); s 137-138.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 8.
(September 1992) at 7.
. Victoria Police Corporate Planning and Review Department
(31 August 1992) at 3.
Section 23K.
. A proposed amendment to this effect, moved by the Australian Democrats in the Senate, did not succeed.
Section 23C(4)(a).
Section 23C(4)(b).
Section 23D.
Section 23N.
. NSWLRC Report 66, Recommendation 3.4.1. See also paras 4.28-4.32 of that Report.
. NSWLRC Report 66 at para 4.29.
(September 1992) at 8.
. Instruction 155 at 1.02.
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
9. Victims and Witnesses
History of this Reference (Digest)
9.1 The over-representation and vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability as victims, together with their low crime
reporting rate, already have been referred to in Chapter 1. It is recognised that people with an intellectual disability are particularly
likely to be the victims of crime.
For example it has been stated that:
[a] person with an intellectual disability is someone who will, by definition, have difficulty with reading, writing, comprehension,
and money skills. He or she will have difficulty with community survival skills and in social situations. The disabled individual
is likely to be unaware of many of the subtle, and sometimes even the gross, cues that guide our everyday behaviour and alert us
to the possibility of criminal victimisation. Further, when a crime occurs, intellectually disabled individuals are unlikely to be
fully cognisant of the variety of criminal justice services at their disposal, or of how they may be accessed. They may have difficulty
realising that particular events constitute a crime, in conveying this fact, or in providing proof of the event. They are likely
to have only limited knowledge of their rights and responsibilities in the situation ... therefore, individuals with an intellectual
disability can be seen as exhibiting greater vulnerability and as engaging in behaviours which may facilitate the criminal in the
performance of a crime. This increases their attractiveness as victims, while lack of knowledge of rights and responsibility may
affect the impunity of the criminal who victimises these individuals.
9.2 As discussed in Chapter 1, the particular vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability to sexual assault has been commented
According to the South Australian Commissioner of Police, David Hunt, they:
are particularly vulnerable to the crimes of others, whether it be loutish harassment, fraud or serious physical or sexual attack.
Submissions have also referred to the common occurrence of physical assault or “crimes of exploitation”, whether monetary
or emotional. Harassment also appears to be common, in particular by neighbours.
9.3 Crimes can have particularly harsh consequences for people with an intellectual disability. The Commission has been informed of
a number of cases where both the victim and the offender had intellectual disabilities, and where both used the same services or
resided in the same institution or supported accommodation. Often, unfortunately, the outcome has been that the victim, rather than
the offender, has been removed from the service. The lack of counselling, particularly in country areas, for sexual assault victims
with an intellectual disability has also been raised in submissions.
9.4 Despite this over-representation of victims with intellectual disabilities, submissions have commented upon the scarcity of successful
prosecutions where the victim has an intellectual disability, particularly in the area of sexual assault. The difficulties which
arise for people with an intellectual disability in the courts will be considered in the Commission’s next Discussion Paper.
One disturbing element relating to victims with an intellectual disability is the suggestion that there is a tendency to “blame
the victim”:
... if a person of low intellectual ability gets into some sort or trouble the difficulty is more or less automatically attributed
to “mental defect” whereas if a person of “normal intelligence” gets into a similar difficulty, it is not
regarded as symptomatic of anything in particular.
9.5 The lack of successful prosecutions, however, appears to be more the result of the perception that victims with intellectual disabilities
are unsuccessful witnesses and the belief that convictions will therefore be unlikely. The purpose of this chapter is not to concentrate
on why there is such an over-representation of people with an intellectual disability as victims, but to look at police procedures
and how they may best take into account the special needs of victims and witnesses with intellectual disabilities. Issues such as
training and identification have already been considered in
of this Paper and their importance should not be overlooked in relation to victims and witnesses.
REPORTING CRIME
9.6 Under-reporting of crime by people with an intellectual disability has often been commented upon. The Victorian
Silent Victims
Report summarised the main reasons for non-reporting as:
the nature of the crimes committed against people with an intellectual disability, predominantly sexual assault and physical assault,
which are generally under-reported throughout the community;
the characteristics of the victims, including lack of knowledge about offences and reporting crime;
the victim’s fear, either of the consequences of reporting, or of police and other people in authority; and
the past responses from staff or service providers to reports of crime; for example, if no action was taken.
9.7 A recent South Australian study found that, though offences against persons with an intellectual disability were reported at a
comparable rate to those against the general population, the numbers of reports made by the
were not; that is, the person with an intellectual disability tended to report the crime to a non-disabled caregiver, rather than
directly to the police.
9.8 Difficult issues arise for police and service providers where
the offender and the victim have an intellectual disability. In such cases the crime is not always reported to the police and dealt
with in the usual way. There are a number of reasons for this; for example:
there was some evidence that police were unclear about their role when an alleged offence occurred within a training centre or a sheltered
workshop. A number of incidents were reported where police, when called, had indicated that they saw the alleged offence as one which
should be handled within the organisation.
9.9 It has been suggested, however, that even if the offence is a minor one the offender may persist unless some police intervention
occurs. The rights of the victim also must be considered. One submission commented that workers in residential facilities are concerned
It has been stated that workers “often believe they are obliged to report matters to the police under this section, regardless
of the victim’s wishes.”
Police response to victims and witnesses with an intellectual disability
9.10 According to the
Silent Victims
The first contact made with the police by a victim who is intellectually disabled is very important. Unfortunately the evidence presented
by people with intellectual disabilities, the police and workers indicated that in some cases such contact was both frustrating and
9.11 The preliminary issue must be the recognition that people with an intellectual disability have the same rights as other members
of the community to report crimes and to have their complaint listened to and taken seriously by the police. Submissions to the Commission
have suggested that this is not, in fact, the case. For example the Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service (“IDRS”)
stated that:
[m]any police decline to investigate complaints from people with intellectual disability. The police often decide on very little actual
knowledge of the capacity of the person that their evidence would not stand up in court. In one case a young woman told the police
she was sexually assaulted and even named her assailant. The police made what appears to be very cursory inquiries, (speaking to
the alleged assailant’s mother) and declined to investigate further. The young woman has since received crime victims compensation.
If a specialist unit did exist within the Police it could have been contacted by the local police for advice in deciding whether
to proceed.
9.12 There also appears to be a misconception in the community that people with an intellectual disability are more likely to lie
or to make up complaints.
Ironically, discussions about the suggestibility of
with an intellectual disability can reinforce ideas that, as
they are poor witnesses.
It has been stated, therefore, that people “discussing court procedures must consider the effects of their arguments and publicity
from the perspective of offenders
9.13 IDRS provided the Commission with some examples of the types of crime committed against their clients and their difficulties
in pursuing their complaints. Sexual assault and fraud figured prominently:
Sexual assault of people with an intellectual disability continues to be a major area of concern for our Service. Our Service receives
many requests for advice and assistance in relation to allegations of sexual assault of people with an intellectual disability. We
have noted below the details of three recent cases. In all three cases, the alleged assailant was a person known to the victim. In
one case the alleged assailant was a relative, in the other two cases, the alleged assailant was a service provider. In one case
the victim lived at home with the family, in one case the victim lived in a group home and in the other the victim lived in a large
residential setting. Despite these factual differences, there were some common problems encountered in all three cases. These included:
the victims were dependent on the alleged assailant for care or support. In one case the victim delayed reporting the incident for
over a year because she was afraid of retaliation by the alleged assailant.
all three matters were reported to the police but difficulties were encountered by the police in investigating the incidents. These
difficulties included concerns by the police that the victim would not be able to give evidence in court; concerns about the limited
information the victim was able to provide (in two of the cases the victims, as a result of their disability, have difficulty understanding
concepts of time and so were unable to give police much information about when the incidents occurred), and difficulties the police
had in communicating with the victim. In one case the family reported to us that the victim had been able to give more information
to family members about the assault than to police. The family believes this was due to fact that the victim was afraid of the police
and that to the victim being questioned by the police meant that the victim was in trouble and had done something wrong.
9.14 Police may believe, wrongly in many cases, that a victim with an intellectual disability will be unable to make a statement and
follow the complaint through the criminal justice system. The lack of success referred to above in relation to prosecutions involving
a victim with an intellectual disability would only strengthen this belief. The mistaken understanding of a person’s ability
to make a statement may mean that complaint details are never taken down or pursued. According to a police officer with experience
with victims with intellectual disabilities:
[s]ome Police believe people with intellectual disabilities are unable to give evidence due to their lack of understanding. This in
my experience is incorrect. The person with an intellectual disability will only explain what has truly happened to them as a victim.
They may confuse times, dates and minor details but in our experience they do not confuse the actual occurrence or the offender involved.
9.15 It is difficult, however, to prevent such misunderstandings through legal reform. The issue largely becomes one of appropriate
training in relation to identification and questioning. It has been suggested to the Commission that the review of such decisions,
such as by a senior officer, may overcome some of these difficulties. The Commission therefore proposes that an outright refusal
to prosecute by the police or to take a statement, on the ground that a person has an intellectual disability and would be unable
to give a statement, should be subject to review. A refusal to take a statement should be reviewed automatically,
on the request of the victim, by a senior officer. The refusal to prosecute where a complaint has been laid and a statement taken
should be reviewable, either by a senior officer or the Director of Public Prosecutions. The issue of competence at the court level
will be discussed in more detail in the Commission’s next Discussion Paper in relation to courts and sentencing.
The Guardianship Board
9.16 The role of the Guardianship Board can be an area of possible confusion for police where the victim has an intellectual disability.
When a victim of sexual assault has an intellectual disability a number of issues may arise. For example:
whether the victim is able to understand or consent to certain investigatory steps, such as a medical examination and the collection
of forensic samples; and
whether the victim is able to make an informed decision about whether he, or more usually she, wants to proceed with the complaint
or seek victim’s compensation.
9.17 The police have their own guidelines in this regard
but there may be a question about whether a guardian should be appointed to assist the victim in making these decisions, or, if necessary,
to make the decisions for him or her. Difficulties may arise where the victim wishes to proceed but this does not seem to be the
appropriate course under the police guidelines; or alternatively, where the victim does not want to take the matter any further but
the police feel there is an appropriate case for further investigation and/or pressing charges. In these situations, where there
are decisions to be made that the victim has a right to participate in, the victim may need a guardian to assist in making these
Obviously such matters must be considered by both the police and the Guardianship Board on a case by case basis. The Board has a
telephone advisory service which can assist in such cases, but it may be an issue where the police are unsure of the appropriate
course to take and need some training. The Commission seeks further submissions in this regard.
POLICE QUESTIONING OF VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
9.18 In Chapter 6 the Commission referred to the particular disadvantages faced by people with an intellectual disability in police
questioning, such as being overly influenced by authority figures; responsiveness to suggestive questioning; lack of comprehension
of the level of language used in police questioning; and difficulty with certain questions such as those involving time and dates.
If a complaint does reach the police and the police take a statement, appropriate questioning techniques will be just as relevant
for victims and witnesses as for suspects. The same dangers of suggestibility and inappropriate language arise. One police officer
has commented that:
[t]he intellectually handicapped victims that I have interviewed are very prone to agreeing with you by nodding to almost every question.
Whether this is their way of dealing with a difficult question, and of disposing of it in the simplest way, I’m not sure. But
it is very easy for the investigator to fall into the trap of following through a line of inquiry generated by himself and supported
by the victim through their acquiescence.
9.19 The particular problems faced by the victim, and by analogy the witness, with an intellectual disability in a police interview
have been referred to in a number of reports
and can be summarised as follows:
lack of knowledge by people with an intellectual disability about crime, reporting crime and police procedures;
lack of understanding by the police about how the person’s intellectual disability may be relevant to the conduct of the interview,
for example the need for questioning which takes into account the danger of suggestion and avoids concentration on details such as
time, addresses and numbers which may confuse the person; and
the low level of literacy of most people with an intellectual disability means there will be difficulties in using police statements,
both in verifying details and refreshing the person’s memory when/if the matter eventually comes to trial.
9.20 According to Hayes and Craddock:
[t]he same process which trains police to deal with intellectually disabled suspects will enable them to provide better assistance
to the intellectually disabled victims of crime. A reliable statement from the victim, for use in prosecution, is as important as
a reliable confession. ... As with confessions, great care should be taken so that a statement truly represents what the witness
is able to say about an incident in his or her own words. The degree of sophistication of the account should reflect that of the
witness and not the officer taking the statement. In particular, it is vital that the statement be recorded as accurately as possible
using the victim’s own words and grammar, because sometimes important evidence and meaning can be lost when it is “translated”
into the sense which a police officer thinks it means. Intellectually disabled people may have particular words, for example, for
sexual organs, which can be understood by care-givers, but which may be meaningless to [a] stranger.
9.21 The Final Report of the NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit on
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
commented, in relation to the role of the police of victims of sexual assault, that:
[t]he role of the police interview is often confusing for many victims of crime ... This can result in difficulties for all parties.
A person under stress can often have difficulties in explaining clearly what has occurred and this can be compounded if they have
an intellectual disability. Threats against the victim made by the offender may also hinder disclosure of details. If the person
also has a speech impediment or problems in expressive language further difficulties are encountered. Witnesses to the sexual assault
may also have an intellectual disability which may pose additional problems for the police investigation.
Language used by the police and a lack of knowledge of the appropriate words to express the nature of the sexual assault may also
hinder clear statement taking. Difficulties in understanding conceptual terms and memory problems may make the person with an intellectual
disability appear as an unreliable witness. Police have no guidelines for alternative forms of interviewing and are trained to follow
a set procedure of official language and structuring of questions.
9.22 The Report made the following recommendations in relation to police procedures:
4.1 Police instructions should be amended to include procedures for conducting police interviews of people with an intellectual disability.
4.2 Police instructions should be amended to include procedures for the method of interviewing victims of sexual assault who are intellectually
4.3 Police instructions should be amended to allow a third party to be present during interviews with victims who are intellectually
disabled to assist with the interpretation of language and help overcome communication difficulties.
4.4 Community education for people with an intellectual disability about the role of the police in the community and how to obtain
assistance from local police should be carried out by police liaison officers.
4.5 An identified police officer in police districts should be nominated to act as a liaison person with disability organisations,
parent groups and people with an intellectual disability.
The Commission supports these recommendations and provides some further commentary on them in this chapter.
Coaching and contamination
9.23 Police must consider carefully, in their questioning of a person with an intellectual disability, whether a victim or a witness,
that their methods may be called into question if the matter proceeds further, perhaps by the accused’s legal representation.
These issues will be discussed further in the Commission’s next Discussion Paper. Allegations of “coaching” or
the contamination of evidence by improper questioning can be diminished by the use of appropriate questioning techniques. Hayes and
Craddock point to the dangers of “coaching” witnesses or victims by stating that:
[t]hose preparing the intellectually disabled victim to give evidence need to avoid scrupulously any “coaching” of the
witness. Coaching can occur in a number of ways, and does not necessarily involve an improper intention on the part of the questioner.
Inexpert interviewers may believe that the intellectually disabled witness will be unable to give a correct account of events unless
they have been over and over the story. In this process, there is the risk that the interviewee will pick up clues, overtly or covertly
expressed, about the expectations of the interviewer. Leading questions can indicate the “desired” response, as can the
interviewer focussing upon particular areas of the narrative. It is desirable that as few interviewers as possible question the intellectually
disabled witness, and that those interviewers have expertise both in the obtaining of narrative evidence from intellectually disabled
people, and in the court processes.
These comments will be equally applicable for prosecution lawyers involved in interviewing victims and witnesses with intellectual
disabilities, as for the police.
The Police Commissioner’s Instructions
9.24 Police have recognised the need for guidelines for interviewing victims with an intellectual disability for sexual assault cases.
Police guidelines for identifying and interviewing victims of sexual assault with an intellectual disability are now found in the
NSW Police Commissioner’s Instruction 67.06, which reads as follows:
A person with an intellectual disability has a capacity for intellectual functioning which is lower than the norm.
People with an intellectual disability may or may not have a physical disability.
Intellectual disability is not a psychiatric illness.
The range of intellectual disabilities is diverse and may not be immediately evident.
Indicators of intellectual disability include:
short attention span
difficulty understanding questions and instructions
responding inappropriately or inconsistently to questions.
Details such as a person’s work, school, residence, or social security entitlements may be indicative of intellectual disability
The effect of a sexual assault on a person with an intellectual disability may be extremely traumatic and the interview process considerably
more difficult.
Initial interview
if you suspect the victim has an intellectual disability have a relative, guardian, carer, or parent present - local Department of
Community Services can assist
the victim has a right to have a support person present - the person must be acceptable to the victim
if communication is difficult, have a specialist ‘interpreter’ attend to facilitate communication
where the victim lives in a residential facility, the licensed manager may be able to help, otherwise contact the local Department
of Community Services
it is preferable if the support not act as an interpreter
brief the interpreter before commencing the interview and remind him/her not to substitute or paraphrase anything the victim says,
nor show any emotion during the interview. Also, clarify with the interpreter any terminology used by the victim in the statement.
When interviewing, consider the following:
make sure the victim knows the reason for being there
establish rapport and make the victim feel comfortable and reassured
use simple language and ask short questions - the statement may be in the form of questions and answers ...
frequent short breaks may help the victim’s concentration
endeavour to ensure the victim knows that you have understood his/her account of the sexual assault
if the sexual assault is recent (within 72 Hours) and the victim agrees to attend a Sexual Assault Centre (SAC), then follow the procedures
set out herein.
The rest of the Instruction contains further guidelines in relation to: the decision whether or not to proceed; guardianship; non-recent
(that is, not within 72 hours) sexual assaults; procedures if the victim is unable to sign the statement; and procedures for commencing
criminal proceedings under the relevant sections of the
(NSW). These special guidelines have not been repeated elsewhere in the Police Instructions in the sections dealing with investigations
and arrest generally, although they are equally applicable to the suspect with an intellectual disability. Nor is sexual assault
the only crime likely to be committed against people with an intellectual disability.
Role of the third or “support” person
9.25 Unlike the position in relation to suspects, the victim with an intellectual disability is less likely to require the assistance
of a lawyer, but is likely to require emotional and practical support, such as assistance in completing forms. This has been recognised
in the Instruction which specifically refers to the need for a “support person” as well as, if communication is difficult,
an “interpreter”. The Instruction states that it is preferable that the support person does not also fill the interpreter’s
role. The provisions of this Instruction do not, however, apply to all victims with an intellectual disability, but only to victims
of sexual assault.
9.26 In Victoria, where an “Independent Third Person” attends all interviews where a person with an intellectual disability
is involved, it has been suggested that the presence of a third person may formalise the investigation process, which provides an
additional benefit to the victim, and ensures that their complaint is taken seriously.
9.27 In South Australia the Police Department has released a policy statement for its prosecution services in relation to intellectual
disability,
providing police prosecutors with guidelines for dealing with people with an intellectual disability, including guidelines about:
what is meant by intellectual disability, the need for an independent person, refreshing memory where the person has low literacy,
assisting the person to give evidence through explaining court procedure, use of court companions, use of expert evidence as to the
person’s competence and capacity and related matters.
9.28 The Commission believes that a support person for a victim with an intellectual disability is particularly important in police
interviews and refers to the discussion and proposals set out in relation to suspects in Chapter 6, above. The Commission believes
that, generally speaking, the proposals relating to the name, identity and role of the suspect’s “Support Person”
should be repeated for victims. Similarly, the Support Person should be present (with the consent of the victim) for all aspects
of the police interview, and all matters relating to the Support Person should be clearly set out in police guidelines, preferably
in a Code of Practice.
Electronic recording
9.29 As discussed in Chapter 6 in relation to suspects, electronic recording of victims with an intellectual disability has obvious
benefits in terms of accurately recording the victim’s statement, including the non-verbal communication, which may be particularly
revealing. It is also likely to shorten interviews and make the police officer’s task easier. A person with low literacy skills
may be able to use their video statement to refresh their memory prior to the court appearance. The Commission therefore proposes
that electronic recording facilities be used for all victims with an intellectual disability, and for witnesses where a detailed
interview is necessary. Legislation would, however, be required to admit the recording into evidence and to overcome the need for
the person to give evidence again. There also remains the difficulty of the treatment of cross-examination. These issues are considered
further in the Commission’s next Discussion Paper. At this stage the Commission seeks submissions about whether there is any
possible detriment to the victim or witness with an intellectual disability through the widespread use of electronic recording of
interviews.
Alternative investigatory procedures
9.30 In relation to interviewing child victims, where similar concerns about vulnerability and difficulties in understanding arise,
some innovative investigatory techniques have been attempted to obtain the best possible evidence and to reduce the trauma for the
child. Some of these alternatives for child victims of sexual assault include the use, in Israel, of “youth examiners”
(usually social workers, psychologists or child care workers) instead of police to interview children under 14. The child’s
statement to the youth examiner is admissible as evidence in the trial and children rarely have to testify in person. In the United
States, “joint interviews” of child victims are conducted by a detective, prosecutor and social worker (although only
one conducts the interview) in a specially designed interview room with child-sized furniture and a one-way mirror, so the interview
can be observed by parents and others without distracting the child. Another alternative suggested is that an appropriately trained
“child advocate” either conduct the initial interviews and then provide a report to the police and prosecutors, or represent
the child’s interest throughout the investigation by, for example, taking objections to inappropriate questioning.
9.31 Although the Commission is not suggesting that people with an intellectual disability can be equated with children, similar concerns
may arise for both, and perhaps more innovative ways of conducting interviews with people with an intellectual disability should
be considered. The Commission seeks submissions in this regard.
APPREHENDED VIOLENCE ORDERS
9.32 The Commission has been informed by the police, court personnel and service providers of the difficulties for people with an
intellectual disability in obtaining an “apprehended violence order” (or “AVO”).
An AVO is made when a court, usually the Local Court, is satisfied that a person fears, on reasonable grounds, violence or other
conduct amounting to harassment or molestation from another person.
When a person “is, in the opinion of the court, suffering from an appreciably below average general intellectual function”,
the court does not have to be satisfied that the person actually fears the violence or other conduct.
The AVO imposes restrictions or prohibitions on the second person (the defendant), for example, prohibiting the defendant from approaching
the other person for a set period of time.
To obtain an AVO a complaint must be made on oath, either orally or in writing, before a Justice. Such a complaint can only be made
by the person seeking protection or by a police officer.
Some people with an intellectual disability may have insufficient communication skills to bring a complaint to a Justice. They will
therefore require the police to do so on their behalf.
9.33 It has been suggested that complaints involving a complainant with an intellectual disability should always be brought by the
police, as is presently the case for children under the age of 18 years.
This may, however, cause difficulties if the police do not believe the person bringing the complaint. As with police questioning
in general, police may also find it difficult to obtain a useful statement from some victims with an intellectual disability and
may need assistance in this regard to enable them to complain on behalf of a person. Justices may similarly need guidelines about
intellectual disability or other assistance. It was also suggested to the Commission that there is a need for “interpreters”
to be made available free of charge in such cases, as is currently provided by the Ethnic Affairs Commission for victims in violence
The Commission seeks further submissions about the particular problems faced by people with an intellectual disability in seeking
AVOs, and how these may be overcome, before making any proposals in this regard.
COMPENSATION FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME
9.34 The issue of victims’ compensation, including the role of the Tribunal and the difficulties faced by people with an intellectual
disability, will be discussed more fully in the next Discussion Paper. However, some consideration of this issue needs to be made
in the context of police procedures. Under the current system, which is being reviewed, the victim must have co-operated with the
police and lodged a formal complaint to obtain compensation. Delay in reporting the matter may be taken into account in assessing
compensation.
This can have obvious implications for a person with an intellectual disability. If the police do not accept the complaint the person
is unable to obtain compensation.
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW) was recently reviewed by the Attorney General’s Department and a report was prepared by Mr C Brahe, Deputy Chief
Magistrate and a former Chairperson of the Victims Compensation Tribunal.
That Report made a number of recommendations relevant to the victim with an intellectual disability. The Brahe Report recommended,
for example, that applications for compensation should be lodged within a period of two years from the act of violence but stated
[t]he Tribunal should have a discretion to accept claims outside that period in exceptional circumstances which include but are not
limited to:
(i) the victim’s age at the time of the act of violence;
(ii) whether the victim has an intellectual or mental disability and when that disability manifested itself;
(iii) the offender is in a position of power in relation to the victim;
(iv) the physical and/or psychological effects of the act of violence;
(v) any policy of the Director of Public Prosecution in sexual assault cases.
Lack of knowledge by the applicant of the time within which applications are to be lodged should not of itself amount to exceptional
circumstances.
9.36 The Brahe Report recognised that the requirement of reporting to the police within a reasonable time may disadvantage sexual
assault victims, who may delay reporting for a variety of reasons. It was also recognised that some victims, for example, children
and some people with an intellectual disability, must rely on the actions of other people who may not notify the authorities. The
Report did not consider the requirement of reporting to the police within a reasonable time to be necessary. Rather it recommended
[f]ailure to report or assist the prosecution could be excused on the following grounds - although not exclusive grounds -
(i) the victim’s age at the time of the act of violence;
(ii) whether the victim has an intellectual or mental disability and when that disability manifested itself;
(iii) the offender is in a position of power in relation to the victim;
(iv) the physical and/or psychological effects of the act of violence.
9.37 The recommendations of the Brahe Report have not yet been implemented. On 31 August 1993, however, the Minister for the Status
of Women, the Hon Kerry Chikarovski MP, released a report by the NSW Sexual Assault Committee based on the results of a sexual assault
hotline in 1992. She also announced a package of reforms to provide additional assistance to women who are victims of sexual assault,
including “making it easier for victims to apply for compensation from the Victim Compensation Tribunal”. No other details
were provided as to the form that assistance would take. These issues will be considered further in the next Discussion Paper, however
it is worth noting at this stage the crucial role the police can have in relation to further procedures such as victims compensation.
9.38 The particular role of the police in relation to a witness with an intellectual disability should not be overlooked. It is likely,
for example, that when an alleged crime occurs in an institutional setting or in a group home, that at least some of the witnesses
will have an intellectual disability. It will be in the interests of police investigators to be able to effectively interview people
with an intellectual disability. The communication issues discussed above apply equally here. In relation to witnesses, the South
Australian Commissioner of Police has commented as follows:
[a]s for any witness, the weight to be placed on the evidence of an intellectually disabled person is a matter of consideration for
a Court. Police are therefore encouraged to accept their evidence as they would any other. Well knowing the trauma that giving evidence
before a Court can cause, police are in a unique position to be of assistance and support to the intellectually disabled witness.
Police are encouraged to show a witness through a Courtroom before giving evidence, and to explain to them the workings of the Court
and what they may expect when giving their evidence. This practice has proved extremely beneficial, particularly for witnesses who
are anxious about their pending Court experience. Police are also encouraged to use the Court Companion service offered by the Victims
of Crime Service, to help victims and witnesses alike through the traumatic experience of Court.
The experience of people with an intellectual disability at court will be discussed in the next Discussion Paper; however, it is worth
noting that the police can have a valuable role at this stage of the criminal justice system as well.
AN EDUCATIVE ROLE FOR THE POLICE?
9.39 The police may also be able to play an important educative role in overcoming the reluctance of people with an intellectual disability
to report crime, particularly if some of the administrative and policy reforms referred to in Chapter 5 are carried out. This has
been one of the concerns of the Police Service’s Special Needs Unit in Wagga Wagga which, in conjunction with other government
departments, local solicitors, and disability and other services, has organised seminars for people with an intellectual disability
and for their parents/carers. Those for parents and carers cover such areas as the role of the Sexual Assault Service, and legal,
police, consumer affairs and social security information. The seminars for people with an intellectual disability are run by various
services, including the police, in groups of about six to eight people, and cover such areas as what that service does, how people
can use it and what are their rights under that service.
9.40 The Commission believes that police officers (among others) should be involved in education programs for people with an intellectual
disability and carers about legal rights, services available for victims of crimes, and guidelines for recognising and reporting
crime. Such involvement could include visiting institutions, schools, homes, recreational services, sheltered workshops and other
places of employment. This will also assist police in their understanding of how crime affects people with an intellectual disability
and people with an intellectual disability to understand the role of the police. The Commission seeks comments and examples about
the role the police can play in this regard.
TENTATIVE PROPOSALS FOR REFORM: VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
Police questioning
41. Police must use appropriate ways of questioning victims and witnesses with an intellectual disability. Police should be aware
of the special susceptibility of people with an intellectual disability to authority figures and of their tendency to give answers
that they believe are expected of them. Police also should be aware of the difficulties people with an intellectual disability may
have with details such as times, dates and numbers. Leading or repetitive questions should be avoided and an attempt made to pitch
the language at a level which will be understood. These matters should be clearly spelled out in police guidelines, preferably in
a Code of Practice.
Presence of a “Support Person”
42. No questioning of a victim with an intellectual disability should take place if a Support Person is not present, unless the victim
objects to the presence of any other person at the police interview. The name, role and identity for that person are as follows:
The third person should be known as a “Support Person”. This name reflects the role envisaged by the Commission for that
person. The Commission suggests that the terms “appropriate adult”, with its implications of a child-like role for people
with an intellectual disability, and “independent third person”, with its implications of a neutral and passive role,
should be avoided.
The role of the Support Person is, as its name suggests, to be supportive of the victim with an intellectual disability. The Support
Person should be clearly attending for the victim’s benefit, rather than to assist the police, and should not be a neutral
or passive observer of the proceedings. The Support Person should play a limited “interpretive” role if necessary, for
example, suggesting the police rephrase a question if the victim is having difficulties, or explaining what the victim means by a
particular word.
The Support Person preferably should be a person (above the age of 18 years) chosen by the victim with an intellectual disability.
It is anticipated that such a person will know the victim well, whether as a family member, guardian, carer or friend (though these
categories are not exclusive), have the trust of the victim, and be able to communicate easily with that person. The Support Person
should not be a police officer or anyone likely to be involved in the alleged offence; for example, as a witness. If the chosen person
is unavailable, unwilling to assist, or inappropriate due to their potential involvement in the investigation, or the victim cannot
nominate a person, police should have access to a list of people with experience with the special needs of people with an intellectual
disability in their area who would be prepared to fulfil such a role from time to time.
43. The Support Person:
should have an opportunity to speak privately with the victim before the interview commences;
should remain present for all aspects of the police interview, subject to the wishes of the victim; and
if a medical examination is required, should be of the same sex as the victim.
The presence (or absence) of the Support Person in relation to each of these procedures should be recorded.
44. All matters in relation to the attendance of a Support Person, including the appropriate contact telephone numbers and names of
organisations (particularly local services), should be clearly set out in police guidelines, preferably in a Code of Practice.
Review of the police decisions
45. Refusal to prosecute by the police or to take a statement, on the ground that a person has an intellectual disability and would
be unable to give a statement, should be subject to review. A refusal to take a statement should be reviewed automatically,
on the request of the victim, by a senior officer. The refusal to prosecute where a complaint has been laid and a statement taken
should be reviewable, either by a senior officer or the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Electronic recording of interviews
46. Videotaping of interviews with victims with an intellectual disability should be carried out, to the greatest extent practicable,
as this will be useful, not only to the victim with low literacy levels when refreshing his or her memory, but to the court.
47. Police (among others) should be involved in education programs for people with an intellectual disability and carers as to legal
rights, services available for victims of crimes, and guidelines as to recognising and reporting crime.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. A useful discussion of some of the reasons people with an intellectual disability are particularly vulnerable to crime is found
in K Johnson, R Andrew and V Topp
Silent Victims
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988) at 18-24.
. C Wilson and N Brewer “The incidence of crime victimisation of individuals with an intellectual disability” (1992) 27
Australian Psychologist
. See, for example, M Carmody “Invisible victims: sexual assault of people with an intellectual disability” (1991) 17
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities
. South Australia. Mr D Hunt, Commissioner of Police
(14 April 1992) at 2.
. L A Dexter “A social theory of mental deficiency” (1958) LX (11)
American Journal of Mental Deficiency
at 923, cited in C Williams
Crime Against People with Learning Difficulties: What is Happening?
(Norah Fry Research Centre, University of Bristol, 1993) at 31.
. Johnson, Andrew and Topp at 36-43.
The Incidence of Crime Victimisation among Intellectually Disabled Adults
(Final Report, National Police Research Unit, 1990) at 14-15.
. Johnson, Andrew and Topp at 48.
. The common law offence of misprision of a felony has been abolished by
(NSW). See now “Concealing serious offence”
. New South Wales Sexual Assault Committee
(August 1992) at 2.
. Johnson, Andrew and Topp at 48.
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(6 January 1992) at 6.
. Johnson, Andrew and Topp at 49.
. Williams at 33.
. Williams at 33 (emphasis in original).
. Redfern Legal Centre Intellectual Disability Rights Service
(16 October 1992) at 4-5.
. Senior Constable P Fernandez
(8 December 1991) at 34.
. See, for example, Instruction 67.
. Mr R West, President, Guardianship Board
Oral Submission
(2 August 1993).
. Detective Inspector R C Kucera “Criminal Law and People with Intellectual Disabilities: A Police Perspective” in
Questions of Balance: Criminal Law and People with Intellectual Disabilities
(Conference Proceedings, Perth, July 1990) at 19.
. See, for example: J Philpott
Towards Normalisation: People with Intellectual Disability Involved in the South Australian Criminal Justice System
(Court Services Department, Adelaide, 1991); D Feben
The Right to be Heard: Obtaining Evidence from Intellectually Disabled People
(Discussion Paper, Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988).
. S C Hayes and G Craddock
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992) at 76-77.
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Final Report, 1990).
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit at 20-21.
. NSW Women’s Co-ordination Unit at 2.
. Hayes and Craddock at 77.
Sitting on a See-Saw: An Evaluation of the Independent Third Persons Program
(Unpublished Thesis, University of Melbourne, 1992) at 59.
. Policy No 51, Policy Statement Prosecution Services, Intellectually Disabled, 1991, cited in Philpott at Appendix E.
. These alternatives were outlined in B Naylor “Sexual assault: the law and the child victim (Pt 2)” (1985) 10 (2)
Legal Service Bulletin
. Section 562B(1).
. Section 562B(2).
. Section 562D.
. Section 562C.
. See s 562C(3)(b).
. Mr K Dover
(11 August 1992).
Victims Compensation Act
1987 (NSW), s 20.
. New South Wales. Attorney General’s Department
The Review of the Victims Compensation Act
(March 1993).
. Recommendation 1(c).
. Recommendation 11(a).
. South Australia. Mr D Hunt, Commissioner of Police
(14 April 1992) at 2.
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
NSW LAW REFORM COMMISSION PUBLICATIONS RELEASED UNDER THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE REFERENCE
General Introduction and Proceedings in Courts of Petty Sessions
(Issues Paper 3 and Outline, 1982);
Long Criminal Trials
(Background Paper, 1985);
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Discussion Paper 12, 1985);
Unsworn Statements of Accused Persons
(Report 45, 1985);
The Jury in a Criminal Trial
(Report 48, 1986);
The Jury in a Criminal Trial: Empirical Studies
(Research Report 1, 1986);
Procedure from Charge to Trial: A General Proposal for Reform
(Discussion Paper 13, 1986);
Procedure from Charge to Trial: Specific Problems and Proposals
(Discussion Papers 14/1 and 14/2, 1987);
Police Powers of Arrest and Detention
(Discussion Paper 16, 1987); and
Police Powers of Detention and Investigation after Arrest
(Report 66, 1990).
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE POLICE POWERS REPORT
Police should be given the right to detain suspects for up to four hours after arrest for the purposes of questioning or conducting
other authorised investigative procedures, and police may apply to a court or a justice for an extension of up to eight or more hours
in difficult cases.
Police are to be made responsible for persons in their custody, who are to be treated with respect for human dignity. Police will
be required to maintain detailed and complete custody records. The creation of specialist “Custody Officers” in the
Police Service should be considered.
Specific rights and safeguards for persons in police custody must be enshrined in legislation, including the right to silence, the
right to communicate with a friend or family member, the right to legal assistance, and the right to an interpreter.
Detailed Codes of Practice regulating criminal investigations as a whole should be developed by the Police Service after public consultation,
to replace the Police Commissioner’s Instructions in this area.
Special rules should be developed as part of the Codes of Practice to regulate the treatment of children, Aboriginal persons and other
vulnerable persons in police custody.
All police interviews with suspects shall be electronically recorded. Evidence of a confession will not be admissible in court unless
it is electronically recorded or there is some other independent verification.
Evidence obtained illegally or improperly (in breach of the new rules of criminal investigation) will be presumed to be inadmissible,
although courts will retain the discretion to admit the evidence in the interests of justice.
There should be a follow-up study by the Commission of the operation of the new system after one year, to assess its effectiveness
and recommend any needed modifications.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 29 (1993) - People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Policing Issues
Select Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
ASHTON, G R and WARD, A D
Mental Handicap and the Law
(Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1992)
ASHWORTH, A “The ‘public interest’ element in prosecutions” [1987]
Criminal Law Review
AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Complaints Against Police
(Report 1, 1975)
BECKEY, D M “Working arrangements with the Police and Intellectual Handicap Services, Queensland Department of Health”
in D Challinger (ed)
Intellectually Disabled Offenders
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Seminar Proceedings 19, 1987)
BRIGHT, J “Intellectual disability and the criminal justice system: new developments” (1989) 63
Law Institute Journal
BROWN, D, FARRIER, D, NEAL, D and WEISBROT, D
Criminal Laws
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1990)
CAMPBELL, I G
Mental Disorder and Criminal Law in Australia and New Zealand
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1988)
CARMODY, M “Invisible victims: sexual assault of people with an intellectual disability” (1991) 17
Australia and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities
CARSON, D “Prosecuting people with mental handicaps” [1989]
Criminal Law Review
CHALLINGER, D (ed)
Bail or Remand
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Conference Proceedings 6, 1991)
CHAPPELL, D and WILSON, P (eds)
Australian Policing: Contemporary Issues
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1989)
An Introduction to Intellectual Disability in Australia
(Australian Institute on Intellectual Disability, Canberra, 1989)
CONLEY, R W, LUCKASSON, R and BOUTHILET, G N (eds)
The Criminal Justice System and Mental Retardation: Defendants and Victims
(Paul H Brookes, Baltimore, 1992)
CROMBIE, G M
A Discussion Paper - Residential and Community Based Options for the Remand and Sentencing of Intellectually Disabled Offenders in
Victoria: A Proposal from Harrison Youth Services
(Harrison Youth Services, Blackburn, Victoria, July 1988)
Sitting on a See-Saw: An Evaluation of the Independent Third Persons Program
(Unpublished Thesis, University of Melbourne, 1992)
DIXON, D BOTTOMLEY, K COLEMAN, C GILL, M and WALL, D “Safeguarding the rights of suspects in police custody” (1990) 1
Policing and Society
The Right to be Heard: Obtaining Evidence From Intellectually Disabled People
(Discussion Paper, Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988)
FENNELL, P “The Appropriate Adult” (1993) 90 (19)
The Law Society’s Gazette
FERNANDEZ, P, and ROSS, D J “Co-Operative Contracting: Empowering Victims and Educating Offenders” (1992/1993) 6 (2)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1990)
FRECKELTON, I and SELBY, H (eds)
Police in Our Society
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1988)
GETHING, L, POYNTER, T and REYNOLDS, F
Disability Awareness Package
(The Community Disability and Ageing Program, University of Sydney, 1991)
GOLDHAR, J “People with intellectual disabilities and the criminal justice system” (1989) 63
Law Institute Journal
HAYES, S C “Prosecutorial discretion and mentally abnormal offenders”, in I Potas (ed)
Prosecutorial Discretion
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Seminar Proceedings 6, 1984)
HAYES, S C and CRADDOCK, G
Simply Criminal
(2nd ed, Federation Press, Sydney, 1992)
HAYES, S C and HAYES, R
Mental Retardation: Law, Policy and Administration
(Law Book Co, Sydney, 1982)
HAYES, S C and McILWAIN, D
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the New South Wales Prison Population: An Empirical Study
(November 1988)
HEWITT, S E K “Interviewing mentally handicapped persons” (1983) 11
Mental Handicap
HEWITT, S E K “Interviewing people at risk: following Police Codes of Practice”
(December 1985) 13
Mental Handicap
HODGSON, J and McCONVILLE, M “Silence and the suspect” (1993) 143
New Law Journal
HYSON, G “Police involvement: what are the problems?” (1988) 2 (4)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
Intellectual Disability: A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1989)
IRVING, B and HILGENDORF, L
Police Interrogation - The Psychological Approach
(Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure Research Study 1, London, HMSO, 1980)
IRVING, B and HILGENDORF, L
Police Interrogation - A Case Study of Current Practice
(Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure Research Study 2, London, HMSO, 1980)
IRVING, B L and McKENZIE, I K
Police Interrogation - The Effects of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
(The Police Foundation, London, 1989)
JOHNSON, K, ANDREW, R and TOPP, V
Silent Victims: A Study of People with Intellectual Disabilities as Victims of Crime
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988)
Out of Sight, Out of Mind
(Disabled Peoples’ International Inc, Adelaide, South Australia, 1990)
LANE, D “The Victorian Police Shopstealing Warning Program as alternative dispute resolution” (August 1992) 3 (3)
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
MASON, B “Reparation and mediation programmes: the perspective of the victim of crime” (1992) 16
Criminal Law Journal
McCONVILLE, M “Video taping interrogations” (1992) 42
New Law Journal
McKILLOP, S (ed)
Keeping People Out Of Prison
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Seminar Proceedings 11, 1990)
McKILLOP, S and VERNON, J (eds)
The Police and the Community
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Seminar Proceedings 5, 1991)
Police Interrogation - Review of Literature
(Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure Research Study 3, London, HMSO, 1980)
NAYLOR, B “Sexual assault: the law and the child victim (Part 2)”
Legal Service Bulletin
NATIONAL COUNCIL ON INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
The Rights of People with Disabilities: Areas of Need for Increased Protection
(Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, Discussion Paper, 1988)
NEW SOUTH WALES. ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT
The Intellectually Disabled in the Criminal Justice System
(Criminal Law Review Division, Issues Paper, 1991)
NEW SOUTH WALES. ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT
Review of the
(Criminal Law Review Division, Issues Paper, 1992)
NEW SOUTH WALES. DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
Report from the Working Party on Services to Young Persons with Intellectual Disabilities in the Juvenile Justice System
NEW SOUTH WALES. INTER-DEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEE ON INTELLECTUALLY HANDICAPPED ADULT OFFENDERS IN NEW SOUTH WALES, AUSTRALIA
The Missing Services
(Departments of Corrective Services and Youth and Community Services, Report, 1985)
NEW SOUTH WALES. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Police Powers of Detention and Investigation After Arrest
(Report 66, 1990)
NEW SOUTH WALES. VICTIMS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
The Review of the Victims Compensation Act
(Attorney General’s Department, Sydney, March 1993)
NEW SOUTH WALES. WOMEN’S CO-ORDINATION UNIT
Sexual Assault of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Final Report, 1990)
NEW ZEALAND. THE LAW COMMISSION
Criminal Evidence: Police Questioning
(Discussion Paper 21, 1992)
Finding New Ways: A Review of Services to the Person with Intellectual Disability in the Victorian Criminal Justice System
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1988)
OXLEY-OXLAND, J
NSW Police Law Handbook
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1988)
PAPALEO, L A “The criminal justice system and people with intellectual disabilities” (1986) 10 (1)
AAMR Journal
PAPALEO, L A “The mentally retarded and the criminal justice system” (1985) 59
Law Institute Journal
Towards Normalisation: People with Intellectual Disability Involved in the South Australian Criminal Justice System
(Court Services Department, South Australia, 1991)
QUESTIONS OF BALANCE CONFERENCE COMMITTEE
Questions of Balance: Criminal Law and People with Intellectual Disabilities,
(Conference Proceedings, Perth, July 1990)
REDFERN LEGAL CENTRE, INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY RIGHTS SERVICE
Questions of Rights: A Guide to the Law and Rights of People with an Intellectual Disability
(Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney, 1992)
THE ROEHER INSTITUTE
No More Victims: A Manual to Guide the Police in Addressing the Sexual Abuse of People with a Mental Handicap
(The Roeher Institute, Ontario, 1992)
ROSSER, K “A particular vulnerability” (February 1990) 15 (1)
Legal Service Bulletin
ROSSER, K “Vulnerability of people with an intellectual disability” (1989) 3 (4)
National Council on Intellectual Disability: Interaction
ROWAN, J “Electronic recording of police interviews in New Zealand (II)” [1992]
New Zealand Law Journal
SANDERS, A “The limits to diversion from prosecution” (1988) 28 (4)
British Journal of Criminology
SANDOR, D “The thickening blue wedge” (1993) 18
Alternative Law Journal
SNASHALL, R (ed)
Pre-Trial Diversion for Adult Offenders
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, Seminar Proceedings 10, 1985)
SOFTLEY, P, BROWN, D, FORDE, B, MAIR, G and MOXON, D
Police Interrogation - An Observational Study in Four Police Stations
(Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure Research Study 4, London, HMSO, 1980)
SOOD, U and STEVENSON, K “Vulnerable victims: the evidence of video recordings” (1991) 88 (3)
The Law Society’s Gazette
Complaints Against Police in New South Wales
(New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research, Sydney, 1992)
TOMBS, J and MOODY, S “Alternatives to prosecution: the public interest redefined” [1993]
Criminal Law Review
TULLY, B and CAHILL, D
Police Interviewing of the Mentally Handicapped
(The Police Foundation, London, 1984)
UNITED KINGDOM. ROYAL COMMISSION ON CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
(HMSO, Cmnd 8092, 1981)
VICTORIA. OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC ADVOCATE
Finding the Way: The Criminal Justice System and the Person with Intellectual Disabilities
(Office of the Public Advocate, Victoria, 1987)
VICTORIA. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
Statewide Victoria Police and Independent Third Person Training Project Report
(Department of Community Services, Report 5, April 1993)
WERTLIEB, E C “Individuals with disabilities in the criminal justice system: a review of the literature” (1991) 18
Criminal Justice and Behaviour
The Incidence of Crime Victimization among Intellectually Disabled Adults
(Final Report, National Police Research Unit, 1990)
WILSON, C and BREWER, N “The incidence of criminal victimisation of individuals with an intellectual disability” (1992)
Australian Psychologist
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of tentative proposals for reform
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter