URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/TASLRI/2018/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:49:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995 [2018] TASLRI 26
Review of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Final Report No 26
December 2018
Information
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute was established on 23 July 2001 by
agreement between the Government of the State of Tasmania, the
University of
Tasmania and the Law Society of Tasmania. The creation of the Institute was part
of a Partnership Agreement between
the University and the State Government
signed in 2000. The Institute is based at the Sandy Bay campus of the University
of Tasmania
within the Faculty of Law. The Institute undertakes law reform work
and research on topics proposed by the government, the community,
the University
and the Institute itself.
The work of the Institute involves the review of laws with a view to:
• the modernisation of the law
• the elimination of defects in the law
• the simplification of the law
• the consolidation of any laws
• the repeal of laws that are obsolete or unnecessary
• uniformity between laws of other states and the Commonwealth.
The Institute’s Director is Associate Professor Terese Henning. The
members of the Board of the Institute are Associate Professor
Terese Henning
(Chair), Professor Tim McCormack (Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University
of Tasmania), the Honourable Justice
Helen Wood (appointed by the Honourable
Chief Justice of Tasmania), Ms Kristy Bourne (appointed by the
Attorney-General), Dr Jeremy
Prichard (appointed by the Council of the
University), Mr Craig Mackie (nominated by the Tasmanian Bar Association), Ms
(appointed at the invitation of the Institute Board), Mr Rohan Foon
(appointed by the Law Society of Tasmania), Ms Kim Baumeler (appointed
invitation of the Institute Board) and Ms Rosie Smith (appointed at the
invitation of the Institute Board as a member of the
Tasmanian Aboriginal
community).
The Board oversees the Institute’s research, considering each reference
before it is accepted, and approving publications before
their release.
Acknowledgements
This Final Report and the Issues Paper that preceded it were prepared for the
Board by Kate Hanslow. Research assistance on the law
in other jurisdictions for
the purpose of preparing the Institute’s Issues Paper was provided by Zoey
Dwyer. Assistance with
public consultations was provided by Jonathon Budgeon.
Valuable contributions to the project and feedback on drafts of this Report
provided by the Reference Group for this project, comprising John Blackwood,
Philippa Shirley, and Jennifer Dunbabin. This Final
Report was edited and
formatted by Mr Bruce Newey. The project was funded by a grant from the
Solicitors’ Guarantee Fund.
The Final Report is available at the Institute’s website at
http://www.utas.edu.au/law-reform/
or can be sent to you by mail or
The Institute can be contacted by:
: law.reform@utas.edu.au
: (03) 6226 2069
: Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Private Bag 89
Hobart, TAS 7001
This study has been approved by the Tasmanian Social Sciences Human Research
Ethics Committee. If you have concerns or complaints
study, please contact the Executive Officer of the HREC (Tasmania) Network on
+61 3 6226 6254 or email
human.ethics@utas.edu.au. The Executive Officer is the
person nominated to receive complaints from research participants. Please
ethics reference number [H0016752].
of abbreviations:
— advance care directive
— Australian Capital Territory Law Reform Advisory
— alternative dispute resolution
Alternative Dispute Resolution Act 2001
— Australian Guardianship and Administration Council
— Australian Law Reform Commission
— Council of Attorneys-General
— Council on the Ageing Tasmania
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
— Department of Health and Human Services
— Equal Opportunity Tasmania
— Guardianship and Administration Board
— government business enterprise
— health care professional report
— Mental Health Tribunal
— Medical Insurance Group Australia
— National Disability Insurance Scheme
— National Disability Services
— New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
— Office of the Public Guardian
— Older Persons Mental Health Services
— Palliative Care Tasmania
— proposed represented person
— The Public Trustee
— Public Trustee and Guardian
— Queensland Law Reform Commission
— Roy Fagan Centre
— Royal Hobart Hospital
— represented person
— mooted Civil and Administrative Tribunal for Tasmania
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
— Guardianship and Administration Board
The Convention
Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
— Tasmania Health Service
— Victorian Law Reform Commission
Executive Summary
This Report evaluates the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Tas) (the ‘Act’) against the human rights articulated
in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
(the ‘Convention’). The Convention enshrines the
rights of people with disability, including the equal right to make
own decisions and for decisions about a person’s life to reflect their
will, preferences and rights.
explains the relevance of international law
obligations upon the operation of the Act along with other relevant developments
legislative, policy and social landscape.
It is a testament to the creators of the Act that it has remained in force
for over 20 years without substantial amendment. In fact,
some of the
recommendations made throughout this Report are intended as refinements to the
existing legislative provisions, rather
than proposing substantial reforms.
Other recommendations do, however, propose more significant changes to the way
that the Act provides
for decisions to be made for Tasmanians requiring support
with decision-making.
explains which category each recommendation fits
within, and provides a suggested roadmap for legislative reform.
of this Report recommends revision to the guiding principles of the
Act to instil the principles and obligations of the Convention.
Whilst the Act
currently requires a person’s wishes to be carried into effect where
possible, and for a least restrictive alternative
to be adopted, it has been
concluded that the present formulation does not give sufficient emphasis to the
need for decisions to
be based upon a person’s will, preferences and
rights, as the Convention requires. This reflects a shift from a paternalistic
‘best interests’ approach to representative decision-making. To
simplify language, and to enhance community understanding
of what this means in
practice, the Institute proposes that the Act incorporate a practical,
step-by-step Decision-Making Process
to achieve decisions based upon a
person’s ‘views, wishes, and preferences.’ The Decision-Making
Process, which
is outlined in
, permits only limited circumstances where
a person’s views, wishes and preferences may not be adopted. Where this is
however, the Decision-Making Process continues to require a person’s
views, wishes and preferences to be advanced to the greatest
Secondly, it is proposed that the scope of the Act’s jurisdiction be
revised. The Act presently enables decisions to be made
for individuals with
disability who, because of disability, are unable to make a reasonable judgment
matters. This Report recommends that the Act
no longer require it to be established that a person has a disability. Instead,
proposed that the Act apply to people who are unable to understand,
retain, use or weigh information relevant to a decision, or communicate
decision. Removal of the precondition for a disability promotes the equal rights
of people with disability and removes the unequal
treatment that people with
disability are currently subject to under the Act. These reforms are discussed
Thirdly, the report makes a range of recommendations about how the Act can
better promote access to quality, effective support with
decision-making,
consistent with obligations under the Convention. Whilst implicitly the Act
already acknowledges the role that support
can play with decision-making,
including via the principle of adopting the least restrictive alternative, it
has been concluded that
more needs to be done. Reforms proposed aim to better
acknowledge, foster and promote the use of support to make decisions to maximise
a person’s autonomy and promote a will, preferences and rights approach to
decision-making for people requiring support. This
Report recommends that a
person not be deemed unable to make their own decisions if they could make a
decision with support and that
a demonstrated effort to offer individuals
decision-making support be required before consideration of the need for a
representative
As part of strengthening and advancing the use of decision-making support,
Part 7 of this Report recommends that Tasmania adopt a
legislative framework of
supported decision-making. This approach acknowledges the reality that people
often make decisions with
some level of support and validates decision-making
processes that utilise support. It provides another alternative before the
of a representative decision, with the aim that representatives are
utilised only as a last resort. These reforms will authorise
and enable the
provision of support where requested, without removing the decision-making
rights of the individual to make their
own decision. It will require quality,
accessible decision-making supports to be made available for Tasmanians on an
equitable basis.
This is likely to particularly benefit members of the community
who do not have individuals within existing social networks from
which to draw
decision-making support.
One of the ways that individuals can be supported to make their own decisions
is to record those decisions in advance in a form that
they can have confidence
will be respected. Parts 4 and 5 consider the legislative framework surrounding
how individuals can record
their decisions in advance, including exercising
choice by deciding who they wish to act as their representative if required and
any terms of those appointments. These provisions are considered fundamental to
ensuring that people retain maximum control of decisions
affecting their lives.
As part of supporting people to make their own decisions, Part 5 recommends that
Tasmania adopt a legislative
framework for the creation and use of advance care
directives (ACDs) to record in advance their directions about future health care
and treatment. Although the role and use of ACDs is already recognised in
Tasmania at common law, the Institute has concluded that
codification of the
common law is both necessary and desirable to better promote the preparation and
use of ACDs, and to reduce or
eliminate the need for a representative decision.
Where it is determined that individuals require a greater level of support
via the appointment of a representative, this Report proposes
a raft of reforms
to provide a rights-based approach to representative decision-making so that
representatives only act where needed,
and only for as long as needed. This
includes better articulating the duties of representatives. These reforms are
discussed in Part
8 (Representative Decision-Making), Part 9 (Powers and
Functions of Guardians), and Part 10 (Powers and Functions of Administrators).
This Report makes several recommendations that reflect obligations under the
Convention to ensure that any interventions for people
requiring decision-making
support are subject to appropriate safeguards. Many of these safeguards are
preventive as they aim to promote
the rights and interests of people subject to
the Act and prevent abuse or misuse of powers. These include recommendations to
the role and functioning of the Guardianship and Administration Board
(the Board) (discussed in Part 15) and Public Guardian (Part
16). One reform
proposed includes an increasing role and use of alternative dispute resolution
as a means of resolving issues collaboratively,
efficiently and without the need
for a representative decision. Part 14 also makes recommendations to enhance the
Board’s accountability
by ensuring that avenues to appeal Board decisions
are appropriate and accessible. Other safeguarding strategies put forward
ensuring that the law is accessible and that processes are adequately
responsive, as discussed in Part 18.
Safeguards for representative decision-making are explored in Part 12, with
safeguards relating to consent to health care and treatment
dealt with in Part
14. Whilst at first glance some of these proposals may appear insignificant,
they are individually and collectively
expected to provide substantial
improvements to the Act’s existing safeguards. In particular, it is
proposed that the Public
Guardian and the Board have strengthened powers to
investigate and respond to circumstances where representatives act contrary to
As part of conducting its review, the Institute has identified several
matters falling outside of the scope of this project but which
are suggested are
of significance and ought to be investigated separately. These include: the
desirability of considering separately
the provisions of the
Attorney Act
(Tas) and the utility of the legislative framework
enabling individuals to appoint attorneys and enduring guardians within a single
); evaluating the merits of enacting adult safeguarding
legislation in Tasmania
; and the need for review of the way in which
the use of restrictive practices are regulated in Tasmania
also explains other developments occurring at both a state and federal level
under the National Disability Strategy and the State
Government’s
Disability Framework for Action that will likely impact the operation of the Act
and result in the need for further
legislative reform to the Act. This includes
developments following full implementation of the National Disability Insurance
(NDIS) in Tasmania in July 2019, and consequential reforms expected to
Disability Services Act 2011
(Tas). These legislative and policy
developments reflect an increasing recognition of the rights of people with
disability including
the right to exercise choice and control, and to
participate fully in the community.
of Recommendations
Guiding Principles of the
Recommendation 3.1
That the ALRC’s National Decision-Making Principles guide reform to the
(1) That all adults have an equal right to make decisions that affect their
lives and to have those decisions respected.
(2) People who require support in decision-making must be provided with
access to the support necessary for them to make, communicate
and participate in
decisions that affect their lives.
(3) Decisions that affect a person’s life must be directed by the
person’s will, preferences and rights.
(4) Laws and legal frameworks must contain appropriate and effective
safeguards in relation to interventions for people who may require
decision-making support, including to prevent abuse and undue influence.
Recommendation 3.2
That the principles of the Convention be included in the Act. These
principles are:
(a) there must be respect for the inherent dignity of persons with
disability and their individual autonomy including the freedom
one’s own choices, and their right to independence;
(b) persons with disability are not to be discriminated against;
(c) persons with disability are to be given the opportunity for full and
effective participation and inclusion in society;
(d) there must be respect for difference and acceptance of persons with
disability as part of human diversity and humanity;
(e) people with disability must have equality of opportunity;
(f) services are to be as physically and technologically accessible as
possible to persons with disability;
(g) equality between men and women is to be promoted; and
(h) respect for the evolving capacities of children with disabilities and
respect for the right of children with disabilities to
preserve their
identities.
Recommendation 3.3
That the guiding principles of the Act include:
• people who require support in decision-making must be provided with
access to the most effective support necessary for them
to make, communicate and
participate in decisions that affect their lives;
• the views, wishes, preferences and rights of persons who may require
decision-making support must direct decisions that affect
their lives;
• the role of families, carers and other significant persons in an
adult’s life to support the adult to make decisions
must be acknowledged
and respected; and
• a function or power conferred, or duty imposed, by this Act is to be
performed so that the means that are the least restrictive
of the person’s
freedom of decision and action as possible in the circumstances is adopted.
Recommendation 3.4
That the guiding principles of the Act apply to any person assisting someone
or making a decision for a person informally.
Recommendation 3.5
That all members of the community be encouraged to uphold and promote the
Act’s guiding principles.
Own Appointment of a Representative: Appointments of Enduring
Recommendation 4.1
That the statutory framework retain separate representatives for financial
decisions and personal matters.
Recommendation 4.2
(1) That the State Government investigate community and stakeholder support
for the introduction of a single enduring document in
Tasmania enabling the
appointment of representatives for both financial and personal matters.
(2) That if a model enduring document is agreed nationally, consideration is
given to adopting the model form.
Recommendation 4.3
That a person aged 16 years and older be eligible to be appointed as an
enduring guardian but that an enduring guardian not be permitted
to act until
they attain the age of 18 years.
Recommendation 4.4
That any person who is directly or indirectly responsible for the health care
or treatment, support services or accommodation of the
donor in a professional
or administrative capacity also be ineligible to be the donor’s enduring
guardian under
of the Act.
Recommendation 4.5
That a donor be able to appoint the Public Guardian as an enduring
Recommendation 4.6
That s 32A(2) of the Act confirm that an alternative enduring guardian has
the functions of the enduring guardian not only upon the
absence or incapacity
of the enduring guardian, but also upon the death or resignation of the enduring
Recommendation 4.7
(1) That the Act enable a third party to execute an instrument or revocation
of instrument on behalf of the donor, at the donor’s
direction. The third
party should be an adult and not an enduring guardian or witness to the
instrument.
(2) That the Act require interpreters to certify on an instrument or
revocation of instrument that they are not aware of anything
that causes them to
believe that the donor does not understand the nature and effect of the
instrument or revocation of instrument.
Recommendation 4.8
That the standard form instrument (form 1) and revocation of instrument (form
2) require witnesses to certify that:
(a) they are not aware of anything that causes them to believe that the donor
did not sign freely or did not understand the instrument
or revocation of
instrument;
(b) the donor signed in their presence; and
(c) the donor is who they purport to be.
Recommendation 4.9
ss 32(2)(c)
(2)(b) of the Act be revised to provide that a
party and ‘close relative of a party’ are ineligible to act as a
to an instrument or revocation of instrument.
(2) That the phrase ‘close relative’ be defined consistently with
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(3) That witnesses to instruments and revocations of instruments be required
to declare that they are not a party to the instrument
or a close relative of a
party and that the term ‘close relative’ be explained on the
standard form instrument (form
1) and revocation of instrument (form 2).
(4) That the Act provide an equivalent fine to that contained in
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(Tas) for a person who is a party to an
instrument or who knows he or she is a close relative of a party to an
instrument acting as
a witness to the signature of the donor, or initialling by
the donor of an alteration of an instrument.
(5) That any alteration of an instrument need to be initialled by the donor
and the enduring guardian, with the donor’s initialling
of the alteration
to be witnessed by two adult witnesses who are not a party to the instrument or
close relative of a party, with
those witnesses able to be the same, or
different, to the witnesses to the instrument.
Recommendation 4.10
That, when signing an instrument to accept the role of enduring guardian, an
enduring guardian be required to declare that they:
• are eligible to act;
• understand their obligations;
• understand the consequences of failing to comply with their
obligations;
• undertake to act in accordance with the Act; and
• have read and understood any advance care directive of the donor.
Recommendation 4.11
(1) That comparative powers be given to the Registrar of the Board in
relation to the registration of instruments as are provided
to the Recorder of
Titles under
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(Tas), with the
exception that the Registrar not be permitted to retain any portion of the
registration fee upon refusing to register
an instrument.
(2) That the Board be able to declare an instrument valid despite it not
complying with the formal requirements of the Act.
Recommendation 4.12
(1) That a donor be able to revoke an instrument using a form ‘to
similar effect’ to the standard form revocation of instrument
included in the Act.
(2) That an equivalent provision to
Powers of Attorney
(Tas) be included in the Act, enabling a donor to revoke an
instrument by giving notice to the enduring guardian(s).
(3) That donors be required to take reasonable steps to give notice to their
enduring guardian(s) of the revocation of their appointment.
Failure to give
notice should not invalidate the revocation.
Recommendation 4.13
(1) That the Act confirm that an instrument is revoked on the death of the
(2) That the Act provide that the authority of an enduring guardian is
suspended at any time that the enduring guardian does not have
decision-making
ability to act as the enduring guardian.
Recommendation 4.14
Powers of Attorney Act
remains, it be revised to:
(a) enable a donor to negate the automatic revocation of their enduring power
of attorney upon the ending of their marriage or registered
relationship in their enduring power of attorney; and
(b) provide that only the appointment of the attorney who was party to a
marriage or registered personal relationship with the donor
is revoked upon the
ending of their marriage or personal relationship without revoking the entire
document, to the extent that it
appoints a substitute or joint attorney (where
their appointment was expressed to be joint and several).
Recommendation 4.15
That an enduring guardian be able to resign by completing and registering a
standard form to be included in the Act, or by using a
form to similar effect.
The enduring guardian should then be required to take reasonable steps to advise
the donor and any other
appointed enduring guardian of that resignation.
Recommendation 4.16
(1) That there not be a registration fee payable on the registration of an
instrument, but that the Registrar have discretion to impose
a registration fee
where more than one instrument is registered for a person in a calendar
(2) That there not be a fee for the registration of a revocation of
instrument.
Recommendation 4.17
(1) That the Board be properly resourced to develop an online search function
to search the register of instruments.
(2) That there be no search fee payable to search the register of
instruments.
(3) That consideration be given to establishing a single repository for the
registration of enduring powers of attorney, instruments
and advance care
directives.
Recommendation 4.18
That the Act state that the authority of a Board-appointed guardian takes
priority over the authority of an enduring guardian to the
extent that the same
functions are conferred upon both.
Making Decisions in Advance – Advance Care Directives
Recommendation 5.1
(1) That Tasmania adopt a legislative framework for advance care
directives.
(2) That the legislative framework for advance care directives be included in
Recommendation 5.2
That the Act not preclude children with decision-making ability making an
advance care directive.
Recommendation 5.3
(1) That the Act confirm that an advance care directive is not invalid merely
because it does not possess certain formal characteristics.
(2) That legislation contemplate a person making a valid advance care
directive orally.
Recommendation 5.4
(1) That witnessing requirements for a written advance care directive be
consistent with requirements for instruments.
(2) That the Board be able to declare an advance care directive valid despite
any non-compliance with formal requirements.
Recommendation 5.5
(1) That a form advance care directive be included in a Schedule to the Act
but that use of this form not be mandatory.
(2) That there is strong community and stakeholder engagement and
consultation in relation to the development of the form advance
care directive
including consumer, medical and legal input.
Recommendation 5.6
(1) That an advance care directive or instrument not be permitted to contain
directions that:
• are unlawful;
• would require an unlawful act to be performed;
• would result in a health practitioner breaching a professional
standard or code of conduct; or
• relate to mandatory treatment, for example under the
Mental Health
Any directions of this type should be void and of no effect.
(2) That legislation clarify that a direction in an advance care directive or
instrument cannot compel a health practitioner to perform
a particular form of
health care and treatment other than the withdrawal or withholding of health
care and treatment.
(3) That legislation confirm that a direction amounting to a refusal of
health care and treatment is binding if:
• it was made voluntarily by a person with decision-making ability to
make the directive;
• it is clear and unambiguous; and
• it extends to the situation at hand.
(4) That the Act confirm that a directive in these circumstances has the same
effect as if the person made the decision whilst they
had the decision-making
ability to do so.
(5) That health practitioners be able to refuse to comply with a binding
direction in an advance care directive if they believe on
reasonable grounds
that it does not reflect the current wishes of the person.
Recommendation 5.7
(1) That the Public Guardian have power to mediate matters and attempt to
resolve disputes in relation to advance care directives
and instruments, broadly
consistent with
–(4) of the
Advance Care Directives Act
(2) That if the Public Guardian is not able to resolve a matter, or it
considers it more appropriate that the matter is determined
by the Board, that
the Public Guardian be able to refer a matter to the Board for
determination.
(3) That the Board have power to give advice and directions and make
declarations to resolve disputes relating to advance care directives.
Recommendation 5.8
That there be an express duty upon enduring guardians, guardians and health
practitioners to give as much effect as possible to the
advance care directive
of a person without decision-making ability to consent to a particular health
care and treatment decision.
Recommendation 5.9
(1) That the Act provide that, except in relation to urgent health care and
treatment, before administering health care and treatment
to a person who does
not have decision-making ability to give consent to that health care or
treatment, health professionals must
make reasonable efforts in the
circumstances to ascertain whether that patient has either or both an advance
care directive or instrument.
(2) That the Act provide a duty upon prescribed health facilities (to be
defined in the Regulations) to make reasonable enquiries
to ascertain whether a
patient in their facility has either or both an advance care directive or
instrument and, if so, ensure a
copy is placed with the patient’s clinical
(3) That guardians have a duty to make reasonable enquiries to ascertain
whether a represented person has an advance care directive.
Recommendation 5.10
(1) That the Act provide for the registration of advance care directives.
(2) That failure to register an advance care directive not affect the
validity of the document.
(3) That there not be a registration fee payable on the registration of an
advance care directive, but that the Registrar be given
a discretion to impose a
registration fee where more than one advance care directive is registered for a
person in a calendar year.
(4) That there not be a fee for the registration of a revocation of advance
care directive.
(5) That an online search function be developed to search the register of
advance care directives.
(6) That there not be a search fee to search the register of advance care
directives.
(7) That the State Government work with other state and territory governments
to develop a national repository for advance care directives.
Decision-Making Ability
Recommendation 6.1
That the test that assesses a person’s ability to make decisions for
the purposes of the Act not require the person to have
a disability.
Recommendation 6.2
That, where necessary, the Convention definition of ‘disability’
be used in the Act.
Recommendation 6.3
(1) That the Act adopt the term ‘decision-making ability’ when
referring to a person’s ability to make decisions
or give consent.
(2) That the definition of ‘decision-making ability’ be
consistent with the definition of ‘decision-making capacity’
contained in
Mental Health Act
(Tas) which
provides that an adult is taken to have the ability to make a decision unless a
person or body considering that capacity
is satisfied that they are unable to
understand information relevant to the decision, retain information relevant to
the decision,
use or weigh information relevant to the decision, or communicate
the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other means).
(3) That ‘information relevant to a decision’ be defined
consistently with
Mental Health Act
include information on the consequences of:
• making the decision one way or the other; and
• deferring the making of the decision; and
• failing to make the decision.
(4) That the Act refer to a person’s decision-making
‘ability’ rather than ‘capacity.’
Recommendation 6.4
(1) That the definition of decision-making ability provide that a person has
decision-making ability if they are able to make a decision
with practicable and
appropriate support.
(2) That the Act provide that it may not be determined that a person does not
have decision-making ability unless all practicable
steps have been taken to
provide the person with appropriate support to make and communicate a
Recommendation 6.5
That the definition of ‘decision-making ability’ in the Act adopt
equivalent provisions to
Mental Health Act 2013
which confirm that:
(a) a person may be taken to understand information relevant to a decision if
it reasonably appears that he or she is able to understand
an explanation of the
nature and consequences of the decision given in a way that is appropriate to
his or her circumstances (whether
by words, signs or other means); and
(b) a person may be taken to be able to retain information relevant to a
decision even if he or she may only be able to retain the
information
Recommendation 6.6
(1) That the Act require a donor to have decision-making ability to make and
revoke an instrument.
(2) That the Act outline what ‘information relevant to a
decision’ includes in relation to a donor’s decision-making
to make or revoke an instrument.
Recommendation 6.7
(1) That any person with decision-making ability to make an advance care
directive be able to make an advance care directive.
(2) That the Act acknowledge that a person’s decision-making ability
should be assessed in relation to each directive or statement
in an advance care
Recommendation 6.8
That the Act list factors that must not, by themselves, result in an
assumption that a person does not have decision-making ability.
These should
• where a person makes a decision that is, in the opinion of others,
• where a decision results, or may result, in an adverse outcome for
the person;
• where a person does not have a particular level of literacy or
• where a person engages in particular cultural, political or religious
practices; and
• assumptions because of a person’s age.
Recommendation 6.9
That the Act require a person assessing a person’s decision-making
ability to take reasonable steps to conduct the assessment
at a time, and in an
environment in which, the person’s ability can be most accurately
Recommendation 6.10
That the Regulations exclude health practitioners submitting a report that
deals with the decision-making ability of a close relative
(defined in
accordance with Recommendation 4.9(2)) for the purposes of regs 4 and 8.
Recommendation 6.11
That the Act create an offence where a person intentionally or recklessly
obstructs another person undergoing an assessment of their
decision-making
ability for the purpose of the Act, without reasonable excuse.
Supported Decision-Making
Recommendation 7.1
That an adequately funded public education program be developed and delivered
to ensure that Tasmanians understand the rights of people
with disability
articulated in the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
including the need to provide adults requiring support with decision-making with
access to the support they may require to make
and implement decisions about
matters affecting their lives and the duties of individuals who provide that
Recommendation 7.2
That adequately funded decision-making support programs be developed,
ensuring equity of access.
Recommendation 7.3
That the standard Board application forms ask specifically about the informal
decision-making supports that have been offered to a
proposed represented person
and/or attempted prior to the making of the application.
Recommendation 7.4
(1) That the Act provide that a donor may specify in an instrument a time
from which, a circumstance in which or an occasion on which
the authority for
all matters or the authority for a specified matter under the instrument is
exercisable, which may be:
• immediately on the making of the instrument; or
• when the donor ceases to have decision-making ability for the matters
or matter; or
• any other time, circumstance or occasion.
(2) That the standard form instrument provide guidance to donors about their
options to nominate when the authority of their enduring
guardian is to
Recommendation 7.5
(1) That a legislated supported decision-making scheme be introduced in
(2) That, as part of introducing legislative reforms to establish a supported
decision-making scheme, the Act be renamed to reflect
the new framework.
(3) That legislative reform to establish a formal supported decision-making
scheme be supported by an appropriate lead-time incorporating
a comprehensive
public education campaign explaining the reforms, emphasising that the scheme is
intended to complement not replace
existing informal support arrangements.
Recommendation 7.6
That a legislated supported decision-making scheme be available for personal
matters, including consent to health care and treatment.
Recommendation 7.7
(1) That legislation enable an individual to appoint their own supporter for
personal matters including consent to health care and
(2) That, to appoint a supporter, an individual needs ‘decision-making
ability’ to appoint a supporter.
Recommendation 7.8
(1) That legislation enable the Board to appoint supporters for personal
matters, including consent to health care and treatment.
(2) That the Board not be permitted to appoint a supporter where the proposed
supported person objects to that appointment.
Recommendation 7.9
That legislation contain the following safeguarding provisions in relation to
supporters:
(a) that there be a clear description of a supporter’s role. Subject to
the terms of their appointment, and the directions of
a supported person or the
Board, a supporter’s role should include:
• to obtain and disclose personal and other information on behalf of
the supported person relevant to a decision;
• to assist the supported person to understand information relevant to
a decision;
• to provide advice to the supported person about a decision;
• to assist the supported person to communicate their decision; and
• to endeavour to ensure the decisions of the supported person are
given effect.
(b) That legislation state explicitly that a supporter cannot make decisions
on behalf of a supported person.
(c) That supporters only be permitted to act during periods in which the
supported person has decision-making ability for the relevant
(d) That supporters be required to comply with the duties outlined in
Recommendation 8.3(2).
(e) That a supported person be able to direct their supporter to report to a
person or body when they are acting as supporter.
(f) That a person be able to revoke their own appointment of a supporter.
(g) That the Board be able to revoke the appointment of a supporter in
defined circumstances, broadly consistent with the test to
representative.
(h) That supporters have a duty to notify the Board if they consider that the
test for the appointment of a representative may be
Recommendation 7.10
That Recommendation 5.7 (providing a mediation role for the Public Guardian)
be extended to supporters.
Representative Decision-Making
Recommendation 8.1
(1) That the test to appoint a representative require the Board to be
satisfied that:
(a) the proposed represented person does not have decision-making ability in
relation to one or more personal matters (in the case
of a guardianship order)
or financial matters (in the case of an administration order);
(b) the proposed represented person is in need of a guardian or
administrator; and
(c) the guardianship order or administration order will promote the proposed
represented person’s personal and social wellbeing.
(2) That, when considering whether there is a need for a representative, the
Board be required to consider:
(a) the values, wishes and preferences of the proposed represented person;
(b) whether the needs of the proposed represented person could be met by
other means less restrictive of that person’s freedom
of decision and
action, including whether the need could be met by informal means, through
negotiation, mediation or similar means,
or in the case of a guardianship order,
through the appointment of a supporter;
(c) the wishes of any primary carer or close relative of the proposed
represented person or other person with a direct interest in
the application;
(d) the desirability of preserving existing relationships that are important
to the proposed represented person.
Recommendation 8.2
That, when conferring authority upon a representative, the Board need to be
satisfied that the test for the appointment of a representative
is satisfied in
relation to each function conferred.
Recommendation 8.3
(1) That the duties of representatives be outlined in a separate section of
(2) That the duties of representatives include the following:
(a) to uphold the guiding principles of the Act;
(b) to act honestly, diligently and in good faith;
(c) to treat the represented person (the ‘person’) with respect
and dignity;
(d) to communicate with the person by any means that they consider the person
will be best able to understand;
(e) to keep the person informed about decisions made and steps taken by the
representative as appropriate in the circumstances;
(f) to regularly consult with any other appointed representative of the
person and them keep informed about substantial decisions
or actions, subject to
the terms of their appointment;
(g) to act as an advocate for the person;
(h) to encourage and support the person to develop their decision-making
abilities where possible;
(i) to act in such a way so as to protect the person from violence, neglect,
abuse or exploitation; and
(j) to respect the person’s right to privacy.
Recommendation 8.4
That the Act require Board-appointed representatives to apply to the Board
for the review of an order if they consider that the test
for the appointment of
a representative would no longer be met.
Recommendation 8.5
That the rights of enduring guardians to access information in s 32B(1) of
the Act also be included for Board-appointed guardians
and administrators.
Functions and Powers of Guardians
Recommendation 9.1
That the Act describe the scope of a guardian’s role as relating to
‘personal matters’.
Recommendation 9.2
That the description in the Act that a guardian has a role akin to that of a
parent in relation to a child be removed.
Recommendation 9.3
(1) That ‘personal matters’ be defined to include:
• deciding where and with whom a represented person lives whether
permanently or temporarily;
• restricting visits on behalf of a represented person where it
promotes their personal and social wellbeing, and prohibiting
visits where the
guardian reasonably believes that it would have an adverse effect on the person;
• consenting to, or refusing or withdrawing consent to health care and
treatment other than special treatment;
• deciding upon education, training, and work arrangements of a
represented person; and
• legal matters that relate to personal matters.
(2) That ‘legal matter’ be defined to include:
• the use of legal services for a represented person’s benefit;
• bringing or defending a legal proceeding or hearing in a court,
tribunal or other body on behalf of the person.
Recommendation 9.4
(1) That the terms ‘medical treatment’ and ‘health
care’ as used in the Act be replaced with the single term
care and treatment’.
(2) That ‘health care and treatment’ be defined to include
‘health care’ of any kind, including:
(a) anything that is part of a health service within the meaning of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law;
(b) an intimate forensic procedure and a non-intimate forensic procedure
normally carried out by a person authorised to carry out
the procedure under
Forensic Procedures Act 2000
(c) any other act declared by the Regulations to be health care and
treatment for the purposes of the Act.
(3) That the term ‘health care and treatment’ exclude the
assessment and treatment of mental illness given to a patient
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) and any other matter that is declared by the
Regulations to not be health care and treatment.
(4) That the term ‘health practitioner’ be defined to mean a
health practitioner within the meaning of the Health Practitioner
National Law, and any other profession prescribed in the Act’s
Regulations.
Recommendation 9.5
That the Act provide a non-exhaustive list of matters that fall outside the
authority of a guardian, including:
• those matters within the scope of an administrator’s
• consenting to, or refusing or withdrawing consent to special
treatment (unless giving consent to the continuation of special
treatment is
approved by the Board);
• consenting to assessment and treatment for mental illness covered by
Mental Health Act 2013
• making, revoking, or amending a represented person’s Will,
enduring power of attorney, instrument, or advance care directive;
• voting on behalf of a represented person;
• consenting to marriage or the dissolution of marriage or significant
relationship, or a sexual relationship of the represented
• making decisions about the care and wellbeing of a represented
person’s child;
• consenting to the adoption of children, surrogacy arrangements and
parenting orders;
• acting after the death of the represented person;
• disciplining, chastising or punishing the represented person; or
• consenting to an unlawful act.
Functions and Powers of Administrators
Recommendation 10.1
That the authority of administrators be described in the Act as relating to
‘financial and property matters’.
Recommendation 10.2
(1) That the existing non-exhaustive lists of powers of administrators in
of the Act and powers of attorneys in
Attorney Act
(Tas) be made consistent.
(2) That both the Act and the
Powers of Attorney Act
clarify that administrators and attorneys’ powers extend to legal matters
relating to financial and property matters.
(3) That the lists of matters falling within the scope of an attorney’s
and administrator’s authority be revised to avoid
use of legalistic terms
and to include:
• description of more day-to-day financial transactions for example,
insuring a person’s property, withdrawing money from,
or depositing money
into a represented person’s account with a financial institution;
• power to apply for and hold a license or permit;
• obtaining or surrendering insurance for the represented person;
• as exceptions to the power to invest money in any manner in which a
trustee may invest, power to:
o retain any of the represented person’s existing investments that are
not authorised trustee investments, including taking
up rights to issues of new
shares or options for new shares to which the person becomes entitled by their
existing shareholding;
o retain property owned by the represented person as a joint tenant or tenant
• lodging and removing caveats over land; and
• lodging and removing caveats against the issue of a grant of probate
or administration in an estate.
Recommendation 10.3
That the State Government review pending recommendations of the NSWLRC
dealing with the rights and powers of representatives in relation
person’s digital estate and consider any need for legislative reform.
Recommendation 10.4
That the Act provide a non-exhaustive list of matters that fall outside the
authority of an administrator, including:
• personal matters included within the scope of a guardian’s
• making, revoking or amending a represented person’s Will,
enduring power of attorney, instrument or advance care directive;
• voting on behalf of a represented person;
• consenting to marriage or the dissolution of marriage or significant
relationship, or a sexual relationship of the represented
• making decisions about the care and wellbeing of a represented
person’s child;
• consenting to the adoption of children, surrogacy arrangements and
parenting orders;
• acting after the death of the represented person;
• disciplining, chastising or punishing the represented person; and
• consenting to an unlawful act.
Recommendation 10.5
That protections for representatives who enter into or participate in court
proceedings on behalf of a represented person be reviewed.
Decision-Making Process
Recommendation 11.1
That the Act contain a separate section headed ‘the Decision-Making
Process’ that outlines when and how representatives
and the Board are to
make decisions for a person.
Recommendation 11.2
That the Decision-Making Process require the Board and representatives (the
decision-maker) to adopt the following process when making
any decision on
behalf of a person who does not have decision-making ability to make their own
decision about the matter:
1. First, the decision-maker must consider whether there is a need for a
decision. There is no need for them to make a decision where
the person has made
a binding direction in advance that applies to the circumstances, including in a
valid advance care directive.
2. Second, the decision-maker must consider whether the person is likely to
become able to make their own decision, and if so, when.
If the decision-maker
considers that a decision can be delayed until the person gains the ability to
make the decision, without that
delay causing harm, then the decision should be
3. If the decision-maker considers that a decision needs to be made, then the
person’s views, wishes and preferences must be
given all practical and
appropriate effect. A person may communicate their views, wishes and preferences
by any means.
4. Where the person’s views, wishes, and preferences cannot be
determined, the decision-maker must give all practical and appropriate
what the decision-maker reasonably believes the person’s likely views,
wishes and preferences are, based on all the
information available, including by
consulting with family, carers and other significant people in the
person’s life that the
decision-maker reasonably believes the person would
want to be consulted.
5. A decision-maker may not give all practical and appropriate effect to the
person’s views, wishes and preferences only where:
(a) it is necessary to prevent unacceptable harm to the person or another
(b) it would be unlawful.
In any of these cases, a representative must adopt Step 6 whilst continuing
to give as much effect as possible to the person’s
views, wishes and
preference.
6. If it is not possible to determine or apply the person’s views,
wishes and preferences, a decision-maker must act to promote
and uphold the
person’s personal and social wellbeing and act in a way least restrictive
of their human rights.
Safeguards for Representative Decision-Making
Recommendation 12.1
(1) That the Act provide the ability to apply to the Board for an internal
review of its original decisions by a division of the Board
not comprising
members who were involved in the original decision.
(2) That the Supreme Court of Tasmania rules, practices and procedures be
reviewed to facilitate accessible pathways to appeal Board
decisions to the
Supreme Court.
(3) That there be publicly available, accessible information produced
explaining the appeal process and which is provided to parties
following a
determination of the Board.
(4) That legislation provide that no order for costs may be made against an
applicant in an appeal if he or she is the person in respect
of whom the
decision appealed against relates.
Recommendation 12.2
That the Act limit those who are eligible to request a statement of reasons
of the Board’s determination to:
(a) those classes of individuals who are entitled to appeal a determination
of the Board; and
(b) any other person that the Board considers has a proper interest in the
Recommendation 12.3
(1) That the Act give the Board power to refer a matter for mediation.
(2) That the Board have mediation services available.
(3) That the use of mediation not be compulsory.
(4) That the Board be added as a prescribed tribunal under the
Alternative
Dispute Resolution Act 2001
Recommendation 12.4
That the Public Guardian have power to attempt to resolve disputes involving
representatives, consistent with Recommendation 5.7.
Recommendation 12.5
That the Board have power to review an instrument of its own motion.
Recommendation 12.6
That the Act confirm that the Board’s powers to revoke instruments
extend equally to
revocations
of instruments.
Recommendation 12.7
(1) That the wording of s 34(1)(b) of the Act be revised to confirm that the
Board may only revoke or amend an instrument where the
donor does not have
decision-making ability to revoke or amend the instrument.
(2) That the Board have power to appoint a substitute enduring guardian after
revoking an enduring guardian’s appointment where
the instrument does not
already provide a substitute.
(3) That the Board have power to suspend an instrument.
Recommendation 12.8
That, to revoke the appointment of a representative, the Board need to be
satisfied that:
(a) in relation to all representatives (enduring guardians and
Board-appointed representatives):
• the representative is not willing or able to act in that capacity;
• the representative has acted in an incompetent or negligent manner or
contrary to the Act; or
(b) in relation to enduring guardians only, that there has been a major
change in circumstances since the appointment was made and:
• the amendment is the only practicable way to address this
circumstance; and
• if the donor had decision-making ability, he or she would agree to
the amendment; and
(c) in relation to Board-appointed representatives only, that the
representative no longer meets the eligibility requirements that
apply to be
appointed as a representative.
Recommendation 12.9
(1) That the Act provide that an order of the Board appointing a
representative is suspended if the representative does not have decision-making
ability to act in that capacity.
(2) That an order appointing an administrator be suspended upon the
administrator becoming bankrupt or insolvent.
(3) That if the appointment of an administrator is suspended because of
bankruptcy or insolvency, that administrator be required to
advise the Board of
that circumstance.
Recommendation 12.10
That the Act require former representatives to facilitate the handover of
authority upon termination of their appointment. Handover
should occur as
(a) if a new representative is appointed, then to the new representative;
(b) if an order appointing a representative is terminated, then to the person
who was formerly a represented person; and
(c) if terminated because of the death of the represented person, then to
their legal personal representative.
Recommendation 12.11
(1) That reports from representatives require representatives to:
(a) describe attempts to encourage and support the represented person to
develop their decision-making skills; and
(b) articulate any future opportunities identified to build the represented
person’s decision-making skills.
(2) That the Board’s processes when receiving reports from
representatives provide opportunity for a represented person to speak
with the Board’s registry staff as part of the reporting process wherever
Recommendation 12.12
(1) That the Act confirm a donor’s ability to nominate in their
instrument a person or body that their enduring guardian must
take reasonable
steps to notify upon them commencing to act in the role for the first time.
(2) That the standard form instrument provide a space for a donor to nominate
a person or body that their enduring guardian must take
reasonable steps to
notify upon them commencing to act in the role for the first time.
Recommendation 12.13
That the standard form instrument provide a space for a donor to nominate a
person or body who their enduring guardian must report
to whilst acting in the
Recommendation 12.14
That an equivalent provision to s 32D(1) of the Act be included in relation
to Board-appointed administrators and guardians, confirming
that administrators
and guardians must keep accurate records of all dealings and transactions that
they make as representatives.
Recommendation 12.15
(1) That the Board be required to consider the following matters when
determining the duration of an order appointing a representative:
• the likelihood of improvements to the represented person’s
decision-making ability;
• the prospect that likely changes to circumstances including short
term interventions to establish supported arrangements will
mitigate the need
for a representative; and
• that the order is the least restrictive of the person’s freedom
of decision and action as is possible in the circumstances.
(2) That any continuation of an order appointing a representative be
permitted to last for a maximum of three years, after which time
lapses unless it is continued in accordance with the Act.
Recommendation 12.16
That, to continue an order appointing a representative, the Board need to be
satisfied that the test for the appointment of a representative
continues to be
Recommendation 12.17
That the standard form instrument explain what conflicts of interest are how
they may be managed.
Recommendation 12.18
That the Act deal with conflicts of interests involving guardians and
administrators as follows:
(a) that the existing definition of ‘conflict of interest’ in s
32C(2) of the Act be moved to the definition section (s
3) so that it applies to
all uses of that term throughout the Act;
(b) that the test for appointment as a representative require the Board to
(i) the extent to which the interests of the proposed represented person and
proposed representative are likely to conflict; and
(ii) whether the proposed representative is likely to comply with the Act;
(c) that the Act state that being a relative or beneficiary of a represented
person’s Will does not of itself amount to a conflict
of interest;
(d) that the Act state that, just because the proposed representative is in
conflict with a close relative of the proposed represented
person, does not, of
itself, mean that they are not suitable to act as a representative; and
(e) that representatives have a duty to report conflicts of interest, or
potential conflicts of interest, that arise during the course
appointment to the Board.
Recommendation 12.19
(1) That administrators be authorised to make certain gifts and donations
without Board approval equivalent to
Powers of Attorney Act
(Tas), subject to any contrary orders of the Board.
(2) That administrators be required to include an account of any gifts made
when submitting accounts to the Board, subject to any
contrary orders of the
Recommendation 12.20
That the assessment of the eligibility of administrators and guardians under
the Act be revised as follows:
(a) to provide a single section in the Act setting out what factors the Board
must consider when assessing the suitability of proposed
representatives (both
administrators and guardians);
(b) to require the Board to be satisfied that the proposed representative
understands their obligations and duties and will act in
accordance with those
obligations and duties;
(c) to take into account ‘the views, wishes and preferences’ of
the proposed represented person, instead of ‘wishes’;
(d) instead of considering the importance of preserving ‘existing
family relationships’, the assessment be of ‘existing
relationships
that are important to the person’;
(e) instead of there being an assessment of the ‘sufficient
expertise’ of a proposed representative, the Board evaluate
whether the
proposed representative has the requisite skills or access to appropriate
support to competently perform the role; and
(f) that whether a representative be required obtain a Registration to Work
with Vulnerable Adults Check be considered as part of
future reform to the
Registration to Work with Vulnerable People Act 2013
Recommendation 12.21
That when deciding upon who to appoint as a representative, the Board be
required to consider the desirability of appointing a person
who has a personal
relationship with the proposed represented person, rather than a person without
a personal relationship.
Recommendation 12.22
That s 11(11) of the Act be revised as follows:
(a) to confirm that the powers in this section extend to the Registrar;
(b) to require provision of a document in addition to a report or
information, with ‘document’ being defined in accordance
Supreme Court Rules 2000
(c) to extend the group or entity this section relates to, to include health
practitioners and for the term ‘service provider’
to be better
articulated including providing examples;
(d) to provide that the cost of providing a document, report or information
is to be borne by the person, group or entity providing
the document, report or
information; and
(e) to require individuals to comply with a request for a document, report or
information unless the person has a reasonable excuse,
with a reasonable excuse
including that compliance with the request may tend to incriminate the
Recommendation 12.23
(a) That the Act enable a person to apply to the Board for an order that any
document, information or report lodged with the Board
not be disclosed to
specified person or class of persons.
(b) That s 86(2) of the Act be revised to provide that sub-s (1) ‘does
not prevent the disclosure of information as required
or permitted by any law
] if, in the case of information relating to the personal affairs of
another person, that other person has given consent in writing.’
Recommendation 12.24
That only those with a legitimate interest be able to search the register(s)
of instruments and advance care directives and that it
be an offence to search
the register(s) without a legitimate interest.
Recommendation 12.25
(1) That s 88 of the Act be revised to confirm that the powers granted to the
Board may be exercised by the Registrar.
(2) That representatives only have a power to obtain, read and copy a
represented person’s Will with an order from the Board.
(3) That the Act define ‘Will’ to include a Will, alleged Will,
part of a Will, or a revoked Will or other testamentary
document, including
Recommendation 12.26
That providing the Board with the ability to award remedies where a
represented person suffers financial loss because of the actions
representative be considered as part of instituting the Tasmanian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
Recommendation 12.27
That upon appointment, Board-appointed representatives be required to declare
• understand their obligations;
• understand the consequences of failing to comply with their
obligations; and
• undertake to act in accordance with the Act.
Recommendation 12.28
That the merits of introducing adult safeguarding legislation in Tasmania be
Part 13: Consent to Health Care and Treatment
Recommendation 13.1
(1) That whether the Act should govern consent to health care and treatment
for children be the subject of separate review.
(2) That, if the Act continues to apply to the giving of substitute consent
to health care and treatment for children with disability:
(a) the Act contain a similar section to
Mental Health Act
(Tas), confirming that the Act does not affect the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court and Family Court to give or refuse consent to
health care and
treatment; and
(b) confirming the effect of valid consent or refusal to consent under the
upon the operation of
Recommendation 13.2
That, if the Act continues to apply to children with disability, it provide
that the best interests of the child must be the paramount
consideration in
relation to any exercise of function or power under the Act.
Recommendation 13.3
(1) That Part 6 of the Act apply to any person who does not have
decision-making ability to give consent to the carrying out of health
treatment, whether or not they are a represented person.
(2) That, if the Act continues to apply to children with disability, the test
of decision-making ability provide that a child is taken
to have the ability to
make a decision about his or her own health care and treatment
(‘decision-making ability’) only
if a person or body considering
that ability under this Act is satisfied that:
(a) the child is sufficiently mature to make the decision; and
(b) the child is able to:
(i) understand information relevant to the decision; and
(ii) retain information relevant to the decision; and
(iii) use or weigh information relevant to the decision; and
(iv) communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other
Recommendation 13.4
That the Act confirm that health care and treatment is not be able to be
performed without consent where the health practitioner is
aware that the
patient has refused that health care and treatment in a valid advance care
Recommendation 13.5
(1) That the Act define the following treatments as ‘minor health care
and treatment’:
• non-intrusive examinations made for diagnostic purposes (such as
visual examination of the mouth, nasal cavity, eyes or ears);
• first-aid; and
• administration of pharmaceutical drug for which a prescription is not
required and which is normally self-administered, if
it is being used for its
recommended purpose and dosage level.
(2) That the Act confirm that consent to minor health care and treatment is
not required where the person does not have decision-making
ability to give
consent and the minor health care and treatment is to be carried out to promote
or maintain the person’s health
and wellbeing.
Recommendation 13.6
That s 41 of the Act remain but it be revised to also provide that, to
perform health care and treatment without consent:
(a) before the health practitioner administers the health care and treatment,
they must make reasonable efforts in the circumstances
to ascertain whether the
patient has a person responsible; and
(b) the health practitioner who carries out or supervises the health care and
treatment must document in the clinical records relating
to the health care and
treatment the reasonable efforts taken in the circumstances to locate an advance
care directive and person
responsible for the patient.
Recommendation 13.7
That the Act confirm that a person can indicate an objection to health care
and treatment by whatever means, including:
• having indicated on a previous but similar occasion that they did not
want the health care and treatment; or
• having previously communicated their objection to the health care and
treatment, including in an advance care directive,
and they have not subsequently indicated to the contrary.
Recommendation 13.8
(1) That the Public Guardian be able to give consent to health care and
treatment as a person responsible of last resort where consent
is required and
there is no valid advance care directive that applies to the decision and no one
falling within the definition of
person responsible.
(2) That the Act provide that the Board may consent to health care and
• classified as special treatment; or
• where consent to health care and treatment is required and there is
no valid advance care directive that applies to the decision
and no one falling
within the definition of person responsible.
(3) That guidelines be developed to outline circumstances where it may be
appropriate to request the Public Guardian to consent as
the person responsible
of last resort, or instead apply to the Board for either it to give consent or
appoint a guardian with power
to consent to some or all health care and
(4) That s 46A of the Act be deleted and that, in its place:
(i) the Act provide that the Board may treat an application for it to consent
to the carrying out of health care and treatment on
a person as an application
for a guardianship order; and
(ii) the Board be permitted to make a guardianship order at a hearing of an
application for consent to health care and treatment if
the Board is satisfied
that the test to appoint a representative is met.
Recommendation 13.9
(1) That the Act confirm that a person responsible and the Board may only
give consent to health care and treatment where the person
does not have the
decision-making ability to make a decision about that health care or
(2) That the Act contain a separate section outlining the test for both
persons responsible and the Board (decision-makers) to apply
to make decisions
(3) That the Act require decision-makers, when making decisions about consent
to health care and treatment, to:
(i) adopt the Decision-Making Process outlined in Recommendation 11.2;
(ii) consider the following:
• the consequences if the health care and treatment is not carried
• any alternative health care and treatment available;
• the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
proposed health care and treatment, or any alternative
health care and
• whether the proposed health care and treatment can be postponed on
the basis that a better health care and treatment may become
available; and
• that the health care and treatment is to be carried out only to
promote and maintain the person’s health and wellbeing.
Recommendation 13.10
That the Act contain special provisions dealing with the substitute consent
to the participation in research for adults who do not
have the decision-making
ability to provide their own consent.
Recommendation 13.11
(1) That non-intrusive examinations, observing a person’s activities
and collecting information be excluded from the definition
(2) That the Act confirm that a person can give advance consent or refusal to
consent to participation in research including in a
valid advance care
(3) That a donor of an instrument be able to confer authority upon their
enduring guardian to make decisions about consent to participation
in research
where the donor does not have decision-making ability to give their own consent.
(4) That the Board be able to confer authority upon guardians to make
decisions about consent to a represented person’s participation
research where a represented person does not have decision-making ability to
give consent.
(5) That the Board have authority to make decisions about consent to
participation in research for a person who does not have decision-making
to give consent.
(6) That, if any research decisions are reserved as matters for the Board
only, there be clear distinction between the role of the
Board and the relevant
Human Research Ethics Committee, avoiding duplication of functions.
(7) That the Act provide that, where a person’s decision-making ability
fluctuates, an attempt should be made to seek their
consent to their
participation in research at a time when the person has decision-making ability
to consent.
(8) That the Act provide that, for a decision-maker to give consent to a
person’s participation in research, that research must
have the approval
of a Human Research Ethics Committee.
(9) That the Act enable decision-makers to give consent to a person without
decision-making ability participating in research that
is not intended to treat
a condition that the person has.
(10) That a person’s objection to participate in research be respected.
(11) That there be an ability to apply to the Board for the review of a
decision to consent or refusal to consent to participation
in research.
Recommendation 13.12
That ‘health care and treatment’ be defined to include the
withdrawal or withholding of health care and treatment, including
sustaining measures.
Part 14: Safeguards for Consent to Health Care and Treatment
Recommendation 14.1
That Recommendation 5.7
be extended to enable the Public Guardian to
attempt to resolve disputes involving persons responsible and consent to health
and treatment.
Recommendation 14.2
(1) That a person responsible be able to apply to the Board for advice or
direction on any matter relating to the scope of their role
or the exercise of
(2) That the Board be empowered to:
(i) approve or disapprove of any act proposed to be done by a person
responsible;
(ii) give such advice to a person responsible as it considers appropriate;
(iii) direct or offer advice to a person responsible of its own motion.
Recommendation 14.3
That the definition of ‘person responsible’ in the Act provide
that a person’s guardian is their person responsible
only if the order or
instrument appointing the guardian authorises the guardian to make a decision
and treatment or all health care and treatment
Recommendation 14.4
That the definitions of ‘person responsible’ in s 4 of the Act be
revised as follows:
• to provide that, where there is more than one person falling within
the definition of ‘spouse’ then it is the
most recent person to
qualify as the spouse who is the ‘spouse’ for the purposes of this
section; and
• for the term ‘relative’ to include any person who is
related to the person in accordance with customary law or
tradition (including
Aboriginal customary law or tradition).
Recommendation 14.5
(1) That the definition of ‘person responsible’ in s 4 of the Act
require a person to:
• be reasonably available;
• have decision-making ability in relation to the particular matter;
• be willing to act; and
• be in a close and continuing relationship with the person.
(2) That the Act provide a simple, non-mandatory form for individuals to
complete and register with the Board to indicate their refusal
to act as person
responsible.
Recommendation 14.6
That the Board be able to make a declaration about the authority of a person
to act as another person’s person responsible upon
application from an
interested party, or of its own motion.
Recommendation 14.7
(1) That the Act contain a separate section dealing with the consent to the
admission and, if necessary, detention of a patient within
a secure unit where
the patient does not have decision-making ability to give their own consent
where the provisions of the
Mental Health Act
(Tas) do not
(2) That the term ‘secure unit’ be defined to:
(i) exclude places of detention covered by the
Corrections Act 1997
(Tas) and any approved secure health units governed by the
Mental Health Act
(ii) include facilities as listed in the Regulations.
That the Regulations include the Roy Fagan Centre as a secure unit.
(3) That consent to the admission and, if necessary, detention of a patient
without decision-making ability within a secure unit fall
outside of the scope
of a person responsible’s authority.
(4) That the section contain the following elements:
• that only the Board or a guardian with specific authority be
permitted to consent to the admission or detention of a patient
within a secure
• enabling the Board to appoint a guardian with authority to consent to
the admission or detention of a patient within a secure
unit, including the
temporary appointment of the Public Guardian in urgent circumstances;
• requiring guardians’ decisions to consent to the admission or
detention of a patient within a secure unit to be subject
to periodic review by
• confirming that an application can be made to the Board for the
review of a decision to consent to the admission or detention
of a patient
within a secure unit;
• enabling the Board to conduct ‘own motion’ reviews of the
substitute consent to the admission or detention of
a patient within a secure
• confirming a patient’s rights, consistent with
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas). Key components include (but are not limited
o the right to have contact with, and to correspond privately with, his or
her guardian, supporter, lawyer, or any other person nominated
by the patient to
represent their interests; and
o the right to have contact with, and to correspond privately with, Official
Visitors; and
• requiring secure units to provide patients with a statement of
rights, consistent with
Mental Health Act 2013
(5) That the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) Official Visitors Scheme be
extended to the Act subject to any specific adjustments required to meet the
needs of the Act.
Part 15: Functions, Powers and Duties of the Board
Recommendation 15.1
(1) That the Board not be required to conduct a hearing to revoke an order
appointing a representative where the representative applies
for the revocation
of the order.
(2) That applications by a representative for the revocation of an emergency
order not require a Health Care Professional Report.
Recommendation 15.2
That the Act enable the Board to make an emergency guardianship order despite
the proposed represented person being the donor of an
instrument, equivalent to
s 65(4)(c) of the Act dealing with emergency administration orders.
Recommendation 15.3
That, to make any order or give any direction under s 65 of the Act, instead
of referring to ‘reason of urgency’, the
Board be required to be
satisfied on reasonable grounds that there is an immediate risk of harm to the
person’s health, welfare,
or property if an order or direction were not
made, including because of a risk of abuse, exploitation, neglect or
self-neglect.
Recommendation 15.4
(1) That there is no change to the notice of hearing provisions of the
(2) That, if there is change to the notice of hearing provisions, the Board
have discretion to shorten the notice period if it considers
it proper to
dispense with notice of the hearing by reason of urgency but that, if it does,
it be required to provide reasonable
Recommendation 15.5
(1) That the Act contain a section outlining who the parties to a hearing
(2) That the section adopt Table 1 of the Board’s Practice Direction
‘Who is a “party” to an application before
the Board?’
which provides that the parties to an application are:
• in relation to applications involving guardianship (including reviews
and advice and direction), the proposed represented
person, the applicant(s),
the proposed guardian, and the Public Guardian;
• in relation to applications involving administration (including
reviews and advice and direction), the proposed represented
person, the
applicant(s), the proposed administrator, the Public Guardian, and the Public
• in relation to applications for consent to health care and treatment
(including advice and direction), the person who is the
subject of the
application, the applicant(s), the health practitioner who will carry out the
health care or treatment, any person
responsible for the person who is the
subject of the application and the Public Guardian; and
• in relation to applications to review an instrument (and advice and
directions to enduring guardians), the donor or purported
donor of the
instrument, any guardian or purported guardian, the applicant(s), and the Public
(3) That, if Recommendation 7.8 is adopted, then, in relation to applications
for support orders, the Act provide that the parties
to an application are the
proposed supported person, the applicant(s), the proposed supporter, and the
Public Guardian.
(4) That the Board have discretion to join anyone as a party not otherwise
specified, if it considers they should be a party.
Recommendation 15.6
(1) That the Act contain an equivalent provision to cl 7(4) of sch 4,
Mental Health Act
(Tas), requiring the Board to make
arrangements for the representation of a person in respect of whom a hearing is
being held if it
considers that the person is, or may not be, receiving useful
assistance elsewhere and that they are, or may be, personally incapable
making those arrangements.
(2) That the Board be required to make arrangements for the views and
interests of a person in respect of whom a hearing is being
independently represented where the person in respect of whom the hearing is
being held does not wish to, or is unable
to, attend the hearing.
(3) That the Board not be required to make arrangements for separate
representation of a person in respect of whom a hearing is being
held where it
is satisfied that it is inconsistent with the person’s views, wishes and
preferences.
Recommendation 15.7
That a review be conducted in relation to the merits of utilising
intermediaries in the guardianship jurisdiction.
Recommendation 15.8
(1) That an equivalent power to that granted to the Public Guardian in s
15(2) of the Act be conferred upon the Board, providing it
with power to do all
things necessary or convenient to be done in connection with the performance of
its functions.
(2) That the need for legislative reform to deal with the appointment of an
administrator for the estate of a missing person be reviewed.
Part 16: Functions, Powers and Duties of the Public
Recommendation 16.1
That the descriptions of the functions of the Public Guardian in s 15(1) of
the Act be reviewed for clarity and to eliminate duplication.
Recommendation 16.2
That one of the functions of the Public Guardian be to support and educate
representatives, supporters and informal supporters, including
by giving advice
on the functions and powers that may be exercised under the Act, the operation
of the Act generally and on appropriate
alternatives to taking action under the
Recommendation 16.3
That the Public Guardian have the following additional functions and
• to investigate complaints and allegations against supporters and
representatives including persons responsible;
• to investigate
matters of its own motion; and
• to investigate circumstances where a person with a disability is
suspected to be subject to or at risk of harm, abuse, exploitation
Recommendation 16.4
That strategies be developed to improve the delivery of systemic advocacy for
people with disability.
Recommendation 16.5
That the Public Guardian have adequate powers to conduct investigations.
These provisions should:
• provide the Public Guardian with equivalent powers to the powers of
the Board to require the provision of reports, documents
and information;
• require individuals and bodies to assist the Public Guardian with its
investigations, including answering questions and attending
conferences;
• give the Public Guardian power to access premises either with a
warrant or on an order of the Board; and
• permit a person to decline to provide information or answer a
question in exceptional circumstances, for example, where it
might tend to
incriminate the person.
Recommendation 16.6
That the application of s 85 of the Act be extended to cover provision of
information to the Public Guardian.
Part 17: Interrelationship with other Legislation
Recommendation 17.1
That the recommendations made in this Report be considered as part of the
review of the
Disability Services Act
(Tas) to take place
following full implementation of the NDIS in Tasmania in July 2019.
Recommendation 17.2
That there be comprehensive consideration of how the use of restrictive
practices should be monitored and regulated in Tasmania.
Recommendation 17.3
(1) That substitute consent to the use of chemical restraint be included
within the comprehensive review of the legislative framework
regulation of the use of restrictive practices, proposed in Recommendation
(2) That, pending the outcome of that review:
(i) the Act include a definition of chemical restraint as meaning
‘medication given primarily to control a person’s behaviour,
treat a mental illness or physical condition’;
(ii) the Act enable interested parties to apply to the Board for the review
of any substitute decision to consent to the use of chemical
restraint pursuant
to the Act; and
(iii) the Board and Public Guardian be able to conduct ‘own
motion’ investigations and reviews of any substitute consent
to the use of
chemical restraint pursuant to the Act.
Recommendation 17.4
(1) That the
Powers of Attorney Act
(Tas) be reviewed in
light of the obligations and principles articulated in the
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and recommendations contained in this
Report, noting in particular:
of this Report which deals with the guiding principles of the
Act, including Recommendation 3.3;
• Parts 4 and 12 of this Report in relation to the appointment, removal
and supervision of enduring guardians;
• Recommendations in Part 6 of this Report in relation to the test and
assessment of a person’s decision-making ability;
• Recommendations in Part 7 of this Report proposing introduction of a
legislated supported decision-making scheme for personal
(2) That as far as possible there be consistency between the structure and
provisions of the Act and the
Powers of Attorney Act
Recommendation 17.5
(1) That consideration is given to the need to continue operation of the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act 1968
(2) That if the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act 1968
(Tas) continues
in operation, the Act confirm that it does not apply to the treatment and
control of persons suffering from alcohol
dependency or drug dependency dealt
with under the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act 1968
Recommendation 17.6
(1) That the Act mandate a statutory review of the Act.
(2) That the statutory review period be every three years.
Part 18 – Enablers and Subsequent Matters
Recommendation 18.1
That there be adequately funded robust and accessible public education about
the Act and any reforms. Educational materials should
be produced in a variety
of formats and include both print and web-based information.
Recommendation 18.2
That the Act be as accessible as possible, including:
• a logical structure;
• use of plain English;
• clearly defined terms;
• avoiding internal referencing to other sections of the Act; and
Recommendation 18.3
That the State Government review and monitor the adequacy of resources
allocated to groups directly involved in administering the
Act, notably the
Board, OPG, Public Trustee and Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania, to ensure that
those bodies are able to perform
their functions, duties and powers effectively.
Recommendation 18.4
(1) That the need for reform to the Act be further reviewed upon any
amendments being made to the
Disability Services Act 2011
Mental Health Act 2013
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) to ensure
consistency wherever possible.
(2) That the State Government work with the other state and territory
governments, and the federal government, with a view to developing
consistent guardianship laws, including substitute consent to health care and
(3) That if agreement is reached nationally about the enactment of uniform
guardianship laws, the State Government work to enact uniform
legislation.
(4) That there be clear and streamlined pathways for instruments, enduring
powers of attorney and advance care directives made or
registered in another
Recommendation 18.5
That reforms proposed in this Report are progressed in accordance with the
implementation strategy outlined in Table 18.1 of this
Introduction
to the Reference
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(Tas) (the Act)
came into force on 1 September 1997. The Act sets out how decisions may be
made for people with disability who are
unable to make their own decisions. The
Act covers decisions about:
• ‘personal matters’ — for example, where a person
• a person’s ‘estate’ — their financial and
property affairs; and
• medical and dental treatment.
It also governs how an adult may appoint an enduring guardian to make
decisions about their personal affairs in the future.
1.1.2 Amendments have been made to the
but it has not had a
substantive review since it was enacted 20 years ago. Since that time, there has
been a shift in community expectations
with an emphasis on human rights. In
2008, Australia ratified the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities
‘Convention’).
Convention requires equality for people with disability. It has significant
impact on the operation of guardianship laws and
other domestic laws and has
resulted in a number of law reform commissions reviewing legislation across
Australia. The Australian
Law Reform Commission (ALRC) has stated that reform to
state guardianship laws is critical in order to implement the
Convention.
of Reference
1.2.1 The former Attorney-General of Tasmania, the Hon Vanessa Goodwin,
requested the Institute to review the Act to ensure that it
is responsive to the
needs of the community, and that it advances, promotes and protects the rights
of people with impaired decision-making
The Terms of Reference are as follows:
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute is to review and report on the need for or
desirability of changes to the Tasmanian
Guardianship and Administration Act
, having regard to the following:
A. The general principles established by the United Nations
Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and other international human rights
instruments;
B. Developments in policy, law and practice in Tasmania and other
since the Act commenced; and
C. Whether the current guardianship and administration framework will be
sustainable and responsive to the needs of Tasmanians, in
particular demographic
In particular, the Institute is to have regard to:
a) the role of guardians, administrators and ‘persons
responsible’ in advancing the interests of persons with impaired
when making substitute decisions in line with national and international
b) the need to ensure that the powers and duties of guardians,
administrators and ‘persons responsible’ are effective,
appropriate,
and advance the interest of persons with impaired capacity;
c) the functions, powers and duties of the Guardianship and Administration
Board and Office of the Public Guardian;
d) the appropriateness of current mechanisms to address poor conduct of
guardians, administrators and ‘persons responsible’
not acting in
the best interests of a person with impaired capacity;
e) provisions in relation to consenting to medical and dental treatment and
how to address long term or indefinite medical treatment
in institutional and
non-institutional settings;
f) how both informal and formal assisted or supported decision-making
frameworks are working for persons with impaired capacity in
Tasmania, including
consideration of national and international trends;
g) the interrelationship between the
Guardianship and Administration Act
and other relevant Tasmanian legislation, in particular the
Health Act 2013
Disability Services Act 2011
and associated
regulations, the
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
Alcohol and Drug
Dependency Act 1968
Public Trustee Act 1930
Trustee Act
, and how these Acts should interact if legislative amendments are
proposed; and
h) other matters the Tasmania Law Reform Institute consider relevant to the
Terms of Reference.
of this review
1.3.1 During the pre-consultation phase of this project, the Institute met
with several stakeholders whose valuable feedback assisted
to scope the issues
raised in the Institute’s Issues Paper. During the drafting of the Issues
Paper, the Institute was involved
in co-convening an Elder Abuse Symposium in
partnership with Council on the Ageing Tasmania (COTA), Equal Opportunity
Tasmania (EOT)
and the University of Tasmania. The Symposium ‘brought
together over 60 representatives from the aged care sector, the legal
profession, police, unions, clinicians, policy makers and academic researchers
to examine the social, legal, and clinical dimensions
of elder abuse and neglect
This forum also highlighted matters relevant to this project, noting that the
Act’s operation extends to Tasmanians with dementia
who may be at risk of
elder abuse and neglect.
1.3.2 The Institute released its Issues Paper in December 2017. This was
followed by a period of community consultation which closed
on 19 March
1.3.3 In addition to publishing an Easy Read version of the Issues Paper, the
Institute produced a video advising community members
review, with the video link published on the Institute’s website and
social media pages. The Institute
thanks those stakeholders who shared this
video and information about the review amongst their networks. The Institute
would particularly
like to acknowledge the contributions of Kim Barker, the
Public Guardian, Julie Butler, Advocacy Practise Leader at the Speak Out
Association of Tasmania (Speak Out), and Dr Matthew Fasnacht, Senior
Psychiatrist at the Older Person Mental Health Service (OPMHS)
contributing to the filming of this video and to the University of Tasmania for
providing funding. The Institute also developed
a flyer advising about the
review which several stakeholder organisations agreed to display. The Institute
was also invited to attend
briefing sessions with staff of the Board, the Office
of the Commissioner for Children and Young People and Speak Out, as well as
members of the Elder Law and Succession Committee of the Law Society.
1.3.4 Fifty formal submissions were received, either in writing, by
completing the submission template, or by contacting the Institute
verbal submission. In addition to the formal responses received, the Institute
was also invited to attend community consultation
sessions convened by external
stakeholders. The Institute takes this opportunity to acknowledge and thank the
following organisations
who facilitated meetings with the Institute’s
researcher:
• Carers Tasmania, which arranged meetings with its members in Hobart,
Launceston and Devonport;
• National Disability Services (NDS), arranging meetings in Hobart,
Launceston and Burnie;
• COTA and Dementia Australia (Tasmania), convening a joint meeting of
members in Hobart; and
• The Menzies Institute for Medical Research.
1.3.5 The Institute consulted with a further 57 individuals who attended
these meetings. Combined with the formal submissions received,
this project
therefore incorporates feedback from a total of 107 organisations and
individuals. Submissions received have deeply
enriched this Report, and the
Institute thanks all those who have contributed to the review.
1.3.6 The Institute also wishes to acknowledge the significant contribution
of the members of its Reference Group for this project,
Philippa Shirley,
Jennifer Dunbabin and John Blackwood.
of this Report
1.4.1 This Report is divided into several parts:
• Part 2 provides an overview of the policy environment in which this
review was conducted. Part 3 then considers, in light
of this policy framework,
the desirability of reform to the guiding principles governing the Act.
• Parts 4 and 5 review how a person may exercise autonomy by appointing
an enduring guardian and making an advance care directive.
• Part 6 evaluates when the Act’s jurisdiction is invoked based
on an assessment of a person’s ability to make decisions.
• Part 7 considers how people requiring support with decision-making
may be offered support and evaluates how the Act presently
recognises the use of
support with decision-making. This Part considers the needs and merits of reform
to the legislative framework
to provide a formal system of supported
decision-making as a middle ground between the making of an autonomous decision
and a representative
• Parts 8 to 12 consider the appointment, role, duties and powers of
guardians and administrators (collectively referred to
as representatives). Part
8 reviews when a representative may be appointed. Parts 9 and 10 consider reform
to the functions and powers
of guardians and administrators. Part 11 outlines
recommendations about when and how representatives should make decisions for a
represented person. Part 12 then reviews safeguards for representative
decision-making.
• Parts 13 and 14 analyse the medical treatment decision-making scheme.
Part 13 deals with when and how substitute consent to
medical treatment may be
given and Part 14 reviews safeguarding provisions.
• Parts 15 and 16 consider the role, powers and duties of the Board and
Public Guardian.
• Part 17 considers the need for or desirability of reform to related
legislation, notably the
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act
Disability Services Act
Disability Services Act
Health Act 2013
Mental Health Act
concludes by making recommendations to improve the
effectiveness of the Act’s operation, along with considering future
developments
and reforms that may become necessary or desirable
Legal and Policy
Introduction
2.1.1 The Act came
into force on 1 September 1997. Much has changed since this time. In 2008,
Australia ratified the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities
In response,
there have been a number of changes to Australia’s legal and policy
framework, reflecting a greater rights-based
approach to laws and policy
impacting people with disability.
2.1.2 The Institute’s Terms of Reference asked for the need for, or
desirability of, changes to the Act having regard to developments
in policy, law
and practice in Tasmania and other jurisdictions that may impact upon persons
with impaired decision-making capacity
since the Act commenced. This Part
discusses key changes in Australia’s legal and policy framework impacting
the rights of
people with disability which have influenced recommendations made
in this Report.
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities
2.2.1 The Convention does not declare any new or different rights for people
disability.
Rather, it explains how human rights apply specifically to people with
disability. Other relevant international instruments include
Declaration on Human Rights
International Covenant on Civil and Political
International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or
international laws deal specifically with certain groups, including women and
2.2.2 The Convention was adopted on 13 December 2006 and opened for signature
on 30 March 2007.
formally ratified the Convention on 17 July 2008 and Optional Protocol on 21
August 2009.
The Optional
Protocol, amongst other things, deals with the role of the Committee of the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (the
‘Convention
Committee’).
2.2.3 The Convention records the rights of people with disability to
equality, dignity and autonomy. When passing the
Disability Services Act
the Tasmanian Parliament reflected on the rights of people with disability under
the Convention, noting that it:
makes a shift from a world where people with disability were viewed as
‘objects’ of charity, medical treatment and social
protection to a
world where they are viewed as ‘subjects’ with rights, who are
capable of claiming those rights and making
decisions for their lives based on
their free and informed consent, as well as being active members of the
2.2.4 Article 12 of the Convention is key to the operation of guardianship
laws. It provides:
Article 12 – Equal recognition before the law
1. States Parties reaffirm that persons with disabilities have the right to
recognition everywhere as persons before the law.
2. States Parties shall recognize that persons with disabilities enjoy legal
capacity on an equal basis with others in all aspects
3. States Parties shall take appropriate measures to provide access by
persons with disabilities to the support they may require
in exercising their
legal capacity.
4. States Parties shall ensure that all measures that relate to the exercise
of legal capacity provide for appropriate and effective
safeguards to prevent
abuse in accordance with international human rights law. Such safeguards shall
ensure that measures relating
to the exercise of legal capacity respect the
rights, will and preferences of the person, are free of conflict of interest and
influence, are proportional and tailored to the person's circumstances,
apply for the shortest time possible and are subject to regular
review by a
competent, independent and impartial authority or judicial body. The safeguards
shall be proportional to the degree to
which such measures affect the person's
rights and interests.
5. Subject to the provisions of this article, States Parties shall take all
appropriate and effective measures to ensure the equal
right of persons with
disabilities to own or inherit property, to control their own financial affairs
and to have equal access to
bank loans, mortgages and other forms of financial
credit, and shall ensure that persons with disabilities are not arbitrarily
of their property.
2.2.5 Ratification requires Australia to proceed in good faith to give effect
to the Convention.
Article 4 of
the Convention provides that State parties must ensure the human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all persons with
disabilities, including by adopting
all appropriate legislative measures to implement the rights recognised in the
Convention and
modifying or abolishing laws that constitute discrimination
against persons with
disabilities.
The ALRC has
stated that reform to state guardianship laws is critical in order to implement
Convention.
Arstein-Kerslake has commented that ‘Article 12 exists due to an outcry
from the disability community. This alone should be
enough for us to re-examine
law and practice.’
2.2.6 There is debate about whether the Convention permits any circumstances
in which decisions for people with disability can be
made by others, for
example, by representatives. The Convention Committee has issued a General
Comment on the effect of Article 12
of the Convention, stating that its effect
is to require the abolition of guardianship laws in place of supported
decision-making
arrangements.
The Australian Government has issued interpretive declarations of its
understanding of the effect of Article 12 of the Convention,
stating that it
understands that the Convention permits substitute decision-making regimes like
guardianship laws where they are
time-limited, used as a last resort and subject
to appropriate safeguards.
Convention Committee challenges this interpretation and has recommended that the
Australian Government withdraw its declaration
and work towards abolition of
guardianship
To the Institute’s knowledge, all Australian and overseas jurisdictions
have retained some form of guardianship legislation
enabling substitute
decision-making in defined circumstances.
2.2.7 Australian law reform
have adopted the Australian Government’s interpretation. All contemplate
substitute decision-making as part of a continuum
of decision-making support
which may be permissive where it is time limited, used as a last resort and
subject to appropriate safeguards.
In 2010, the Queensland Law Reform Commission
(QLRC) reviewed guardianship laws in Queensland, recommending that the
principles of
the Convention be adopted within their guardianship
legislation.
In 2012, the Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) delivered its Final Report
Guardianship.
It recommended a raft of reforms in response to the principles and obligations
of the Convention. In July 2016, the ACT Law Reform
Council (ACTLRAC) released
its Final Report into guardianship law in the ACT. It too made a number of
recommendations to guardianship
legislation intended to promote the human rights
of people with disability. In April 2017, the
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
came into force in the Northern
It, along with the
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT), contain a number of contemporary
provisions reflecting the decision-making rights of people with disability.
Since the Tasmania
Law Reform Institute (TLRI) released its Issues Paper in
December 2017, there have been two new guardianship Bills put forward in
Victoria and Queensland, with those Bills incorporating many of the
recommendations previously made by the respective law reform
commissions in
those states.
Most recently, the
NSW Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) has reviewed guardianship legislation in New
South Wales, delivering its Final
Report in May
2.2.8 The VLRC, ACTLRAC and the NSWLRC have all recommended reform to
guardianship legislation to incorporate a formal supported decision-making
scheme in light of the
Convention.
Legislated supported
decision-making regimes provide formal acknowledgment of and legitimise
decision-making made with support. They
provide a further, formal alternative to
the appointment of a representative and the making of a representative decision
requiring support with decision-making. Supported decision-making
frameworks are discussed in more detail in
2.2.9 Whilst the QLRC did not recommend a legislated supported
decision-making scheme, it recommended a range of reforms aimed at
acknowledging
and promoting the use of informal decision-making within the community, along
with suggesting ways in which legislation
could better safeguard the interests
of those receiving informal decision-making support. Theirs was the first
comprehensive review
of guardianship legislation in Australia following
ratification of the Convention, with Australia’s legal and policy
environment
now eight years more advanced. During that period, legislative
schemes have been in operation in a number of jurisdictions overseas.
2.2.10 A legislated supported decision-making scheme has been operating in
Victoria since 2014. Under reforms made to the
Powers of Attorney Act
(Vic), individuals may appoint a ‘supportive attorney’ to
provide them with decision-making support. Legislative reforms
Guardianship and Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) would also enable the tribunal
to appoint a supporter for an individual who requires support with
decision-making.
2.2.11 Recent revisions to the Queensland Act have not included a legislated
supported decision-making model. The Northern Territory
also has not introduced
a legislated supported decision-making scheme. Both jurisdictions have, however,
made several reforms to
their guardianship Acts to better reflect the rights of
people with disability.
2.2.12 There are
several elements to achieving full compliance with obligations under the
Convention. It would be inappropriate, perhaps
reckless, to abolish guardianship
laws in the absence of ensuring an effective replacement scheme. The use of
supported decision-making
as an alternative to guardianship requires more than
legislative reform — it necessitates the development of accessible and
effective decision-making supports within the community, and policies and
procedures that recognise, encourage, and support such
a model. It also requires
robust and effective safeguards. Ultimately, ratification of the Convention
requires a demonstrated commitment
to taking action in good faith to work
towards compliance with the
Convention.
Legislative reform
that fosters and strengthens these broader developments is one component of
2.2.13 It is timely that the State Government has referred this review to the
Institute, providing the opportunity to reflect on the
suitability of
Tasmania’s guardianship laws within this context.
developments in policy, practice, and other laws
2.3.1 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to consider developments in
policy, law and practice since the Act commenced that
may impact persons with
impaired decision-making capacity. As noted earlier in this Part, a key driver
of changes to law, policy
and procedure at a national level has been
Australia’s ratification of the Convention. This next Part explores
notable developments.
The ‘Shut Out’
2.3.2 The 2009 ‘Shut Out’ Report shone a light upon how people
with disability experience disadvantage and social isolation,
not because of
their disability, but as a consequence of external
It highlighted the
barriers that exist which prevent people with disability participating fully and
equally in the community. Thirty-one
per cent of respondents who lodged a
submission to that review stated that comprehensive legislative and policy
review was needed
to eliminate conflicts with the
Convention.
The findings of this
report informed the development of the National Disability
National Disability Strategy
2.3.3 The National Disability Strategy is an agreement between the federal
and all state and territory governments. The National Disability
Strategy aims
to provide national leadership towards better inclusion for people with
disability and progress Australia’s obligations
Convention.
The goal of the
National Disability Strategy is to create an inclusive and enabling society that
maximises opportunities for people
and their participation in social, economic
and cultural life. It aims to ensure equality for people with disability.
Tasmania’s Disability Framework for
2.3.4 In January 2018, the State Government released its third Disability
Framework for Action,
Accessible Island: Tasmania’s Disability
Framework for Action
It comprises the State Government’s implementation plan for the National
Disability Strategy, providing ‘a whole-of-government
approach to ensure
that all government departments implement socially just policies and practices
for Tasmanians with
disability.’
As the name
Accessible Island
outlines a range of activities aimed at
making Tasmania a more inclusive and accessible place so that people with
disability can
participate fully within the community.
2.3.5 One of the action items of
Accessible Island
is to consider the
recommendations of the ALRC in relation to powers of attorney and to continue to
educate the public about guardianship
These matters are
considered in this Report.
Department of Justice Action Plan
2.3.6 The Department of Justice’s Disability Action
outlines the
Department’s plan to deliver on activities under
Accessible Island
Amongst a range of action items intended to ensure that the Department of
Justice achieves accessibility for people with disability,
relevant action items
include to:
• support people with disability, their families and carers to build
and strengthen supportive networks within the
• consult with people with disability on the design and implementation
of Tasmanian Government policy and
legislation;
• maintain and strengthen protections and supports for people with
disability who experience, or are at risk of experiencing,
violence, sexual
assault, abuse and neglect;
• support independent advocacy to protect the rights of people with
disability;
• consider recommendations from the ALRC in relation to powers of
attorney, and continue to educate people about guardianship
and power of
attorney issues.
Tasmania’s Disability Justice
Disability Justice Plan for Tasmania
the State Government’s plan to implement the National Disability Strategy
in relation to equal access to justice
for people with disability. The Plan
observes the barriers that people with disability face in accessing services and
the need for modifications or support to ensure that people with
disability can participate equally within the justice system. Its
objective is
to ensure that the Tasmanian justice system is responsive to the needs of people
with disability, to provide equality
before the law and equal access to justice
for all. The Plan reflects the State Government’s commitment to developing
strategies to remove unnecessary roadblocks that people with disability
can face. The Plan’s supporting Action Items include
ensuring that
people’s need for support is identified at an early opportunity and that
supports are made available to ensure
that people can participate equally in the
justice system.
Relevantly,
Action Item 11 requires support for people with disability to make decisions
that affect their lives to enable them to
exercise their legal rights and
participate in legal processes. The Plan acknowledges that people with
disability can be supported
in all but the most extreme cases to exercise their
legal capacity.
Enquiry into Delivery of Outcomes under the
National Disability Strategy
2.3.8 The Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee was recently asked to
conduct an enquiry into implementation of the National
Disability Strategy. It
issued its report in November
2.3.9 The enquiry observed significant issues with implementation of the
National Disability Strategy. The report states that:
Since the introduction of the Disability Strategy, Australian governments,
industry bodies, community groups and individuals have
been involved in myriad
activities to improve the accessibility and inclusivity of communities. However,
despite some positive instances
indicating some progress there continue to be
major problems in accessibility and inclusive for people with disability and the
Strategy has failed to live up to expectation for
2.3.10 The Committee reinforced that:
Accessibility, or the lack of it, is not created by a person’s
disability. It is created when the environment in which they
live is being
designed for other people’s skills and needs. Accessibility is not about
creating a ‘special’ solution
to meet the needs of people with
disability. It is about reducing the inherent discrimination of the way our
communities have previously
been designed, built and organised, to ensure that
all abilities are catered
2.3.11 It noted that:
The Disability Strategy is viewed as essential to deliver better outcomes for
those participating in the NDIS and particularly for
people with disability not
eligible for the NDIS. However, the implementation of the Disability Strategy in
the seven years since
its introduction has left much to be desired. Many people
think it has been sidelined while the NDIS rollout has been
The National Disability Insurance Scheme
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
’) is one way that the federal government has acted
to give effect to the
Convention.
The objectives of
the client-centred model include supporting people with disability to be
independent, to have the same opportunity
to participate socially and
economically in the community, and to have choice and control so that, as much
as possible, a person
makes decisions for
themselves.
requires that support be provided to people in dealing with the
and to participate in,
and contribute to, social and economic
The Act recognises the
importance of informal supported decision-making and requires that informal
supported decision-making options
be explored before a substitute decision-maker
is appointed.
The NDIS comprises
an existing framework in which people with disability exercise freedom of choice
over their health and personal
circumstances, along with the use of individuals
or networks of people to provide decision-making support. The ALRC has suggested
that ‘[t]his new approach to individual decision-making at the
Commonwealth level can also be used to guide law reform at the
territory level.’
2.3.13 The full rollout of the NDIS in Tasmania in July 2019 will see broad
reform to the disability space in Tasmania. The recent
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Amendment (Quality and Safeguards Commission and Other
Measures) Bill 2017
, passed on 4 December 2017, includes establishment of the
NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission, an independent Commonwealth body
with overseeing implementation of the NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework.
These reforms impact the division of functions
between the states and
Commonwealth and will require amendments to be made to the
Services Act
. The Australian Human Rights Commission comments that it is
currently uncertain which state oversight and safeguarding mechanisms
continue to operate once the NDIS rollout is
with negotiations between the federal and state governments
2.3.14 It must be recognised that not all people with disability will be NDIS
participants. The Australian Human Rights Commission
has recently estimated that
only about 10 per cent of Australians living with disability will be
participants of the Scheme.
is important to ensure that non-NDIS participants have equal rights and
protections to those falling under the Scheme. There may
be a continuing role
for state legislation, including the Act, to play in providing these
safeguards.
Guiding Principles of the
Introduction
Institute’s Terms of Reference ask for advice about the need for, or
desirability of, changes to the Act in light
of the general principles
established in the Convention.
3.1.2 The guiding principles of the Act in s 6 provide the basis upon which
decisions are made and actions are taken under the Act.
They are fundamental to
the Act’s operation. This Part analyses how these guiding principles align
with the Convention and
makes recommendations for reform. Reforms proposed
reflect a shift from a ‘best interests’ approach to decision-making
to adopting a ‘will, preferences and rights’ model that recognises
the importance of offering support to people who require
support to make
decisions affecting their lives The recommendations outlined in this Part anchor
proposals outlined in later parts
of this Report.
The Convention and a will, preferences and
rights approach to decision-making
3.2.1 As explained in Part 2, the Convention requires decisions about a
person’s life to be directed by their ‘will, preference
rights.’ Rationales for basing decisions on a person’s will and
preferences include that:
• every person should have the ability to make decisions that affect
his or her life;
• people without disability are not required to establish that a
decision is rational, or in their best interests; and
• decisions based on a person’s perceived best interests tend to
overemphasise
All people have the right to take risks and make
The ALRC’s National
Decision-Making Principles
3.3.1 In 2014, the ALRC reviewed the effect of the Convention on Commonwealth
Through a consultative
process, it developed four National Decision-Making Principles, intended as a
way to implement the principles
of the Convention within Australia’s legal
framework. It recommended that state guardianship laws be made consistent with
National Decision-Making Principles:
Principle 1
: That all adults have an equal right to make decisions
that affect their lives and to have those decisions respected.
Principle 2
: Persons who require support in decision-making must be
provided with access to the support necessary for them to make, communicate
participate in decisions that affect their lives.
Principle 3
: The will, preferences and rights of persons who may
require decision-making support must direct decisions that affect their
Principle 4
: Laws and legal frameworks must contain appropriate and
effective safeguards in relation to interventions for persons who may require
decision-making support, including to prevent abuse and undue
3.3.2 The ALRC reinforced these Principles in its recent report on elder
abuse, released in
The Decision-Making Principles have also been supported by the Senate Community
Affairs Reference
3.3.3 The Issues Paper asked whether the ALRC’s National
Decision-Making Principles should form the basis of reform to the Act.
Should reform to the Act be founded upon the ALRC’s National
Decision-Making Principles?
The principles are:
• That all adults have an equal right to make decisions that affect
their lives and to have those decisions respected.
• People who require support in decision-making must be provided with
access to the support necessary for them to make, communicate
and participate in
decisions that affect their lives.
• Decisions that affect a person’s life must be directed by the
person’s will, preferences and rights.
• Laws and legal frameworks must contain appropriate and effective
safeguards in relation to interventions for persons who
may require
decision-making support, including to prevent abuse and undue
3.3.4 There was broad support for the ALRC’s National Decision-Making
Principles. Of the 19 written responses to this question,
10 agreed that the
ALRC’s Decision-Making Principles would provide a strong basis for
considering reforms to the Act. The other
responses were not explicit in either
supporting or rejecting the Principles. For example, the Board expressed neither
support nor
opposition to the Decision-Making Principles, but commented that it
supported principles that would provide for guardianship approaches
fully compatible with Australia’s international obligations under the
Convention. Speak Out Advocacy also stated that
the Act should fit the
Convention. The Public Trustee acknowledged the National Decision-Making
Principles but commented that it
is content to work within the current
3.3.5 Of the verbal submissions received, most comments indicated support for
the Principles. Some commented that a represented person
should have the ability
to be spontaneous and spend their money as they wish. Others commented about the
importance of ensuring that
people with disability are acknowledged and heard,
and certainly not ignored. Some perceived that guardianship laws are sometimes
used improperly to exert power over individuals and families, with applications
to the Board being made too readily where third parties
(for example, health
professionals, service providers or family members) disagree with the decisions
that a person with disability
3.3.6 National Disability Services (‘NDS’) submission observed
is one example of Commonwealth legislation that
provides for people having choice and control in relation to decisions that
their lives. It endorsed the ALRC’s Decision-Making Principles
being used to achieve national consistency. Some family members
and carers of
NDIS participants, however, expressed concerns about the primacy given to a
participant’s wishes under the Scheme.
It was observed that
decision-making based solely on a participant’s wishes or values can to
lead to harm to the person and
have negative repercussions for those around
them. Some perceived that a participant’s choice about the supports they
or do not receive, can create a burden upon those around them. Family
members and carers felt that they had sometimes needed to help
matters where problems or difficulties had arisen. It was commented that
decisions that focus exclusively upon an individual’s
wishes or values may
only be workable where the person has the support of others around them who are
able to act as a ‘buffer’
to mitigate adverse consequences. Concerns
were raised about whether and how this form of person-centred decision-making
works where
an individual does not have a support network available to assist
3.3.7 Concerns that respondents raised in response to the ALRC’s
Decision-Making Principles typically fell into one of two broad
• firstly, that this does not amount to any broad variation to the
Act’s current approach; and
• secondly, that the approach fails to adequately address the potential
These are discussed below.
Is this model any different to the Act at
3.3.8 Whilst a number of respondents commented that this approach will
require a shift in focus and emphasis, others observed otherwise.
The Board, for
example, commented that the Convention ‘does not focus in any novel way
upon the rights of and obligations to
those without or with impaired decision
making capacity.’ It commented that the Convention requires appropriate
safeguards,
the ‘safeguards’ mandated are precisely those measures and
considerations with are set out in the current legislative
framework and which
underpin the current decision making process of the Board.
3.3.9 The Board stated that it already interprets the Act in light of the
Convention. It noted that both s 27 and s 57 of the Act
set out what
‘best interests’ means for guardians and administrators, and that
this includes consideration of the wishes
of the person and the desirability of
preserving existing relationships. Some stakeholders noted that the Act
• requires a ‘least restrictive’ approach to be adopted
where available;
• requires consideration of a person’s wishes, and for those
wishes to be carried out wherever
‘wishes’ aligns with a person’s ‘will and
preferences’ using the language of the Convention;
• involves taking into account a person’s ‘best
interests.’
Some observed
that a person’s best interests and their wishes are so intrinsically
linked that determining what is in a person’s
‘best interests’
cannot be ascertained without considering their wishes.
Least restrictive alternative
3.3.10 The Institute agrees that the guiding principle of adopting a least
restrictive alternative is consistent with a human rights
approach to
decision-making for people requiring decision-making support.
Relevance of a person’s wishes
3.3.11 Presently all decisions under the Act must carry into effect a
person’s wishes as much as
It is one of the
Act’s three guiding principles.
3.3.12 One situation where it would not be possible to carry out a
person’s wishes is when those wishes are inconsistent with
determined to be in their best interests, because representatives have a duty to
at all times
in a person’s best
The effect is that
the Act only permits decisions that carry out a person’s wishes where
those wishes are consistent with their
Best interests
3.3.13 The Convention Committee has stated that ‘the “best
interests” principle is not a safeguard which complies
with article 12 [of
the Convention] in relation to
The ALRC has
interpreted the Convention to mean that a person’s will and preferences
must form the basis of a decision and
are only able to be overridden to prevent
Only where a
person’s will and preferences cannot be reasonably determined should
decisions be based upon promoting a person’s
This approach is
discussed further in Part 11.
3.3.14 Taking into account a person’s ‘best interests’ can
involve consideration of their human rights. But it can
also result in a
person’s will and preferences being overridden where their will and
preferences are assessed to not be in
their best interests. The Act’s
requirement that representatives uphold a person’s best interests at all
times does not
give sufficient authority to representatives who may want to act
consistently with a person’s wishes, despite those wishes
not necessarily
being consistent with their ‘best interests.’ The ‘best
interests’ approach requires decisions
that are deemed best for a person.
Under a will, preferences and rights approach, the focus is upon a
person’s wishes, whilst
considering harm.
The Convention
Try to adopt a person’s wishes but do what is
best for them.
A person’s wishes prevail and may only be
departed from if it affects their other rights.
3.3.15 This can be demonstrated using the following example:
Jane adores her three cats. She wants to convert her spare room into a
giant custom-built cat run, estimated to cost thousands of
dollars to build.
Following the current approach under the Act, Jane’s administrator
is only permitted to use Jane’s financial resources
in her best interests,
even if this is what Jane really wants. Her administrator does not consider this
use of money to be in Jane’s
best interests.
Under a will, preferences and rights approach, Jane’s administrator
would be required to act in accordance with Jane’s
wishes, unless it would
result in unacceptable harm. Unacceptable harm in this example could, for
example, include where this would
leave Jane without any money to buy
3.3.16 Some decision-makers might view a
person’s ‘best interests’ as effectively amounting to the sum
of the other
parts — in other words, that it is the end result of adopting
the least restrictive alternative and carrying into effect a
wishes. Other decision-makers may interpret s 6 to mean that ‘best
interests’ is something separate to
what is the least restrictive
alternative and consistent with a person’s wishes, noting that it is
listed as a distinct factor
to consider. Some representatives may not appreciate
the rights confirmed under the Convention and how they affect interpretation
3.3.17 The three existing guiding principles of the Act are not expressed to
be in any particular order of priority, and there is
nothing to indicate any
particular weighting that should be given to each consideration — a matter
that the Office of the Public
Guardian (OPG) raised in its submission. The only
words that give any guidance are the limiting words of ‘if possible’
which are only used in relation to consideration of the least restrictive
alternative and a person’s wishes.
Other ways to achieve a will, preferences and rights approach to
decision-making
3.3.18 It is acknowledged that the ALRC’s National Decision-Making
Principles and accompanying Guidelines are only one way to
achieve greater
compliance with the Convention. It is not necessarily the only way. One
alternative could be to continue to adopt
the term ‘best interests’,
but with the phrase ‘best interests’ defined to provide a greater
rights-based
focus. The Issues Paper noted that some jurisdictions continue to
adopt the term ‘best interests’ within their guardianship
The Northern Territory,
for example, adopts the language of ‘best interests’, but with the
term defined to promote a
rights-based
perspective.
3.3.19 The Institute called for submissions about whether there is support
for retaining ‘best interests’ as part of the
Act and, if so,
whether it would be useful to define the term.
(i) Should the term ‘best interests’ remain part of the Act?
(ii) If so, what should ‘best interests’ be
3.3.20 There were 22 written submissions addressing this question, in
addition to a number of verbal submissions and comments. Not
all respondents
expressly answered in the affirmative or negative, with a number making
observations indicating a preference one
way or another. Ten written submissions
expressed support for retaining a requirement to consider a person’s
‘best interests’
as part of the Act. Of these, the substantial
majority supported the phrase being defined or explained.
3.3.21 Some respondents that supported continuation of a ‘best
interests’ approach suggested that it may be appropriate
where it is not
possible to make a decision consistent with a person’s will and
preference. The Medical Insurance Group Australia
for example, commented
in relation to medical treatment decisions that there may at times be good
reason to depart from a person’s
will and preference. Specifically, it
wished to ensure that medical professionals were not compelled to act in
accordance with a
patient’s will and preference without exception.
Appropriate exceptions given included where a decision would be impractical
impossible. In those circumstances, it supported continuation of decisions being
based upon a patient’s best interests.
Another submission also commented
that ‘best interests’ may be an alternative default test where the
person’s wishes
are totally impracticable. These comments and concerns are
addressed in Part 11 via the Decision-Making Process that it is proposed
representatives and the Board be required to
3.3.22 One submission suggested that the phrase ‘best interests’
be defined to mean that no detriment arises from the
Similarly, the Board
commented that:
Given the complexities of financial management and the realities of financial
elder abuse, there is some reluctance to entirely abandon
interests’ model that currently operates in these circumstances. The
legislation must require the person appointed
to a decision making role to
identify and follow the person’s wishes wherever possible, but not in
situations where to do so
would cause undue harm or risk of abuse. This concern
is overcome if a similar provision to section 9(1)(d) of the decision-making
principles of the Victorian
Guardianship and Administration Bill 2018
included in the Act.
3.3.23 The Interim Commissioner for Children and Young Persons expressed
support for continuation of the ‘best interests’
principle in
relation to children, noting that Article 7 of the Convention requires that
‘in all actions concerning children
with disabilities, the best interests
of the child shall be a primary
consideration.’
Institute acknowledges and agrees with this reasoning and addresses this matter
in Part 13.
3.3.24 Dr Lisa Eckstein
supported retention of decision-making based on a person’s best interests.
Dr Eckstein noted that ascertaining a person’s
will and preference can be
particularly difficult in the context of dementia, where a person’s will
and preference might change
over time. Dr Eckstein referred the Institute to a
journal article
demonstrating
that, in relation to one individual, two people can reach different conclusions
should be adopted — the
person’s will and preference before onset of dementia, or their will and
preference with dementia.
Similar observations were made about the challenges of identifying the will and
preference of a person with anorexia nervosa:
Another situation where respecting a person’s wills and preferences may
prove insufficient as a decision-making device is in
the context of conditions
like anorexia nervosa (AN) where the condition itself may impede persons from
developing and expressing
an authentic choice when it comes to receiving
treatment. How should a decision-maker, for example, weigh a statement by an AN
such as ‘I wasn’t really bothered about dying, as long as I
died thin’?
Should this
overriding desire for thinness be taken as the person’s will and therefore
the basis for medical decision-making?
Determining a person’s wills and
preferences is especially challenging when a person has suffered from a
condition such as
AN from the time that they were a minor and therefore they
have never had the opportunity to express an authentic view.
3.3.25 Dr Eckstein therefore challenged a person’s will and preference
as the primary tool for decision-making, concluding by
commenting upon the
comparative benefits of retaining a ‘best interests’ approach:
Best interests provides some objective criteria for reconciling these
challenges, especially when recognised that the best interests
standard needs to
be informed by the person’s will and preferences, to the extent that these
can be ascertained.
Retaining a best interests standard also recognises the practical challenges
that decision-makers face in ascertaining a person’s
will and preferences,
and the stress that can be experienced by those faced with making such
determinations. Notably, in a review
of hypothetical treatment scenarios,
surrogates only predicted a patient’s treatment choices 68% of the time.
Since most of
the scenarios were binary choices, random guessing would have been
correct about 50% of the
3.3.26 Seven written responses did not support retaining ‘best
interests’ as part of the Act. A number of comments made
during public
consultation meetings also expressed concern with the way in which a ‘best
interests’ approach is applied.
Criticisms typically fell within one of
two interrelated categories:
1. that what one person might think of as being in a person’s
‘best interests’ might be different to another’s
perspective;
2. because of this subjectivity, it can lead to decisions that are overly
risk-averse.
3.3.27 The OPMHS observed that interpretation of best interests ‘can
vary significantly between different decision makers with
focus.’ It commented that, if the term were retained, it should not be
seen as a general standard, but should be
‘from the person’s
perspective, taking into account their current and previous preferences,
culture, lifestyle etc.’
In other words, what is important is what a
person would themselves likely consider to be in their ‘best
interests’,
taking into account their values, rather than an objective
standard based on a ‘reasonable person’, for example.
3.3.28 Respondents indicated concern that decision-makers may have a tendency
to make decisions that are overly protectionist, or
risk-averse when seeking to
promote a person’s ‘best interest’. The Institute heard
several examples from participants
in community consultation sessions where
family members or carers perceived that decision-makers had taken an overly
protectionist
approach. They commented that they had experienced situations
where a represented person or loved one had been called upon to provide
extensive details to satisfactorily demonstrate that a particular course of
action would be in a person’s ‘best interests’.
This was said
to have occurred in relation to what they considered to be seemingly incidental,
everyday financial and lifestyle
3.3.29 Advocacy Tasmania observed:
While it may be possible to reform this language to reflect a more
contemporary and rights-based understanding, this language really
long history of people’s rights and choices being taken away and
substituted with what someone else thinks is best
for them. Being able to
determine what is in our own interests is an essential part of being human and
having the support to consider
and make these decisions is where the focus of
the Act needs to be.
3.3.30 It was general accepted that guardianship law should move away from
paternalistic notions. The Board, for example, endorsed
legislative guidance
from paternalistic notions of
‘best interests’.
3.3.31 The Institute appreciates that the difference in approach and outcome
might depend upon how individual decision-makers weigh
the sometimes competing
considerations in s 6 of the Act. It has concluded, however, that a will,
preferences and rights approach
is fundamentally different to the Act’s
present formulation, necessitating legislative reform. A change in language is
to emphasise the rights of the individual and to move away from
paternalistic notions of guardianship. The term ‘best interests’
not included within recent legislative reforms in
Queensland.
It has also been
omitted in recent recommendations for reform made in New South
Consideration of harm
3.3.32 The second concern expressed in relation to the ALRC’s National
Decision-Making Principles related to Principle 3 —
Decisions that affect a person’s life must be directed by the
person’s will, preferences and rights.
Comments made
related to how this Principle takes into account the risk of harm to a
3.3.33 The Board commented in its submission that, by virtue of
Australia’s ratification of the Convention, the emphasis should
prioritising the ‘rights, will and preferences’ of a person
where this will not cause harm
’ (emphasis added). The OPMHS
submitted that it supported the ALRC’s Decision-Making Principles, but
also commented that
there should be consideration of harm. Clinical Associate
Professor Robyn Wallace
raised the issue of harm in her submission. Associate Professor Wallace
commented that, whilst the equal right to make decisions
and to have those
decisions respected is fundamental, it can also be problematic if decisions are
not informed. For example, what
if a person’s decision would result in
adverse consequences but they are not capable of understanding those
consequences? These
concerns appear primarily based on the need to ensure that
reforms that require focus upon a person’s ‘will, preferences
rights’ do not result in a person’s other human rights being
3.3.34 It is acknowledged and agreed that it is important that any
decision-making framework consider and adequately resolve issues
order to safeguard a person’s rights and interests. However, the Institute
makes the following observations:
3.3.35 Individuals have a range of tolerance to risk. What is an unacceptable
level of harm or risk for one person might be an acceptable
level to another. In
other words, assessment of risk, and tolerance to it, is
subjective.
A representative or
the Board might have a different level of risk tolerance to a represented
3.3.36 The Institute also observes the importance of allowing individuals to
take risks (the ‘dignity of risk’), a matter
highlighted by COTA in
its submission. The ability to take risks is said to be fundamental to
personhood.
The freedom to make
mistakes and learn from them is part of building a person’s
decision-making skills, as Speak Out advocates
highlighted. Risk should not,
therefore, be viewed as only negative.
3.3.37 Under a risk analysis framework, consideration needs to be given to
the likelihood of harm. There is only the
for harm where a
person’s will and preference are at the forefront of decision-making. On
the other hand, there is
denial of a person’s rights if a
will, preference and rights approach is not adopted. Giving preference to
avoiding the
of harm or abuse over a
denial of a
person’s rights implies that the rights outlined in Article 12 of the
Convention are of lesser importance than
other human rights.
3.3.38 It must also be recognised that there is the potential for harm under
the current model. There is the risk that representatives
might abuse or exploit
a represented person, act incompetently, contrary to the principles of the Act,
or give priority to their
own personal interests over the interests of a
represented person.
3.3.39 The Convention requires decision-making based on a person’s
will, preferences,
(emphasis added). This explicitly requires
consideration of a person’s human rights. The ALRC interprets this to mean
may be appropriate, in extreme circumstances, that a person’s will
and preference not be adopted where it would result in a
denial of the
person’s other human rights. The Institute considers that the ALRC’s
resulting Rights, Will and Preference
Guidelines address the relevance of the
risk of harm in these circumstances. These Guidelines are discussed further in
Part 11 and
are incorporated into the proposed Decision-Making Process for the
Board and representatives to follow when providing a person with
decision-making
The Institute’s view
3.3.40 Reform to the Act should be aimed towards achieving the ultimate goal
of compliance with the Convention. Advocacy Tasmania’s
submission is
noted, which commented in response to the ALRC’s National Decision-Making
Principles that:
The first three principles are essential to shift the focus from being on a
person’s disability and best interests to their
rights, choices and the
support they need to exercise those rights on an equal basis with other people.
This focus shift is a fundamental
aspect of the UN Convention and contemporary
understanding and recognition of the inherent rights, dignity and autonomy of
with disability.
3.3.41 It is acknowledged that the ALRC’s Decision-Making Principles
are only one method to achieve greater compliance with
the Convention. However,
one benefit to adopting the Principles is that they provide a framework from
which to develop nationally
consistent laws.
Achieving National Consistency
3.3.42 One criticism made frequently during the Institute’s public
consultation was the lack of consistency amongst guardianship
laws across
Australia. The Institute heard numerous examples where difficulties had arisen
where enduring documents or orders were
made outside of Tasmania but needed to
be used within the state. The practical steps involved in having arrangements
made in one
Similarly, community members expressed concerns about the validity
of documents
created under the Act when they may need to be used in another jurisdiction
where different laws apply. This might occur,
for example, when someone travels
interstate for leisure or for medical treatment or moves interstate.
3.3.43 A further benefit to developing nationally consistent guardianship
laws would likely be to dispel or reduce community misunderstanding
of the Act.
‘Folklore’ can often arise because people mistakenly assume that the
Act is consistent with laws in other
materially different.
3.3.44 The Institute was told frequently during its public consultations that
greater uniformity amongst guardianship laws across
Australia is critical to
ensuring that the law is responsive to the needs of the community. Whilst the
ALRC’s Principles are
only one way that uniformity could be achieved, they
provide a useful framework that that can be progressed at a state level, pending
progress towards uniform legislation at a national level. The ACTLRAC has
recommended that the ALRC’s Decision-Making Principles
be adopted in the
It could be expected
that legislative reforms at a national level will also consider, if not adopt,
the National Decision-Making
Principles as a framework. The NDIS is one example.
It is therefore anticipated that, not only will adopting the Decision-Making
Principles achieve greater compliance with the Convention, but it will also
assist in achieving greater consistency amongst laws
across Australia.
3.3.45 Given public support for the approach, that it aligns with the
Convention, and that it may assist to achieve greater consistency
legislation and policy across Australia, the Institute recommends that reforms
be founded upon the ALRC’s Decision-Making
Principles.
Recommendation 3.1
That the ALRC’s National Decision-Making Principles guide reform to the
(1) That all adults have an equal right to make decisions that affect their
lives and to have those decisions respected.
(2) People who require support in decision-making must be provided with
access to the support necessary for them to make, communicate
and participate in
decisions that affect their lives.
(3) Decisions that affect a person’s life must be directed by the
person’s will, preferences and rights.
(4) Laws and legal frameworks must contain appropriate and effective
safeguards in relation to interventions for people who may require
decision-making support, including to prevent abuse and undue influence.
principles of the Act
3.4.1 As explained earlier in this Part, the Act contains overarching
principles that govern the operation of the Act. These principles
require all
functions and powers to be performed so that:
• the means which is the least restrictive of a person’s freedom
of decision and action as is possible in the circumstances
is adopted;
• the best interests of a person are promoted; and
• the wishes of a person with a disability or in respect of whom an
application is made under the Act are, if possible, carried
3.4.2 The Issues Paper provided examples of principles governing guardianship
laws in other jurisdictions and asked for stakeholder’s
views about what
principles should guide the operation of the Act.
What principles should guide the operation of the
3.4.3 There were 16 written and verbal submissions addressing this question.
3.4.4 The Board, EOT, and Advocacy Tasmania supported the principles of the
Convention forming the guiding principles of the Act.
TasCOSS also supported the
Convention being used to guide the operation of the Act:
Where a decision cannot be made by the person, even with support, for example
if a person is in a coma or otherwise unable to communicate,
Article 12 makes it
clear that a decision be made that is “the best interpretation of will and
preferences”. This should
replace “best interest”
interpretations which are highly subjective—and often based on gendered
and class- and
race-based notions of what makes “a good
life”—and may be in conflict with the person’s will and
preferences.
The ACT Spectrum of Support report argues that what is required is
“decision support ... provided to people to enable their
preference to be heard in substitute decisions that are being made by
3.4.5 The OPG gave examples of ways that s 6 of the Act could be
The OPG considers the principles underpinning the Act should be reviewed in
line with contemporary thinking about the priority to
putting into effect the
person’s will and preferences; allowing the dignity of risk; the right to
support for decision-making
and the promotion of autonomy in decision-making;
the promotion of personal, emotional and social well-being; the right to full
participation
in civil and social life; the right to live free from abuse,
neglect and exploitation; the recognition of informal support, family,
and carers; and the adoption of the least restrictive alternative.
3.4.6 Palliative Care Tasmania (PCT) also gave suggestions of principles that
could be adopted to guide operation of the Act, including:
• a person’s right to be involved in decision making, even if
they lack capacity;
• the right to consent to treatment and care; and
• the right to be listened to.
3.4.7 The Mental Health Tribunal (MHT) referred the Institute to the New
South Wales’
Disability Inclusion Act 2014
as providing a useful
example of legislation supporting the objectives of the
Adopting the principles of the Convention
3.4.8 The Institute agrees that reform to the Act should align with the
Convention. The best way to achieve this is to enshrine the
principles of the
directly in the
Act. Doing so would require those applying the Act to consider and uphold the
principles of the Convention. It may
also serve a broader educative purpose as
it is expected that a substantial proportion of the community are unaware of the
or its governing principles. It is unlikely that those who come into
Convention. They
may, however, review key parts of the Act, or be guided by educational resources
which would likely highlight key
elements of the Act.
3.4.9 The principles of the Convention have been incorporated into the
Disability Services
Similar provisions are also contained in the
Mental Health
Disability Framework for Action 2018–2021
also adopts the
principles of the Convention.
The Act already adopts a variation of one of the principles by providing that
people must be encouraged and supported to participate
in the life of the
community as much as
Recommendation 3.2
That the principles of the Convention be included in the Act. These
principles are:
(a) there must be respect for the inherent dignity of persons with
disability and their individual autonomy including the freedom
one’s own choices, and their right to independence;
(b) persons with disability are not to be discriminated against;
(c) persons with disability are to be given the opportunity for full and
effective participation and inclusion in society;
(d) there must be respect for difference and acceptance of persons with
disability as part of human diversity and humanity;
(e) people with disability must have equality of opportunity;
(f) services are to be as physically and technologically accessible as
possible to persons with disability;
(g) equality between men and women is to be promoted; and
(h) respect for the evolving capacities of children with disabilities and
respect for the right of children with disabilities to
preserve their
identities.
Revised guiding principles
3.4.10 Based on feedback received, there are several principles that the
Institute considers should be adopted as guiding principles
of the Act. These
are explained below.
That people who require support in decision-making must be provided with
access to the most effective support necessary for them to
make, communicate and
participate in decisions that affect their lives
3.4.11 This adopts Principle 2 of the ALRC’s National Decision-Making
Process. The Institute recommends a minor variation by
‘effective’ supports to be made available. This ensures that
supports are of a high quality and tailored to
the individual to best enable a
person to make decisions affecting their lives. An equivalent requirement is
contained in Saskatchewan
A variation also
appears in the new Victorian legislation, requiring provision of
‘practicable and appropriate’
That the views, wishes, preferences and rights of people who may require
decision-making support must direct decisions that affect
their lives
3.4.12 This adopts Principle 3 of the endorsed ALRC’s National
Decision-Making Process.
The role of families, carers and other significant persons in an
adult’s life to support the adult to make decisions must be
acknowledged
and respected
3.4.13 This recommendation adopts one of the guiding principles of
guardianship legislation in
Queensland.
It is intended to
reinforce the critical role that informal supporters, carers and others close to
a person play in supporting a
person and advancing their rights and interests. A
number of respondents identified this as a gap in the current legislation,
support networks to feel
This reform
complements the
Tasmania Carer Policy
, with one of its key objectives
being an increased recognition of
A function or power conferred, or duty imposed, by this Act is to be
performed so that the means that are the least restrictive of
the person’s
freedom of decision and action as possible in the circumstances is
3.4.14 This principle is consistent with one of the existing guiding
principles.
What is least
restrictive of a person’s freedom of decision and action is consistent
with the Convention and the ALRC Decision-Making
Principles because it focuses
on people’s human rights and autonomy. It implicitly endorses use of
informal support for decision-making
and is aimed at ensuring that people do not
have a representative appointed on their behalf if their needs could be met in
less restrictive
ways. It has also remained one of the guiding principles in
proposed revisions to the legislation in
Recommendation 3.3
That the guiding principles of the Act include:
• people who require support in decision-making must be provided with
access to the most effective support necessary for them
to make, communicate and
participate in decisions that affect their lives;
• the views, wishes, preferences and rights of persons who may require
decision-making support must direct decisions that affect
their lives;
• the role of families, carers and other significant persons in an
adult’s life to support the adult to make decisions
must be acknowledged
and respected; and
• a function or power conferred, or duty imposed, by this Act is to be
performed so that the means that are the least restrictive
of the person’s
freedom of decision and action as possible in the circumstances is adopted.
Requiring informal supporters to apply the
general principles
3.4.15 One of the gaps within the existing legal framework is a lack of
clarity about the role and duties of informal supporters who
are not formally
appointed as representatives and thus not subject to the Board’s
oversight. This gap creates a risk of informal
supporters failing to act in
accordance with the rights and interests of the person that they are supporting
informally. The Board’s
submission estimates that about 1.83% of the
population living in Tasmania with a ‘mental or behavioural
disorder’ disability
had an application to the Board made about them.
Further, only about 0.89% of the population living with a ‘mental or
behavioural
disorder’ disability in Tasmania is subject to an order of the
Board. This means that by far the greatest number of people
who may be in need
of decision-making support fall outside of the Board’s oversight.
3.4.16 The Institute endorses Queensland’s approach where legislation
confirms that informal supporters must uphold and apply
the general principles
of guardianship legislation.
This reform was introduced in Queensland in accordance with the QLRC’s
recommendations.
3.4.17 It is not suggested that a penalty be included in the Act where an
informal supporter breaches their duties. Depending upon
the conduct, it could,
however, have implications under other laws.
Recommendation 3.4
That the guiding principles of the Act apply to any person assisting someone
or making a decision for a person informally.
Encouraging the community to uphold the
general principles
3.4.18 The Act can and should play a role in reinforcing the rights of people
requiring decision-making support. Similar to Recommendation
suggested that all members of the community be encouraged to uphold and promote
the general principles of the Act. This
proposal reinforces the role that
everyone has in ensuring that the rights of people requiring decision-making
support are upheld.
In this way, it serves an educative function aimed at
influencing community behaviour.
3.4.19 As commented in relation to Recommendation 3.4, it is not suggested
that the Act impose sanctions where members of the community
Act’s guiding principles. It is instead intended to serve a proactive,
educative function.
Recommendation 3.5
That all members of the community be encouraged to uphold and promote the
Act’s guiding principles.
for representative decision-making
3.5.1 This Part has outlined revised guiding principles of the Act. The
Institute makes further recommendations about when and how
decision-maker’s ought to make decisions in Part
Appointing your own
Representative
Introduction
4.1.1 This Part considers how the Act governs the way in which a person can
appoint their own representative. The legislative framework
in Tasmania provides
for the separate appointments of enduring representatives for financial matters
(called attorneys) and representatives
for personal matters (called enduring
guardians). The
Powers of Attorney Act
deals with the appointment,
removal and supervision of attorneys. The Act governs the appointment, removal
and supervision of enduring
guardians. The scope of this review is to evaluate
the need for reform to the Act rather than the
Powers of Attorney Act
although there is broad alignment between the Acts and the desirability for
consistency in approach.
4.1.2 The appointment of one’s own decision-maker is a key element of
the decision-making continuum. It provides one method
for individuals to
exercise choice and control in deciding who they wish to act as their
representative in the future, if the need
were to arise. Advance care directives
are another document that enable a person to retain control of decisions
affecting their lives,
and these are considered in the following Part. Other
parts are also relevant to the role of enduring guardians:
consider when the powers of an enduring guardian should become operative,
reviews the powers and functions of guardians, and
considers safeguards
for representative decision-making.
4.1.3 Whilst the Terms of Reference did not specifically call for a review of
the appointment of an enduring guardian or use of advance
care directives, the
Institute considers that these two documents are fundamental to the operation of
the Act because they provide
a means to support people to make their own
representative decision-making scheme
4.2.1 Tasmania has separate appointments of decision-makers for financial
matters and personal matters. A representative appointed
by a person to make
financial decisions is called an ‘attorney’. Statutory provisions
dealing with the role and powers
of attorneys are contained in the
Attorney Act
. A representative appointed by a person to make personal
decisions is called an ‘enduring guardian’. Statutory provisions
dealing with the role and powers of enduring guardians are contained in the Act.
Also contained in the Act are provisions dealing
with the appointment and powers
of administrators and guardians. An ‘administrator’ is a
appointed by the Board
to make financial decisions. A ‘guardian’ is a
appointed by the Board
to make personal decisions. Table 4.1 explains the framework.
Table 4.1: Tasmanian representative decision-making framework
Title given to representative
Governing legislation
Financial Representatives
Appointed by a person for themselves
Powers of Attorney Act
Appointed by the Board
‘Administrator’
Personal Representatives
Appointed by the person for themselves
‘Enduring guardian’
Appointed by the Board
4.2.2 If a person wishes to appoint a representative for both personal and
financial matters, then an instrument appointing an enduring
guardian (an
instrument) and enduring power of attorney are required. If the Board is
satisfied that it needs to appoint a representative,
then it must make separate
orders appointing an administrator and guardian. There is no overlap between the
roles and each serves
a separate and distinct function to the other.
Potential reform to the
4.2.3 The House of Assembly Standing Committee on Community Development (the
‘Standing Committee’), in its recent Inquiry
into Palliative Care,
reported that they observed significant confusion amongst Tasmanians including
some health care workers about
the differences between an enduring power of
attorney and an
instrument.
This observation raises the question of whether there should remain distinct
roles of attorneys/administrators for financial decisions
and enduring
guardians/guardians for personal matters. In some jurisdictions a person may
appoint one decision-maker for both financial
and personal
and/or the relevant
court or tribunal may appoint a single decision-maker with power to make both
personal and financial
4.2.4 The Issues Paper outlined a range of potential advantages and
disadvantages to each option. The question was posed whether the
representatives for personal and financial matters should remain separate or be
consolidated.
Should one representative be able to make both personal and financial
decisions, or should the roles remain
4.2.5 The substantial majority of respondents supported retention of separate
representatives for personal and financial matters.
It was observed that there
may be occasions where one person could fulfil both functions, but it was
considered that the role and
titles should remain distinct. Only two submissions
supported combining the roles, although both commented that they were also
with the current framework.
4.2.6 Arguments supporting retention of separate roles included:
• the different skill sets and personal attributes needed for financial
and personal decisions;
• the importance of avoiding ‘role creep’ where a
representative is only required for, say, financial matters, but
representative attempts to expand their role into decisions about personal
• it provides accountability where separate individuals are appointed
and are thus able to monitor each other’s activities,
acting as a
• this approach still enables the appointment of the same individual(s)
to make both financial and personal decisions if considered
appropriate or
desirable; and
• it provides an opportunity for a represented person to extend their
4.2.7 The Institute observes that, fundamentally, retaining separate roles
enables a person and the Board to easily and clearly designate
personal and
financial functions between different people where appropriate. Having a single
role encompassing both personal and
financial matters would make appointing
different individuals for each function cumbersome.
4.2.8 Consistent with responses received, the Institute recommends that
separate roles of representatives for financial and personal
matters remain.
Recommendation 4.1
That the statutory framework retain separate representatives for financial
decisions and personal matters.
One enduring appointment
4.2.9 Five responses to this question raised the possibility of reforming the
legislative framework to enable a person to appoint
both an attorney and an
enduring guardian within the single enduring document. It was submitted that
this would resolve confusion
attorney and instruments and simplify the scheme. This approach is consistent
the ALRC’s proposal which recommends a single model document be
created that enables the appointment of all decision-makers
for financial,
medical and personal matters.
In proposing this approach, the ALRC noted that:
A single agreement, while permitting the principal to appoint different
individuals for different types of decisions, may reduce confusion
enduring documents have been signed, clarify the roles of attorneys and
guardians, and reduce confusion as to who needs
to be contacted with respect to
a particular decision.
4.2.10 The Institute understands that, anecdotally, there are occasions where
individuals choose not to create an instrument at the
time of making an enduring
power of attorney. This can be for a range of reasons, including the desire to
avoid legal costs and the
registrations fee payable for two
The OPMHS’s
submission commented that:
Currently, enduring guardian is often neglected and only a POA appointed.
This leaves people vulnerable when treatment/lifestyle decisions
are required
and can lead to prolonged hospital stays, which are neither in the interest of
the person concerned nor the wider community.
4.2.11 It is of concern to the Institute that some individuals may feel that
they must choose between the appointment of an attorney
and an enduring guardian
because of the additional steps and cost required. This imposes a barrier to
people nominating who they
want to promote their rights and interests if the
need for a representative arises. A person’s own appointment of their
representative
is a fundamental way in which they can exercise choice and
control by deciding who they want to act, and the circumstances in which
representative may act. It also enables the donor to express their will and
preference, by either making directions or expressing
values and wishes to
assist their representative in the role. This assists to achieve the fundamental
principle of the Convention;
that it is a person’s will and preference
that must direct decisions affecting their life.
4.2.12 Another benefit of better facilitating individuals appointing their
own representatives is a decreased need for applications
to the Board for the
appointment of a representative where an enduring appointment has not been made.
It also reduces the guess work
in ascertaining a person’s likely wishes in
relation to their choice of representative in these circumstances.
4.2.13 The Institute has conducted this review taking into account
overwhelming feedback received during the Institute’s community
consultations and the House of Assembly Palliative Care Inquiry commenting that
the law in this area is overly complex and confusing.
It is desirable that the
legislative framework be simplified. One of the ways that this could be achieved
is by enabling a person
to appoint representatives for financial and personal
matters within the single enduring
4.2.14 It is outside of the Institute’s Terms of Reference to consider
and make recommendations about the consolidation of the
legislative framework
regulating enduring appointments. Further consultation with stakeholders is
necessary, along with consideration
of a range of consequential reforms needed
— including, amongst other matters, the registrations of any newly
proposed single
enduring document. For this reason, the Institute has not made
recommendations as part of this review proposing reform to enable
a person to
appoint an attorney and enduring guardian within the one document. It is
recommended, however, that this be further evaluated.
It is also recommended
that, if there is progress nationally to develop a model enduring document, as
proposed by the ALRC, that
any agreed approach is considered for introduction in
Recommendation 4.2
(1) That the State Government investigate community and stakeholder support
for the introduction of a single enduring document in
Tasmania enabling the
appointment of representatives for both financial and personal matters.
(2) That if a model enduring document is agreed nationally, consideration is
given to adopting the model form.
an enduring guardian
4.3.1 The following paragraphs review how a person appoints an enduring
4.3.2 The ALRC made specific recommendations about enduring documents as part
of its inquiry into Elder Abuse. It recommended that:
Safeguards against the misuse of an enduring document in state and territory
legislation should:
(a) recognise the ability of the principal to create enduring documents that
give full powers, powers that are limited or restricted,
and powers that are
subject to conditions or circumstances;
(b) require the appointed decision-maker to support and represent the will,
preferences and rights of the principal;
(c) enhance witnessing requirements;
(d) restrict conflict transactions;
(f) set out in simple terms the types of decisions that are outside the power
of a person acting under an enduring document; and
(g) mandate basic requirements for record
4.3.3 Recommendations (a) and (c), are dealt with in this Part. Point (b) is
dealt with in Parts 3 and 11, Point (f) is considered
in Part 9 under the powers
of guardians, and Points (d) and (g) are considered in Part 12 covering
safeguards for representative
decision-making.
Capacity to make an instrument
4.3.4 Any adult with capacity may appoint an enduring guardian. Part 6
outlines the test that assesses whether a person has capacity
instrument.
Age of donors
4.3.5 Only those who are 18 years or older may appoint an enduring
The Issues Paper
asked whether a person under the age of 18 years ought to be able to appoint an
enduring guardian.
Should a person under the age of 18 years be able to appoint an enduring
4.3.6 There were 11 responses to this question with eight respondents
advocating that a person under the age of 18 years should be
able to appoint an
enduring guardian. Four of those respondents suggested that the age could be
lowered to 16 years of age.
4.3.7 Members of the Elder Law and Succession Committee of the Law Society
(Elder Law Committee) commented that there are existing
laws enabling a child to
make a Will. They noted that this example could be used to guide reform enabling
a child to make an instrument.
4.3.8 Two submissions did not support reform to enable a child to appoint an
enduring guardian, including the Board which commented
that it considered that
the existing provisions were appropriate.
4.3.9 The Institute observes existing provisions of the Act which describe
the role of an enduring guardian as being akin to the relationship
of parent and
child. Whilst it is proposed later in this Report that this description be
it highlights that
the role of an enduring guardian can include matters typically within the scope
of a parent’s role. This
Report does not make recommendations for reform
to the Act to alter the existing position.
Age of enduring guardians
4.3.10 An enduring guardian must be an adult when they are
In the Northern
Territory, a person under the age of 18 years may be appointed as an enduring
guardian, so long as their appointment
only becomes operative after they have
reached the age of 18.
4.3.11 The Institute asked whether a donor should be able to appoint a person
under the age of 18 years to be their enduring guardian.
Should a person under the age of 18 years be able to be an enduring
4.3.12 There were five submissions addressing this question, with four
supporting reform to enable a person under the age of 18 years
to be appointed
as an enduring guardian. Carers Tasmania commented:
Many primary carers under the age of 18 have responsibilities beyond their
years, in caring for a parent, sibling or other family
member. Young carers are
more likely to be living in low-resource and lone parent households with limited
support from other family
members. As a result, many young carers provide
significant levels of decision making support.
However, young carers often report not being recognised by their caring role
by health professionals and service providers, and being
excluded in discussions
Act for a limited guardianship
order may be beneficial, in exceptional cases
where the carer is under 18. Some young carer stories, collected as part of a
called ‘Young Carers Talk’ demonstrates some examples where
a young carer may have such responsibilities that considering
this would make
sense. The following are two examples:
‘Caring for my mum involves a lot of supervision because things can
escalate so quickly. She can wake up fine, and then a few
hours later I am
calling an ambulance because her pain is out of control. I provide her with a
lot of emotional support. I help her
when she needs medication and I accompany
her to all her appointments so that I can understand her and advocate for her
‘Mum can’t take on too many activities as it stresses her too
much and she gets sick. When she is stressed, it’s
hard for me because I
have to help to sort it out. My sister’s conditions are moderate to
severe, so when this happens I am
left with a lot of responsibility’.
4.3.13 PCT similarly commented that it might be appropriate to enable a donor
to appoint a child carer as their enduring guardian
circumstances.
4.3.14 The OPG stated that, whilst it supports reform to enable a child to be
appointed as an enduring guardian, they should not be
able act until they attain
the age of 18 years. Members of the Elder Law Committee also commented that
‘If there is concern
appointment could be conditional upon the person attaining 18.’ They
that the benefit to permitting a young person being able to be
appointed as an enduring guardian is that it ‘would better allow
person to appoint family members particularly if children are close to 18 and
dementia is an issue for the appointor.’
4.3.15 The Institute agrees with the observations of members of the Elder Law
Committee that it can be unduly restrictive to require
an enduring guardian to
be an adult when they are appointed, particularly where there is an urgent
desire to appoint an enduring
guardian because of a donor’s declining
ability. It also restricts individuals who do not have others from within their
network suitable to appoint as their enduring guardian apart from a young
person who may already be assisting the donor with decision-making
informally.
4.3.16 The Institute therefore proposes that a person aged 16 years or older
be able to be appointed as an enduring guardian, but
that their appointment not
become effective until they attain the age of 18 years. This allows the
opportunity for the enduring guardian
to decline the appointment upon reaching
Recommendation 4.3
That a person aged 16 years and older be eligible to be appointed as an
enduring guardian but that an enduring guardian not be permitted
to act until
they attain the age of 18 years.
Eligibility to be an enduring guardian
4.3.17 A person who is directly or indirectly responsible for the medical
care or treatment of a donor in a professional or administrative
capacity cannot
be their enduring guardian.
The Issues Paper noted that this description makes it unclear whether the
owners or staff of aged care facilities, allied health care
providers or other
services providers are included within this
It was noted that
individuals ineligible to be an enduring guardian in other jurisdictions
• a donor’s care
• a donor’s health
• a donor’s accommodation
• a donor’s support service
• the spouse, parent, child, brother, or sister of any of these
4.3.18 Feedback was requested about who ought to
be eligible to be an enduring guardian.
Who should be eligible to act as an enduring
4.3.19 Respondents suggested that those eligible to be an enduring guardian
should include:
• those with a demonstrated and positive social and emotional
connection to the donor;
• the person who knows the donor well and has spoken to them about
their wishes; and
• individuals who are sensible and reasonable.
4.3.20 The Board commented that the Public Guardian should be eligible to be
appointed as an enduring guardian. This matter is considered
at [4.3.26]
4.3.21 Members of the Elder Law Committee commented that they considered it a
better approach to state who is
to be an enduring guardian.
The Institute agrees with this statement, although age requirements are
considered at [4.3.10] above,
and the Public Guardian’s eligibility
considered in the following paragraph.
4.3.22 The Issues Paper also asked who ought to be ineligible to be appointed
an enduring guardian.
Who should be ineligible to act as an enduring
4.3.23 The Board noted the Institute’s observations in the Issues Paper
and commented that ‘[i]t appears that further
clarity in the Act is
appropriate including the possibility of enlarging the group of those
ineligible, to reduce conflict of interests
when dealing with external service,
accommodation, and other providers.’ The OPG also stated ‘[t]he
general view of the
OPG is that anyone who has a direct or indirect role in the
provision of paid care or medical treatment to the donor should be
ineligible.’
Members of the Elder Law Committee endorsed reform in
accordance with the list of examples included in the Issues
(outlined above) where
those providing care and support are excluded from appointment. They also
commented that:
The purpose of this type of document is to give a person the choice to
appoint the person they want. Sometimes in practice the person
who might be
considered an ideal appointment is not who a person wants. The circumstances in
which prima facie ineligibility and/or
possible automatic revocation occurs need
to be considered carefully and there needs to be some flexibility.
4.3.24 One submission stated that there is no need for reform to the existing
4.3.25 The Institute considers that the current classes of individuals
excluded from appointment as an enduring guardian are too narrow.
Descriptions
do not neatly fit with those who are responsible for accommodation or other
health care or services that the donor receives.
It is therefore proposed that
the Act be revised to exclude anyone with a direct or indirect role in the
provision of paid care,
accommodation or other services from being appointed as
an enduring guardian. The rationale is that these classes of individuals
conflict of interest between their role in providing paid services to the
individual and their duties as an enduring guardian
involving decision-making
impact the donor and compromise
their rights and interests being paramount. A
reform of this type would strengthen the existing exclusions, provide
consistency with
and align with
submissions received.
Recommendation 4.4
That any person who is directly or indirectly responsible for the health care
or treatment, support services or accommodation of the
donor in a professional
or administrative capacity also be ineligible to be the donor’s enduring
guardian under s 32(4) of
The Public Guardian as an enduring
4.3.26 The Act does not state that a donor can appoint the Public Guardian as
their enduring guardian.
Board’s submission clarified that it can appoint the Public Guardian as an
enduring guardian via its power to amend
instruments.
4.3.27 In contrast, the Public Trustee may be appointed as a person’s
attorney under the
Powers of Attorney
In Queensland, the
Public Guardian may be appointed as an enduring
In the ACT, a donor
may appoint the Public Trustee and Guardian (PTG) as their enduring guardian,
but the PTG retains a discretion
to decline an
appointment.
4.3.28 The Issues Paper noted that the inability to appoint the Public
Guardian may restrict people’s choice when appointing
an enduring
guardian. On the other hand, the Public Guardian often will not have an existing
relationship with a donor which may
make it more difficult to make personal
decisions for them than it would for someone who has an existing personal
relationship with
4.3.29 The Institute sought feedback about whether the Public Guardian should
be able to be appointed as an enduring guardian.
Should the Public Guardian be eligible to appointed as an enduring
4.3.30 Five responses expressed support for this reform, whilst two did
4.3.31 Both the OPG and PCT considered that the Public Guardian should not be
eligible for appointment as an enduring guardian. The
OPG stated that:
Enduring instruments provide for an alternative to the state stepping in as a
substitute decision-maker. They enable the principle
or donor to appoint someone
of their own choosing to take on this role, usually a close family member or
friend. There is a very
small number of people who have no-one in their life who
they want to fill this role, and a small number of those people would like
appoint the Public Guardian to provide some certainty or peace of mind. However,
in the event that a person who has not made an
enduring guardian appointment
loses capacity and requires a substitute decision-maker, the state will in any
case step in with the
Public Guardian’s appointment if there is no
suitable private person. Our view is that this is the preferred route to this
We also hold the view that with further community education and support, and
potentially with the introduction of a statutory scheme,
the making of an
advance care directive may provide a satisfactory alternative for those who have
no one to appoint as an enduring
It is not practical for the Public Guardian to hold enduring guardianship
appointments for unknown people with whom we have no familiarity
and no insight
into their wishes. Appointing the Public Guardian as enduring guardian would
preclude the appointment of a suitable
person who might emerge after that
appointment was made — for example, new relationships might develop, or
new family members
(e.g., children growing into adulthood) may become
In the relatively rare case where the donor does have close family members or
friends, but expressly wants them precluded from appointment
as guardian in the
event they lose capacity, this should be noted in an advance care directive.
4.3.32 PCT commented that ‘[t]he Public Guardian should always be the
Guardian of last resort.’
4.3.33 Two members of the public commented that this reform would make
meaningful improvement to their life as they do not consider
anyone from within
their existing social networks appropriate to appoint as their enduring
guardian. One indicated that this has
caused distress to them and others in
similar situations, whilst the other respondent commented:
I keep meaning to fill and file an Enduring Guardian and/or advance care
directive form, but these seem to need me to nominate someone
I know really well
and who will still have their marbles after I’ve lost mine. Despite there
being 7,000,000,000 people on
the planet, none seem to meet these criteria.
I’ve considered appointing a lawyer or an accountant, but being a person
responsible
seems not to be something they relish doing, and even if they did
it, it is the sort of task for which they’d expect fees that’d
me destitute... I can’t think of anyone more appropriate.
4.3.34 Appointing an enduring guardian is one of the ways that a person can
exercise control and choice in determining their potential
representative, if the need were to arise. It can be part of advance care
planning, a process that the Convention Committee
endorses on the basis that it
supports a person to communicate their will and
preference.
4.3.35 The creation of an instrument requires the appointment of an enduring
guardian. This is unlike an advance care directive (ACD),
which does not require
the appointment of a decision-maker as a pre-condition to completing the
document. Effectively rendering a
person unable to make an instrument if they
have no one within their network from which to draw a suitable or available
guardian whom they would want to act in that role creates a barrier to
those individuals exercising their will and preference. They
are then limited to
making an ACD as their means by which they can communicate and express their
will and preference. Some individuals
may prefer the alternative of an
instrument which allows them to also nominate a person who can advocate on their
behalf to ensure
that their wishes and views are upheld.
4.3.36 Enabling a person to appoint the Public Guardian as their enduring
guardian enables the donor to avoid the otherwise default
statutory provisions
that could result in their spouse, child, or other close friend or family member
from acting as their ‘person
responsible,’ if it would be
inconsistent with their will and preference. As explained in Part 13, an
individual’s ‘person
responsible’ has power to make medical
treatment decisions if the patient is unable to give or communicate their own
to that treatment. The current definition of ‘person
responsible’ does not require assessment of the suitability of the
with the only pre-requisite being the nature of the relationship — for
example, as the patient’s spouse or child.
Recommendation 14.5 proposes
that this test be revised, to require an assessment of whether the person is
willing and able to act
in the role (implicitly requiring consideration of their
suitability). Nevertheless, the person’s suitability would be assessed
the time, by others on a patient’s behalf, typically the treating health
professional seeking substitute consent to treatment.
Suitability is not a
matter that the individual would determine themselves. It is
person’s guardian be their ‘person responsible’ if the
guardian has been granted specific powers in relation
to health care matters.
Permitting appointment of the Public Guardian as a person’s enduring
guardian enables a person to plan
and document wishes to circumvent operation of
the default ‘person responsible’ scheme.
4.3.37 The present situation results in some individuals having limited
options available to plan for future decision-making impairments.
If a person
without an enduring guardian becomes unable to make their own personal
decisions, this may require an application to
the Board. The Board must then
determine, based on the information available at the time, the
individual’s will and preference
and who they may want to act on their
behalf. Applications to the Board involve time, often in urgent and/or stressful
circumstances.
This might not be in the best interests of the person when
compared to the alternative of the person having planned for and documented
their will and preferences whilst they had the ability to do so. At a practical
level, the more individuals who appoint an enduring
guardian, the lesser
workload for the Board who may otherwise be called upon to consider the
appointment of a guardian for a person
if the need arises.
4.3.38 In contrast, a person may appoint the Public Trustee as their attorney
for financial matters. This allows individuals who are
socially isolated to
appoint the Public Trustee rather than requiring the Board’s appointment
of an administrator. The Board
commented that, for the sake of consistency, it
would seem appropriate to enable a person to appoint the Public Guardian as an
4.3.39 One assertion put forward to justify a different approach is that the
Public Trustee acting as an attorney does not require
as close a relationship to
the represented person as is desirable for guardians. The Institute does not
accept that this is necessarily
correct. Decisions about a represented
person’s money should involve consideration of the represented
person’s individual
circumstances and wishes. As recommended in Part 3, it
is the person’s will and preferences that should have primacy when making
decisions about the person’s life, consistent with the Convention. For one
individual, it might be important to them that money
is saved and spent
conservatively to provide for a ‘buffer’ or contingency for future
unknowns. For another individual,
it might be important to them that money is
spent on their lifestyle or leisure activities in priority to saving. There are
many situations where the decisions of an attorney and enduring guardian
overlap or interact.
4.3.40 Accepting that the presence of an existing relationship is important;
the reality is that some people may not have individuals
from within existing
social networks willing or able to act as their enduring guardian. There may,
therefore, be no-one more suitable
than the Public Guardian to act in the role.
The Act already contemplates that there may be some individuals for whom there
one within their personal relationships suitable to act in the role. That
is one of the rationales for the role of the Public Guardian,
to provide a
decision-maker of last resort for those who do not have anyone else able to make
decisions about personal matters.
4.3.41 Appointment of the Public Guardian as enduring guardian at an early
opportunity, rather than a reactive appointment via the
Board provides an
opportunity for the Public Guardian to build a relationship with the donor. This
may assist the Public Guardian
with its potential future role and lead to better
understanding of the donor’s will and preference. It is envisaged that the
Public Guardian would be able to develop forms for donors to complete, to
communicate further information including their values,
wishes and preferences.
In supporting this reform, members of the Elder Law Committee commented that:
‘It may be more practical
to allow this appointment, but to have a system
in place where the appointor can communicate with the Public Guardian about
and how the appointment would work.’
4.3.42 The OPG commented that if the legal framework surrounding ACDs were
strengthened, this may reduce or eliminate the need for
a person to appoint a
representative by them being able to effectively make their own decisions in
advance. Whilst ACDs can play
an important role in enabling a person to convey
their will and preference and make decisions for themselves (a matter considered
in the following Part), the Institute foresees that it is likely to be difficult
for a person making an ACD to give advance consent
or make decisions about all
potential matters impacting them in the future. It may be that a representative
is still needed to consider
and make decisions consistent with a donor’s
values directive, for
4.3.43 Some people may not wish to appoint the Public Guardian as their
enduring guardian due to the absence of an existing relationship.
critical point is to facilitate individuals being able to appoint the Public
Guardian if that is their choice. It ensures
that, particularly for individuals
who are socially isolated, they have the same opportunity to plan and express
their will and preference
in who they would want to make personal decisions for
them in the future if they became unable to do so.
4.3.44 It is not expected that there would be a large group of individuals
wishing to take advantage of this reform by appointing
the Public Guardian as
their enduring guardian. It is therefore not envisaged that this reform would
result in a substantially increased
workload for the Public Guardian. The
Institute notes that the ACT model enables the Public Trustee and Guardian to
decline an appointment.
Whilst this approach is not preferred, it may provide a workable solution if
there were strong opposition to this reform, particularly
from the Public
Guardian as the key stakeholder affected by the proposal.
Recommendation 4.5
That a donor be able to appoint the Public Guardian as an enduring
Substitute appointments
4.3.45 Substitute enduring guardians may be appointed to act during the
‘absence or incapacity’ of the first appointed
Other jurisdictions
clarify that a substitute enduring guardian may act if the first appointed
enduring guardian dies or
For the avoidance of
doubt, the Institute recommends equivalent revision to the relevant section, to
confirm that a substitute enduring
guardian may act upon the death or
resignation of the enduring guardian.
Recommendation 4.6
That s 32A(2) of the Act confirm that an alternative enduring guardian has
the functions of the enduring guardian not only upon the
absence or incapacity
of the enduring guardian, but also upon the death or resignation of the enduring
4.4.1 This section reviews the formal requirements to appoint an enduring
4.4.2 An enduring guardian is appointed by instrument in writing in
accordance with a standard form contained in the Act, or a form
with similar
Execution requirements
4.4.3 The Act does not set out how an instrument can be executed by another
person on a donor’s behalf. These provisions are
included in some other
guardianship Acts.
Institute recommends that equivalent provisions be included in the Act to
confirm that a person who is physically unable to execute
an instrument can
still complete the document. This ensures that a person’s physical
condition is not a barrier to the creation
of an instrument if they otherwise
have the ability to create an instrument.
4.4.4 The Victorian Act also clarifies how an instrument may be created using
the assistance of an
interpreter.
It requires the
interpreter to certify on the document that the donor appeared to understand the
nature and effect of the document.
It is suggested that an equivalent provision
also be included in the Act, for the avoidance of doubt and to ensure that
individuals
for whom English is not their first language: 1) have the same
ability to make an instrument as others; and 2) understand the nature
of the document. This may also function as a safeguard by reducing the risk of
fraud or deception in the creation of an
instrument.
Recommendation 4.7
(1) That the Act enable a third party to execute an instrument or revocation
of instrument on behalf of the donor, at the donor’s
direction. The third
party should be an adult and not an enduring guardian or witness to the
instrument.
(2) That the Act require interpreters to certify on an instrument or
revocation of instrument that they are not aware of anything
that causes them to
believe that the donor does not understand the nature and effect of the
instrument or revocation of instrument.
Witnessing requirements
4.4.5 The Act requires two adult witnesses to be present together to witness
a donor execute an instrument.
Witnesses do not need any special qualifications or experience. The Issues
Paper commented that this is also the position for enduring
powers of attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
, and for other documents, for example
Wills and contracts of sale.
4.4.6 The ALRC has recommended that two people should need to witness an
instrument, with one being a professional ‘whose licence
to practise is
dependent upon their ongoing integrity and honesty and who is required to
regularly undertake a course of continuing
professional education that covers
the skills and expertise necessary to witness an enduring
recommended that witnesses should be required to explain key aspects of the
document to donors.
qualifications, for example be a person able to witness
affidavits, a medical
practitioner or another authorised class of
4.4.7 The Issues Paper noted that witnessing requirements must balance the
need to avoid the potential for undue influence and exploitation
with the need
to not make requirements so onerous that they deter people from completing an
instrument.
In light of the
ALRC’s recommendations and approaches in some jurisdictions, the Institute
asked whether there needs to be
any change to witnessing requirements.
Should there be any changes to the witnessing requirements for
instruments?
4.4.8 The Board and OPG endorsed reform consistent with the ALRC’s
recommendation that one witness be a professional medical
or legal witness with
ongoing and professional development requirements. They commented that this
reform acts as an appropriate safeguard.
4.4.9 Members of the Elder Law Committee did not support this view. They
commented that it could have the potential to act as a barrier
completing an instrument:
This makes sense to see that documents are properly witnessed but it can be
hard to find people and the witnesses who are ‘qualified’
not understand what they are actually witnessing. The Committee does not support
the ALRC’s recommendations noted
in 15.4.5 of the Issues paper as it may
constitute a barrier and abandonment or indefinite postponement of the
task/intention (including
due to likely associated costs).
4.4.10 Two submissions stated that doctors should not be permitted to act as
witnesses to instruments. Speak Out submitted that witnesses
should ‘need
to understand what they are doing.’
4.4.11 The ALRC’s recommendations are based on the need to ensure
adequate safeguards for those requiring decision-making support,
consistent with
the Convention. Its proposal aims to address the risk of undue influence or
fraud in the preparation of an instrument,
or donors conferring powers upon an
enduring guardian without understanding the nature and effect of the
appointment.
4.4.12 The Institute has considered the ALRC’s recommendations and
for reform to the
Act at this time. This is on the basis that:
• the Act already provides a safeguard in requiring there to be two
adult witnesses, reducing the risk that an individual might
be unduly influenced
to make or revoke an instrument;
• the Act already limits those who are eligible to witness instruments
to exclude relatives of a party to the
instrument.
This limits the
risk of collusion between an appointed enduring guardian and their family
members who may have improper motives for
the creation of the document;
• the Act already provides for the registration of instruments,
enabling the Board to oversee the preparation of instruments.
Whilst it is not
expected that it would typically enquire beyond the face of the instrument,
there may be information on the face
of the document that causes the Board to
enquire further. It might also investigate of its own motion, or require the
Public Guardian
to do so, if the donor were to register several instruments
and/or revocation of instruments in close succession;
• there are currently no equivalent requirements under the
Attorney Act
for one of the witnesses to an enduring power of attorney to
have any special qualification. Similarly, there is no special requirement
Will to have a professional witness. Both of these documents involve risk of
undue influence or fraud in their preparation,
perhaps more so than the creation
of instruments which deal with non-financial matters; and
• the Institute is unaware of any research or data that provides an
indication of the number of Tasmanian cases where fraud
or undue influence is
involved in the preparation of an instrument. It is therefore an unquantified
problem, raising the question
of the necessity for legislative reform if it may
potentially only resolve a small number of cases.
4.4.13 In the Institute’s view, it would be insufficient to merely
require that one of the witnesses to an instrument have professional
qualifications. To have maximum effect, then, consistent with the ALRC’s
recommendation, those professional witnesses should
be required to undertake a
course of continuing professional education covering the skills and expertise
needed to witness an enduring
document. In the absence of that training,
professional witnesses may not be any better placed to understand the nature and
of an instrument, the test for capacity to complete an instrument or
identify concerns about undue influence than any other member
of the community.
Professionals may not have adequate time to meet with a donor to gain any better
perception about issues of concern
than another member of the public, for
example a friend or neighbour.
4.4.14 Education and training for professionals about the preparation and
execution of instruments would require adequate resourcing.
It would need to be
decided how that cost would be funded, and who would be responsible for
monitoring the quality of training provided
or overseeing any accreditation
process. In addition to the financial cost would be the increased workload for
professionals. If
these matters were not satisfactorily addressed, then it is
foreseeable that professionals would not undergo the necessary training
become a qualified professional witness. There may then be a reduced pool of
available witnesses, which would in turn increase
the workloads of those willing
to undertake the role, as well as potentially creating a barrier to making an
instrument.
4.4.15 Primarily, the Institute does not recommend revision to the existing
witnessing requirements for instruments because of the
risk that it would act as
a barrier to individuals appointing an enduring guardian. Some respondents
commented that they consider
that the appointment of attorneys and enduring
guardians is already overly cumbersome and complicated. Empirical evidence of
existence of a problem, and that this reform would alleviate that problem,
may warrant legislative reform. Reform may also be appropriate
if requirements
Powers of Attorney Act
were revised to require one of the two
witnesses to an enduring power of attorney to have special qualifications, or
the framework
was changed to enable individuals to appoint an attorney and
enduring guardian within the one document (as discussed at [4.2]). It
of the Institute’s Terms of Reference to make recommendations about
potential reform to the
Powers of Attorney Act
in this regard as part of
this review.
Witnesses certification
4.4.16 Witnesses must certify that the donor signed freely and voluntarily in
their presence and that they appeared to understand
the effect of the
instrument.
4.4.17 The ALRC supports the Law Council of Australia’s recommendation
that, instead of witnesses certifying that the donor
signed freely and appeared
to understand, they should need to certify that they are not aware of anything
that causes them to believe
that the donor did not sign freely or did not
understand the document.
OPG’s submission addressed this issue, providing support for reform. The
Institute also agrees that this would be a useful
reform to the standard
4.4.18 In the Northern Territory, a witness must also certify that the donor
is who they purport to be.
Members of the Elder Law Committee supported this reform. The Institute agrees,
considering that this provides an appropriate safeguard
to reduce the risk of
fraud in the preparation of instruments.
Recommendation 4.8
That the standard form instrument (form 1) and revocation of instrument (form
2) require witnesses to certify that:
(a) they are not aware of anything that causes them to believe that the donor
did not sign freely or did not understand the instrument
or revocation of
instrument;
(b) the donor signed in their presence; and
(c) the donor is who they purport to be.
Ineligible witnesses
4.4.19 Witnesses must not be a party to the instrument or a relative of a
The Act does not
define what ‘relative of a party’ means. The
Powers of Attorney
provides that a ‘close relative of a party’ cannot witness
an enduring power of
It defines a
‘close relative of a party’ as:
• a spouse;
• sibling (including step-siblings);
• child (including step-children);
• parents-in-law;
• grandparent; and
• aunt or uncle.
4.4.20 Unlike the standard form enduring power of
the standard form
instrument does not confirm that witnesses may not be a party to the document,
or a relative of a party. Having
this information on the face of a document
enables parties to understand the technical requirements of the Act and may
reduce instances
where ineligible witnesses inadvertently breach this
requirement. It makes sense to provide consistency.
4.4.21 The OPG’s submission supported revision to the standard form
instrument to indicate that witnesses may not be a party
to the document or a
relative of a party. It, along with members of the Elder Law Committee, also
supported inclusion of a definition
of the phrase ‘relative of a
party’ within the Act consistent with the
Powers of Attorney
. The Board also supported consistency between the Act and
of Attorney Act
. The Institute supports these views.
4.4.22 Members of the Elder Law Committee commented that there ought to be an
avenue for redress where an ineligible person acts as
a witness. It commented:
There needs to be a practical rectification or confirmation method where
ineligible people have witnessed an instrument. These documents
can be prepared
by people who have capacity at the time of preparation but if the issue with the
witness is discovered at a later
time this may result in a person’s wishes
not being followed.
This matter is considered further at [4.4.40] below.
4.4.23 The Act does not create penalties for witnesses who fail to comply
with witnessing requirements. The
Powers of Attorney Act
makes it an
offence for an attorney to be a witness or for the witness to know that they are
a ‘close relative of a
A fine may be
imposed in cases of a breach. The Institute asked whether there ought to be
consistent provisions in the Act.
Should there be a penalty for a person who acts as a witness when they are
ineligible?
4.4.24 Three respondents addressed this question, with one supporting reform.
The OPG commented:
Our general view is that penalties are not helpful to the process and are
resource-intensive to instigate, and resources are better
directed to community
education around the issue of enduring guardianship.
The provisions in the Act to review and revoke an appointment with the option
of addressing who is appointed as guardian provides
a measure of redress.
4.4.25 Members of the Elder Law Committee commented ‘[i]f this were to
occur there would need to be substantial education on
this.’ On the other
hand, another respondent commented ‘[i]t makes little sense to define a
restriction for which there
is no penalty.’
4.4.26 Whilst the Institute is mindful that the Act not place an
over-reliance on penalties, it considers it appropriate that there
discretionary penalties available for those who witness an instrument knowing
that they are ineligible to do so. The rationale
is that, presently, the only
consequence when individuals witness an instrument when they are ineligible to
do so is the revocation
of the instrument. This effectively penalises the donor
without providing any direct consequences for the witness. In certain
circumstances
it may be appropriate to impose a penalty for the breach. It is
not expected that this would be appropriate in all circumstances,
when a witness was ignorant of the law or were themselves unduly influenced to
act as a witness. The merits of this first
argument would, however, be reduced
if Recommendation 4.9(3) were enacted. That recommendation proposes that the
standard form instrument
outline and explain witness eligibility
requirements.
4.4.27 It is appropriate to have equivalent consequences for non-compliance
with witnessing requirements under the Act as already
exist under the
of Attorney Act
Recommendation 4.9
(1) That ss 32(2)(c) and 33(2)(b) of the Act be revised to provide that a
party and ‘close relative of a party’ are ineligible
to act as a
witness to an instrument or revocation of instrument.
(2) That the phrase ‘close relative’ be defined consistently with
Powers of Attorney Act
(3) That witnesses to instruments and revocations of instruments be required
to declare that they are not a party to the instrument
or a close relative of a
party and that the term ‘close relative’ be explained on the
standard form instrument (form
1) and revocation of instrument (form 2).
(4) That the Act provide an equivalent fine to that contained in
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(Tas) for a person who is a party to an
instrument or who knows he or she is a close relative of a party to an
instrument acting
as a witness to the signature of the donor, or initialling by
the donor of an alteration of an instrument.
(5) That any alteration of an instrument need to be initialled by the donor
and the enduring guardian, with the donor’s initialling
of the alteration
to be witnessed by two adult witnesses who are not a party to the instrument or
close relative of a party, with
those witnesses able to be the same, or
different, to the witnesses to the instrument.
Acceptance of the role
4.4.28 An enduring guardian must sign an instrument to accept their
appointment.
Their signature
does not need to be witnessed.
4.4.29 When accepting an appointment, the enduring guardian undertakes to
exercise their powers honestly and in accordance with the
In Victoria,
decision-makers must also declare that:
• they are eligible to act;
• they understand their obligations;
• they understand the consequences of failing to comply with their
obligations;
• they undertake to act in accordance with the donor’s known
preferences and values;
• they undertake to promote the personal and social wellbeing of the
• they undertake that they have read and understood any advance care
directive of the donor.
4.4.30 It was asked whether reform should be made to require enduring
guardians to certify any particular matters upon their appointment.
When accepting the role, should an enduring guardian have to undertake to do
anything, and if so,
4.4.31 The OPG supported reform requiring enduring guardians to certify
matters as required in Victoria. Members of the Elder Law
Committee also
supported this reform in principle, but expressed the view that education would
need to be available for enduring
guardians if this reform were made. Social
Work Services Royal Hobart Hospital (RHH) also supported this reform, commenting
the Board’s ‘Handbook for Enduring Guardians’ could be
supplied to enduring
PCT also supported enduring guardians educating themselves about what their role
might entail. Another submission agreed that an
enduring guardian should need to
‘agree to do the chores defined in the rest of the document.’
4.4.32 The Issues Paper also asked whether enduring guardians should need to
certify any particular level of knowledge or understanding
when accepting the
Should enduring guardians have to confirm that they have a certain level of
knowledge and understanding of the document or other
circumstances?
4.4.33 In response to this question, the OPG stated that:
Our observations are that enduring guardians often appear to lack clear
understanding of when and how the instrument should be enacted
undertaking that their obligations are understood would assist. The OPG also
considers that it is crucial that any appointed
guardian has read and understood
any advance care directive the donor has made, and must make decisions
consistent with any advance
care directive. Any changes to the instruments to
address these concerns would be welcome.
4.4.34 Members of the Elder Law Committee observed that education would need
to be available for enduring guardians if this reform
was enacted. A third
submission did not support any reform.
4.4.35 It is proposed that the Act require enduring guardians to declare
certain matters and undertake to do certain things when accepting
the role. This
assists to educate enduring guardians about their role and duties and provides
an opportunity for them to reflect
and ask questions about the role. It enables
an enduring guardian to ensure that they have read any ACD of the donor which
relevant to the scope and exercise of their authority. It signifies to an
enduring guardian the importance of their role and promotes
enduring guardians
acting in accordance with their duties under the Act. This reform would
strengthen the existing requirements which
provide that, when accepting an
appointment, an enduring guardian must undertake to exercise their powers
honestly and in accordance
Recommendation 4.10
That, when signing an instrument to accept the role of enduring guardian, an
enduring guardian be required to declare that they:
• are eligible to act;
• understand their obligations;
• understand the consequences of failing to comply with their
obligations;
• undertake to act in accordance with the Act; and
• have read and understood any advance care directive of the donor.
Failure to comply with formal requirements
4.4.36 The Board may declare an instrument invalid if satisfied that it is
contrary to the Act.
Powers of Attorney Act
includes detailed provisions dealing
with the registration of enduring powers of
This includes the
ability for the Recorder of Titles to refuse to register an enduring power of
attorney if it does not comply with
requirements.
At a practical
level, the Board advises that it is its usual practice to do
but suggests that its
power ought to be confirmed. This would provide a pragmatic solution to ensure
that any errors or omissions
in an instrument are rectified at an early
4.4.38 The Board does not have power to declare an instrument valid despite
it not complying with formal requirements. As noted above,
members of the Elder
Law Committee submitted that:
There needs to be a practical rectification or confirmation method where
ineligible people have witnessed an instrument. These documents
can be prepared
by people who have capacity at the time of preparation but if the issue with the
witness is discovered at a later
time this may result in a person’s wishes
not being followed.
4.4.39 In Victoria, VCAT has the power to declare an appointment of a medical
treatment decision-maker valid despite the appointment
not complying with formal
requirements. The test is whether VCAT is satisfied that the person’s
intention to appoint a decision-maker
is sufficiently
A more detailed
provision is included in Victoria’s
Powers of Attorney Act
which provides that, to declare a power of attorney valid despite
non-compliance with formal requirements, VCAT must be satisfied
• the principal and attorney intended the document to be an enduring
power of attorney;
• at the time the document was signed, the principal had decision
making capacity in relation to the making of the enduring
power of attorney;
• the principal:
o signed the document freely and voluntarily; or
o freely and voluntarily directed the person who signed the document for the
principal to do so,
and was present when the person signed the
In Tasmania, the
Wills Act 2008
(Tas) also enables the Supreme Court
to declare a Will valid despite non-compliance with the formal requirements for
the execution
of a Will imposed under that
4.4.40 The Institute concurs with members of the Elder Law Committee that it
is appropriate to give flexibility to enable the Board
to declare an instrument
valid despite non-compliance with the formal requirements of the Act. This
enables the Board to uphold the
donor’s will and preferences where it is
clear they intended the appointment to be effective. Whilst presently it may
this by itself appointing the person, a preferred alternative is to
enable the Board to declare the donor’s appointment of
their enduring
guardian valid if satisfied that they intended the appointment to be valid.
Recommendation 4.11
(1) That comparative powers be given to the Registrar of the Board in
relation to the registration of instruments as are provided
to the Recorder of
Titles under
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(Tas), with the
exception that the Registrar not be permitted to retain any portion of the
registration fee upon refusing to register
an instrument.
(2) That the Board be able to declare an instrument valid despite it not
complying with the formal requirements of the Act.
and limits on the powers of enduring guardians
4.5.1 A donor may limit an enduring guardian’s powers or make their
appointment subject to
conditions.
Subject to any
conditions or limitations, an enduring guardian has the same powers and duties
as a full Board-appointed
Those powers and
duties are considered in Part 9.
4.5.2 An instrument can include directions to an enduring guardian about how
they must act. The enduring guardian must act in accordance
directions, unless the Board directs
Recommendation
11.2 outlines a proposed decision-making process to be followed when making
decisions for a represented person. This
process confirms that it is the will
and preferences of the person that are paramount. It provides that
representatives may only
depart from a represented person’s will and
preference in exceptional circumstances, consistent with the ALRC’s
Decision-Making
Principles.
of instruments
4.6.1 The following section considers reform to those parts of the Act that
deal with termination of the powers of an enduring guardian.
Revocation by a donor
4.6.2 A donor may revoke an instrument using a standard
The donor’s
execution of a Revocation of Instrument must be witnessed in the same way as an
instrument. It must be
registered.
A registration
fee is payable, with the current fee being $49.60. The Act does not state that a
‘form to similar effect’
to the prescribed form can be
The Act also does not
state that registration of a later instrument revokes an earlier
instrument.
4.6.3 To provide consistency with other parts of the Act that enable a donor
to make an instrument in a form ‘to similar effect’
to the standard
form, it is recommended that the wording of s 32(2)(a) be revised to
confirm that a donor may revoke an instrument
using the standard form, or a form
to similar effect. This provides flexibility and avoids argument that a
revocation is ineffective
if there is not strict compliance with the standard
form revocation. It would also enable a donor to revoke an instrument as part
creating a new instrument, rather than the revocation having to be completed in
a separate document.
Powers of Attorney Act
enables a donor to revoke their
enduring power of attorney by giving notice to the appointed
attorney(s).
The Institute
considers that, for consistency and to provide flexibility and reduce formality,
a donor also be able to revoke an
instrument by giving notice to the appointed
enduring guardians.
4.6.5 In Tasmania, a donor is not required to advise an enduring guardian
that their appointment has been revoked, unlike the position
in Victoria, New
South Wales and Queensland.
There are similar provisions in the
Powers of Attorney Act
donors of an enduring power of attorney to give notice to their former attorneys
advising that their appointment has been
revoked, for example, upon
4.6.6 Short of searching the register of instruments, there is no clear
process for an enduring guardian to learn that their appointment
revoked. This creates the risk of a former enduring guardian inadvertently
carrying out the functions of an enduring guardian,
unaware that their
appointment has been revoked. Notice also provides a former enduring guardian
opportunity to make inquiries if
there are concerns about the donor’s
ability to revoke the appointment, or potential undue influence. It is
preferable that
these issues are identified at an early stage, rather than some
time later when a former enduring guardian learns of his or her removal.
4.6.7 It is therefore proposed that the Act be revised to require donors to
take reasonable steps to advise their former enduring
guardians of the
revocation of their appointment. The OPG endorsed this reform, as did a
participant at a consultation meeting facilitated
by Carers Tasmania, who
commented that this approach would serve as a safeguard against abuse.
Recommendation 4.12
(1) That a donor be able to revoke an instrument using a form ‘to
similar effect’ to the standard form revocation of instrument
included in the Act.
(2) That an equivalent provision to
Powers of Attorney
(Tas) be included in the Act, enabling a donor to revoke an
instrument by giving notice to the enduring guardian(s).
(3) That donors be required to take reasonable steps to give notice to their
enduring guardian(s) of the revocation of their appointment.
Failure to give
notice should not invalidate the revocation.
Deemed revocation in certain circumstances
4.6.8 There are no circumstances where an instrument is automatically
revoked. The
Powers of Attorney Act
provides that an enduring power of
attorney is revoked:
• if the donor
• if the donor and the attorney cease to be married, or parties to a
registered personal relationship under the
Relationships
• upon an attorney being subject to a mental incapacity or becoming
bankrupt or insolvent.
4.6.9 In New South Wales and Queensland, a donor’s later marriage to
someone other than the appointed enduring guardian automatically
revokes the
appointment of an enduring guardian, although the NSWLRC has recently
recommended that this be
4.6.10 The Issues Paper sought feedback about whether there should be
automatic revocation of instruments upon the happening of certain
events. This
matter is also considered separately in Part 12 in relation to the revocation of
the appointment of Board-appointed
representatives.
Should the appointment of an enduring guardian be automatically revoked in
certain circumstances? If so,
4.6.11 Responses stated that it may be appropriate to provide for automatic
revocation of an instrument:
• at the request of the donor (if they are assessed as having
• upon the death of the
• upon the death of the enduring guardian (in the case of a single
appointment of an enduring
• upon the enduring guardian having decision-making
incapacity;
• where there is evidence of a conflict of
• where the enduring guardian no longer wishes to continue with the
role due to inability or
unwillingness;
• where the appointed person cannot be contacted and therefore cannot
fulfil the role;
• where there is significant concern or harm to the represented person
or sufficient evidence that the appointed person is not
acting in their best
• where there has been a breach of the enduring guardian’s
The OPG supported consistency with the
Powers of Attorney Act
basis that it may minimise confusion.
4.6.12 The Institute agrees that, to provide consistency with the
of Attorney Act
, the Act should confirm that an instrument is revoked upon
the death of the donor.
4.6.13 It is also proposed that the Act provide that the appointment of an
enduring guardian be suspended if the enduring guardian
does not have
decision-making ability to act as the enduring guardian. By way of
clarification, it is only the appointment of that
enduring guardian that should
be suspended. There may be substitute appointments made in an instrument or
directions or statements
of a donor’s wishes about personal and medical
decisions. The incapacity of an enduring guardian is unrelated to these other
parts of the document and ought not have the effect of revoking it in its
4.6.14 The appointment of an enduring guardian should only be suspended
because of an enduring guardian’s incapacity. This enables
the powers of
an enduring guardian to be restored if the enduring guardian regains
decision-making ability. By way of example, if
an enduring guardian has a stroke
rendering them unable to act, but their health improves, and they become able to
act in the role
again, then their suspension of powers would be removed.
Temporary inability to act in the role should not permanently terminate
appointment.
4.6.15 Circumstances where enduring guardians no longer wish to continue in
the role are considered later in this Part. Part 12 considers
revocation of the
appointment of an enduring guardian in other circumstances as part of a broader
discussion about safeguards for
representative decision-making. It is considered
that these remaining events should not result in the automatic revocation of an
instrument, but that the Board have power to make orders to revoke or amend an
instrument in these circumstances.
Recommendation 4.13
(1) That the Act confirm that an instrument is revoked on the death of the
(2) That the Act provide that the authority of an enduring guardian is
suspended at any time that the enduring guardian does not have
decision-making
ability to act as the enduring guardian.
Change to the donor and enduring guardian’s relationship
4.6.16 No submissions received supported the automatic revocation of an
instrument upon the ending of the relationship between the
donor and the
enduring guardian. In addressing this issue, the Board commented that it
‘may be deemed inflexible in allowing
for the wishes of the donor to be
considered.’
4.6.17 The OPG made similar observations:
There are examples of where individuals have been married and are
subsequently separated or divorced, but are able to maintain caring
supportive connections in the long term. Therefore, ceasing to be married or in
a registered personal relationship should not
necessarily be grounds for
automatic revocation of enduring guardianship... our view is that the Board
should maintain discretion
to revoke or amend instruments.
4.6.18 The Institute agrees that there should not be situations where the
appointment of an enduring guardian is automatically revoked
upon the ending of
a relationship of marriage or registered personal relationship.
Negating an automatic revocation
4.6.19 Members of the Elder Law Committee submitted that, if there were to be
automatic revocation of an instrument upon the ending
of a relationship, then it
should be possible for a donor to negate this. The Institute agrees, noting that
Wills Act 2008
(Tas) enables a testator to negate the automatic
revocation of a Will upon the marriage or divorce of the
It is observed that
there is no equivalent provision in the
Powers of Attorney
This is included in
Queensland and the ACT.
present drafting of the
Powers of Attorney Act
also does not contemplate
a partial revocation of an appointment of a former spouse as attorney, but
retaining the appointment of
any other attorney. This situation is also
contemplated under the
Wills Act 2008
Institute’s Terms of Reference require review of the Act, noting the
submissions received, the Institute considers
that it is appropriate to propose
that these revisions be made to the
Powers of Attorney Act
Recommendation 4.14
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(Tas) remains,
it be revised to:
(a) enable a donor to negate the automatic revocation of their enduring power
of attorney upon the ending of their marriage or registered
relationship in their enduring power of attorney; and
(b) provide that only the appointment of the attorney who was party to a
marriage or registered personal relationship with the donor
is revoked upon the
ending of their marriage or personal relationship without revoking the entire
document, to the extent that it
appoints a substitute or joint attorney (where
their appointment was expressed to be joint and several).
Resignation of the enduring
4.6.20 This Part reviews the ways in which an enduring guardian may resign
from the role.
Resignation before the enduring guardian’s powers become
4.6.21 The Act does not presently provide any specific method for an enduring
guardian to resign prior to their appointment becoming
operative. In practice,
an enduring guardian can advise the donor that they no longer accept the role,
with the donor then able to
appoint a new enduring guardian if they wish to do
4.6.22 In Victoria, an enduring guardian can resign by completing a standard
They must take
reasonable steps to notify the donor and any other enduring guardian that they
have resigned.
The Institute
sought to ascertain whether there was support for a similar reform to the
Should an enduring guardian be able to resign by completing and registering a
standard form?
4.6.23 This reform was endorsed by members of the Elder Law Committee, Social
Work Services RHH, and the
with the latter
commenting that:
An enduring guardian should be able to resign by completing and registering a
standard form. Many factors influence whether a guardian
considers they are able
to continue to fulfil the role such as the relationship with the donor, the
physical or mental health of
the guardian and/or their personal circumstances.
There should be a formal requirement that the donor and any other guardian is
of the resignation.
4.6.24 The Board also highlighted the importance of ensuring that a donor has
notice of the enduring guardian’s resignation
to ensure that they have the
option of making a new appointment:
If notification of the donor is not required, this essentially denies the
donor their right to appoint another person to be their
enduring guardian, as
they would assume their enduring guardian instrument can become operative if and
when they lose capacity.
4.6.25 Consistent with responses received, the Institute considers it
beneficial to enable an enduring guardian to resign by completing
registering a standard form. This would assist where an enduring guardian no
longer has a relationship with the donor. It also
enables the enduring guardian
to publicly record their resignation which would assist third parties, notably
health professionals
or service providers, to quickly obtain accurate details
enduring guardian. The Act already provides a role for substitute enduring
guardians to act if the first appointed enduring guardian
is unable to do
This reform would enable
that circumstance to be established quickly.
4.6.26 The Institute agrees with respondents that it would be unsatisfactory
to permit an enduring guardian to resign by simply lodging
a form with the Board
with nothing further. It is important that the enduring guardian be required to
take reasonable steps to advise
the donor that they no longer wish to accept the
role. This is to ensure that the donor can make a new instrument and appoint a
enduring guardian. A useful example of this approach is included in the
Victorian Act.
Recommendation 4.15
That an enduring guardian be able to resign by completing and registering a
standard form to be included in the Act, or by using a
form to similar effect.
The enduring guardian should then be required to take reasonable steps to advise
the donor and any other
appointed enduring guardian of that resignation.
Resignation after the enduring guardian’s powers become
4.6.27 If an enduring guardian wishes to resign after their appointment has
become operative, and there is no substitute enduring
guardian nominated, then
an application needs to be made to the
When an attorney
wishes to retire, an application to the Board does not necessarily need to be
Powers of Attorney Act
solely appointed
attorney to appoint the Public Trustee to act in their place without the
Board’s approval.
Social Work Services RHH noted this position under the
Powers of Attorney
and submitted that the Act should be revised to enable a retiring sole
enduring guardian to appoint the Public Guardian in their
4.6.28 A similar issue is also discussed in Part 8 in relation to the
automatic appointment of the Public Guardian or Public Trustee
as guardian or
administrator upon the death of a solely appointed
That part concludes
that, based on submissions received, it is more appropriate that this
circumstance result in a fresh assessment
by the Board to determine who might be
appropriate to act in substitution. It is noted that the Act already permits the
appoint a substitute enduring guardian via its power to amend an
instrument under s 34. This approach enables the Board to consider
suitability of other applicants so that the Public Guardian is a guardian of
last resort, consistent with stakeholder feedback.
This approach promotes
outcomes being consistent with a donor’s will and preferences.
Revocation by the Board
4.6.29 The Board may also revoke instruments in certain circumstances. This
matter is discussed in Part 12.
Registration
of instruments
4.7.1 To be effective, an enduring guardian must be registered with the Board
which maintains the register of
instruments.
The Recorder of
Titles maintains a separate register for enduring powers of attorney. The
Regulations provide for a fee for the registration
of an instrument of $69.75
and $49.60 for the revocation of an
instrument.
provide a source of revenue for the Board. In 2016–17, the Board received
income of $172,262.00 from the registration
of instruments and revocations of
instruments.
4.7.2 The Board may waive the registration fee payable on an
instrument.
The Board’s
website advises of the ability to seek a waiver of
There is a form for
applicants to complete and submit to seek a
The cover sheet
required to be submitted when lodging an instrument or revocation for
registration refers to the fact that a waiver
of fees form may be
In 2016–17,
the Board waived the registration fee on 12 occasions, which was less than one
per cent of the instruments registered
in the reporting
4.7.3 The Institute is concerned that the payment of a registration fee may
act as a deterrent to people completing instruments. This
is particularly so as
a registration fee is also imposed for the registration of an enduring power of
attorney, a document commonly
completed at the same time as an instrument. It
was commented in the Issues Paper that it was Parliament’s intention when
the Act that ‘people should be encouraged to make their own
decisions about who should be their guardian should they subsequently
disability which requires a
4.7.4 Whilst imposing a registration fee is consistent to the provisions of
Powers of Attorney Act
, which provides for a registration fee on the
registration of an enduring power of attorney, the nature of the documents are
given that an instrument relates to personal matters, whilst powers of
attorney apply to financial transactions.
4.7.5 The Institute notes that the VLRC recommended that there not be a
registration fee to register an instrument, but that a fee
could be imposed
where more than one document was registered in the calendar
4.7.6 Considering these matters, the Institute asked whether the registration
fee should be removed.
Should a fee be payable for the registration of an instrument/revocation of
an instrument?
4.7.7 There was a split in views about whether there should be a fee for the
registration of an
instrument.
4.7.8 The OPG supported continuation of the payment of a registration fee. It
submitted that:
this office is supportive of consistency between the current Act and the
Powers of Attorney Act
. There is a current provision for application for the
waiver of fees for registration of enduring guardianships in cases of financial
hardship and this should be continued. A registration fee may be preferable to a
also assist with resourcing an
upgrade of and accessibility to the Enduring Guardianship Register. There are
currently significant
issues with lack of accessibility to the register out of
business hours.
4.7.9 Other respondents supported continuation of the payment of a fee on the
basis that it may prevent individuals from being unduly
influenced to complete
and register multiple instruments. A ‘minimal’ fee was considered
acceptable. It was also reinforced
that the opportunity to apply for a waiver of
the fee payable should remain.
4.7.10 Several respondents considered that the registration fee provides a
barrier to the completion of instruments. Members of the
Elder Law Committee
commented that ‘[t]he legal profession has experience of clients who have
not proceeded because of the
filing fee.’ Similar observations were made
by Social Work Services RHH, and another
with experience
assisting patients with advance care planning. Members of the Elder Law
Committee commented, however, that:
It is more important that there be no impediment to a revocation of an
instrument as if all that is stopping it is the fee may result
in a person
acting who should not be.
4.7.11 The Institute commends the State Government on having a
long-established system providing for the registration of instruments.
Registration of enduring instruments is not mandated across the country, but has
the strong support of law reform
commissions.
4.7.12 The Institute considers that it is critical that the appointment of an
enduring guardian be accessible to all and that cost
not create a barrier. The
Institute notes feedback from respondents that the registration fee can prevent
individuals from completing
an instrument. It therefore recommends that there
not be a registration fee imposed on the registration of an instrument. To
that this provision is not misused, or instruments made and revoked
flippantly, it is suggested, adopting the VLRC’s proposal,
that the Board
have discretion to impose a registration fee if more than one instrument is
registered in any calendar year.
4.7.13 If this recommendation is not accepted, then the Institute makes the
following recommendations:
• that the registration fee for the revocation of an instrument be
removed; and
• that the revenue received from registration fees be used to develop
the register’s functionality, including an online
issue is considered further in the following paragraph.
Recommendation 4.16
(1) That there not be a registration fee payable on the registration of an
instrument, but that the Registrar have discretion to impose
a registration fee
where more than one instrument is registered for a person in a calendar
(2) That there not be a fee for the registration of a revocation of
instrument.
4.7.14 The public may search the register of
instruments.
A search fee is
included in the Regulations.
There is no online or electronic search function, resulting in people
being unable to search the register outside of business hours.
There is currently no capacity for an online or electronic search of the
register outside business hours which means that authority
cannot be sought
often when it is most critically needed, and thus the donor’s wishes may
not be upheld. It is the understanding
of the OPG that the register currently
takes the form of an Excel spreadsheet held at the office of the Board.
4.7.15 An online search function is available via the Tasmanian Government
Land Information System Tasmania (LIST) to search for an
enduring power of
It is observed that
the personal nature of instruments can result in a greater need to search the
register of instruments outside
business hours than exists for enduring powers
of attorney which are used for financial transactions commonly occurring during
4.7.16 It is critical to the success of the system that those with a
legitimate interest can quickly and easily search the register
to establish
whether someone has an instrument and, if so, obtain a copy. The OPG
Operationally, the Board should be resourced to upgrade the storage mechanism
and assisted to make the register accessible outside
of business hours —
especially to medical personnel.
4.7.17 Members of the Elder Law Committee also expressed concerns about the
present difficulty to search for an instrument:
Having a mandatory online accessible register and search facility (also
fee-free) for the appointment instruments would make it easier
for others to
find out and verify who is appointed when these are needed.
In an emergency situation a person appointed as a guardian may not have the
ability to get a copy of the document when they need to
use it. E.g. if the
person creating the document is taken to hospital and they don’t appoint a
spouse, it can be difficult
for the person who is appointed to get others
(including the hospital/medical profession) to revert to them and not to revert
the spouse. The appointed person may have the document filed at home and not
have the time or the ability to get the appointment
document when treatment
decisions need to be made.
4.7.18 Another submission also raised the issue of searching the register of
instruments.
4.7.19 The Institute agrees with these remarks. It compromises the
effectiveness of the system if a person appoints an enduring guardian,
the document, but then those who require access to it are unable to search the
register and obtain a copy outside of business
hours. It is unsatisfactory to
consider that there may be circumstances where a person’s documented will
and preference is
not given effect due to the absence of an accessible register
with a user-friendly search functionality. Improvements in this area
ought to be
a priority.
4.7.20 The OPG also noted:
In terms of access to enduring documents, there is the potential for public
confusion. Powers of Attorney are registered with the
Lands Titles Office under
DPIPWE (not necessarily a logical source point). ACDs may be optionally lodged
with major hospitals, and
enduring guardianships are registered with the Board.
There is a logical argument for a single repository for these registers,
24/7 access. In Victoria, the Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages
is under consideration, and this may also be appropriate in
4.7.21 The Institute acknowledges these remarks and agrees that any
improvements that assist end-users to have easy access to a donor’s
enduring documents would be welcomed.
Recommendation 4.17
(1) That the Board be properly resourced to develop an online search function
to search the register of instruments.
(2) That there be no search fee payable to search the register of
instruments.
(3) That consideration be given to establishing a single repository for the
registration of enduring powers of attorney, instruments
and advance care
directives.
4.8.1 The Institute enquired whether there were additional matters that ought
to be considered in relation to the appointment of enduring
How else could the Act better safeguard the granting of authority to an
enduring guardian?
4.8.2 Responses to this question have either been dealt with elsewhere in
this Part, or within other Parts of this Report, including
Parts 9 (the powers
of guardians) and Part 12 (safeguards for representative decision-making). Two
matters that are not addressed
elsewhere were raised by Social Work Services
• that instruments not be able to be registered when there is a current
emergency order; and
• that there should be some provision to alert the Board where an
enduring guardian loses capacity: ‘Example: A Geriatrician
deems Mr Smith
can’t make informed decisions re: accommodation or health care for himself
but family advise you he is the Enduring
Guardian for his wife.’
Current guardianship order and subsequent
registration of instrument
4.8.3 The first matter raised by Social Work Services RHH is the lack of
clarity about the effect of an instrument that is registered
at a time when the
donor is already the subject of a guardianship order. This issue was also raised
in the OPG and the Board’s
submissions in addressing other questions in
the Issues Paper. The Board explained:
In practice the Board has had situations where it has made an emergency
guardianship order and then a number of days later receives
an enduring guardian
instrument to register which conforms with section 32(2) of the Act and which
the Board is required to register.
The Act does not set out whether the
emergency order or the enduring guardian instrument takes priority.
4.8.4 In New South Wales, for example, legislation provides that ‘[i]f
a person who is the subject of a guardianship order purports
to appoint an
enduring guardian, the purported appointment is of no
4.8.5 It is appreciated that this may create difficulties in practice,
particularly where the result is potentially concurrent, conflicting
between representatives. Complexity might arise particularly because a
‘guardian’ becomes the represented person’s
responsible’ with priority to consent to medical
recommendations made in this Report may alleviate this issue, including
proposals to enable the Board to refuse to register
instrument,
and giving the
Board power to review an instrument of its own
These approaches
enable the Board to consider the issues and determine how the situation ought to
be resolved.
4.8.6 Emergency orders do not require a finding that the represented person
does not have the ability to make decisions, only that
there is reasonable
ground for believing that the person may require a guardianship
Precluding a person
from creating an instrument where there has not been an investigation or enquiry
into the person’s ability
to make an instrument and no finding of fact
that they do not have decision-making ability denies them their right to appoint
own decision-maker. For these reasons, it is not proposed that there be
legislative reform to preclude a represented person the subject
of an emergency
order from registering an instrument. It is suggested, however, that the Act
confirm that a Board appointed guardian
takes priority over an enduring guardian
to the extent of any duplicated powers.
Recommendation 4.18
That the Act state that the authority of a Board-appointed guardian takes
priority over the authority of an enduring guardian to the
extent that the same
functions are conferred upon both.
Notification of guardians losing
decision-making ability
4.8.7 The second matter raised related to notification of an enduring
guardian losing decision-making ability. In regard to this point,
the Institute
agrees that it could be useful for there to be a mechanism facilitating notice
to the Board upon an enduring guardian
being declared unable to make their own
personal decisions. Notification to the Board of the change of circumstances
gives the Board
the opportunity to review the situation and make alternative
arrangements if required.
4.8.8 It is noted that the Act already enables a person to apply to the Board
for the review of an instrument in these circumstances,
allowing the Board to
amend an instrument if the enduring guardian is incapable. It is problematic to
mandate compulsory reporting
requirements in these circumstances, particularly
where a treating doctor may be unaware that their patient has been appointed as
someone’s enduring guardian. Issues of privacy also need to be considered.
It is suggested that this relates to matters of
policy and procedure and
education rather than a matter for legislative reform.
Advance Care Directives
Introduction
5.1.1 An advance care directive (ACD) is a
that contains a
person’s wishes and/or directions about future medical care and treatment.
Among other names, they are sometimes
also called a ‘Living Will’,
‘advance heath directive’ or an ‘advance statement.’
They can be
prescriptive, by giving directions about future consent or
non-consent to treatment, or they can be values based, by providing guidance
decision-makers about the views and values important to the person which should
be considered when making decisions.
5.1.2 ACDs have effect at common law. They do not have legislative
recognition in Tasmania as a distinct document. The Act enables
an adult to give
directions about future medical treatment in an
instrument.
Donors often
include directions or guidance to an enduring guardian about treatment in an
instrument.
5.1.3 The Terms of Reference do not specifically ask the Institute to address
the legislative framework surrounding ACDs in Tasmania.
Nevertheless, as noted
in the previous Part, the Institute considers it both appropriate and necessary
to do so as part of this review.
Firstly, ACDs are a mechanism to communicate a
person’s will and preference. They are therefore consistent with the
as they enable a person to retain control of decision-making.
Secondly, the Institute notes the interrelationship between ACDs and
instruments. Both documents enable a person to communicate their will and
preference by expressing who they wish to be involved in
future decision-making
and/or by stating their views about future treatment.
5.1.4 This Part recommends that ACDs be given statutory recognition in
Tasmania, and outlines proposals for key elements of the legislative
of advance care directives
5.2.1 Overwhelmingly, respondents expressed support for the use of ACDs. PCT
advocated the following benefits of ACDs:
An ACD often is the difference between having a ‘good death’,
i.e. carers and service providers understanding what is
important to you and
adapting their care accordingly, and a death that can lead to complex grief for
loved ones. In fact many studies
have shown that when a person has an ACD, their
loved ones experience less cases of complex grief because they know the wishes
the dying person and are able to intervene accordingly. An ACD is really the
only means in which a person can communicate what care
they want and what is
important to them in the event they become incapacitated. It allows the person
to still maintain control of
their care. Appointing an Enduring Guardian does
not provide for this. It is simply appointing a person who can make decisions
your care if you cannot ...
5.2.2 The Board commented that ACDs:
• allow a person to retain choice, control and dignity where their own
health is concerned
• provide an ascertainable record of a person’s expectations and
values with respect to their future care, including end
of life care
• articulate and to give effect to the rights, wishes and preferences
of a person without capacity in line with those of a competent
• reassure and inform those who are required to make health care
decisions for another person, including the decision to withhold
• can operate if and when the person becomes incapable of giving
consent, if specific enough
5.2.3 EOT also highlighted that ACDs enable a person to express their will
and preference:
ACDs have the capacity to form an important mechanism for individuals to make
their preferences known when health and related decisions
are required. As such
they may provide a critical alternative to the appointment of representative
decision makers in some circumstances
or provide an important statement of the
will and preference of those for whom the appointment of substitute decision
considered also warranted. In this way they can provide an important
mechanism for guiding decision making when a person enters the
stage where
communication is impaired or capacity is lacking.
5.2.4 Given the positive feedback received about the use of ACDs, it is
important that the Act complements their use.
care directives in Tasmania
5.3.1 Whilst ACDs do not have legislative recognition in Tasmania, they have
effect at common law. At common law, an ACD must be respected
and given effect
• it was made voluntarily by a capable adult;
• it is clear and unambiguous;
• it extends to the situation at
• their circumstances have not changed such that the person would no
longer intend it to apply.
5.3.2 The Board’s submission clarified the interrelationship between
ACDs and the Act as follows:
Part 6 of the Act contains detailed provisions in relation to consent to
medical treatment, which operates in addition to the common
law. The provisions
in the Act do not oust the common law, and therefore advance consent or advance
refusal of treatment can apply.
Part 6 of the Act only applies when a person
with a disability is incapable of giving consent to treatment, which would not
case if a person had previously given consent or refusal to the treatment
in question.
5.3.3 In 2016, the House of Assembly Standing Committee was engaged to
conduct a review of palliative care in Tasmania, including
the use of ACDs. The
Standing Committee found that ACDs are used in Tasmania, but that there was a
variety of views about what legal
weight they
5.3.4 The following options were identified in the Issues Paper:
• to continue to rely on the common law to give effect to ACDs; or
• to enhance existing provisions in the Act that explain how
instruments may be used to record a person’s wishes or directions.
could include articulating how health practitioners should consider, or follow,
directions in an instrument. This option would
necessitate better systems to
ensure that health professionals can easily search and obtain copies of a
patient’s instrument
when needed, a matter discussed in Part 4; or
• to enact legislation formally recognising ACDs separate to
instruments. This could be achieved by incorporating provisions
into the Act or
enacting separate legislation.
Public Consultation
5.3.5 The Issues Paper asked for views about whether ACDs should be given
statutory recognition in Tasmania.
Should Tasmania have legislation dealing with advance care
directives?
5.3.6 There was broad support for introduction of legislation in Tasmania
articulating the role and use of ACDs. Only two submissions
stated that there
should not be legislative reform to deal with ACDs. One stated a preference for
reform to the legislative framework
to establish a single document governing all
future decision-making — personal, financial, and medical matters —
therefore did not support introduction of ACDs as a further layer in
addition to instruments and enduring powers of attorney. Mrs
Hilda Nilsson,
having worked in advance care planning for several years, stated that the lack
of recognition and understanding of
the role of ACDs is due to lack of knowledge
and that education about their role and effect is the solution to resolving the
gap, rather than legislative reform.
5.3.7 Fourteen respondents supported legislative reform, although
MIGA’s submission qualified its position that:
Legislation should only recognise the existence of ACDs under common law, or
otherwise made under statutory schemes in other Australian
states, without
imposing additional manner or form requirements.
5.3.8 Several submissions commented that legislative reform could remove
uncertainty about the role of ACDs. The Board commented:
The fact that ACD’s have effect at common law can still create some
uncertainties for medical practitioners. There is also some
uncertainty in the
community about the legal effect of such directives and whether they are an
expression of a person’s wishes
or are legally binding. In relation to
treatment decisions, and when consent is given a considerable time before
treatment, its validity
may be questioned because of the increased chance that
it will not be specific enough to apply to the treatment in question...
5.3.9 The OPG commented:
On balance, we favour the introduction of statutory ACDs in order to give
clarity as to their use, erase any doubt as to the validity
of ACDs at common
law, and ensure medical treatment is provided (or withdrawn or refused)
consistent with the wishes and decisions
made by the person at a time when they
had capacity. It may well help with promoting the uptake of ACDs —
anecdotally it seems
there is some reluctance for people to make ACD’s and
reduced support or encouragement for them to do so by health professionals,
based on the perception that they are not legal documents.
5.3.10 The OPMHS also commented that ‘[l]egislation might help clarify
the medico legal fears or ambiguities for practitioners,
who might be reluctant
or uncertain about following ACDs.’
5.3.11 Professors White and
Legislative schemes provide clarity and improved recognition of directives
within the medical profession and may promote the uptake
of advance directives
in the community.
5.3.12 One attendee of a consultation meeting facilitated by COTA gave his
own example of how legal uncertainty has deterred him from
completing an ACD. He
commented that he had had the ACD form for three years but had not yet completed
it because there is no clarity
it has. He expressed the view that, if legislation confirmed the priority of an
ACD (for example over the decisions of an enduring guardian or person
responsible), then this would place greater protection around
the wishes of the
The Institute’s view
5.3.13 The Institute recommends that legislation in Tasmania codify the
effect of ACDs under common law. This recommendation is made
for several
reasons, outlined below.
5.3.14 ACDs are widely used in the community and have the support of medical
professionals.
Given their prevalence, there must be clarity about the effect of directions in
an ACD. As noted earlier, several respondents observed
confusion amongst health
professionals and the public about the effect of ACDs and how they interrelate
with instruments. Statutory
recognition would provide certainty about these
matters. The House of Assembly Standing Committee recently commented that
legislative
recognition of ACDs might help to clarify what effect they have, and
if, how, and when a person can provide advance consent or refusal
of consent to
medical treatment.
presently a draft Bill before Parliament which proposes to establish a
legislative framework dealing with the creation and
5.3.15 An ACD provides a means for an individual to express their will and
preferences. They enable a person to decide in advance,
avoiding the need for a
representative decision. For this reason, ACDs have the Convention
Committee’s
endorsement.
Legislative
clarity about the effect of directions in an ACD assists to ensure that a
person’s prior expressed will and preference
is given effect.
5.3.16 While ACDs have effect at common law, it should not be expected that
members of the community understand what effect they have.
It will assist
understanding to state within legislation the legal position in relation to ACDs
rather than requiring individuals
to understand the position at common law.
5.3.17 One argument against statutory recognition of ACDs in Tasmania is that
the Act already enables donors to give directions to
their enduring guardian in
an instrument.
The effect is
to allow donors to include equivalent directions about medical treatment as may
be included in an ACD. Whilst this
is correct, the Institute observes that ACDs
serve a distinct function to instruments. Instruments require the appointment of
enduring guardian; ACDs do not. An instrument therefore continues to require
the involvement of a representative. Conversely, an
ACD enables a person to make
their own decision without requiring the appointment of a representative. This
advances a person’s
will and preferences, removes the need for a
representative decision and respects the rights of the individual to make their
decisions about matters affecting their lives.
5.3.18 Because instruments require the appointment of a representative, this
can act as a barrier to the completion of the document
where a person is
socially isolated or does not have anyone that they wish to appoint. This issue
is presently compounded by the
fact that the Act does not permit a donor to
appoint the Public Guardian as their enduring guardian, as discussed in Part
ACDs might, therefore,
have particular use for this group of individuals who do not have anyone
appropriate to appoint as their enduring
5.3.19 All other Australian jurisdictions, apart from New South Wales, have
legislation dealing with the preparation and use of
Whilst this is does not
itself justify revision to the position in Tasmania, the Institute considers it
relevant to the question
of whether there is utility in having legislation
dealing with ACDs, noting that this has been the conclusion reached in all other
states and territories.
5.3.20 As a supplementary question, the Institute asked for
stakeholder’s views about whether legislative provisions surrounding
should be incorporated as part of the Act or contained in separate
legislation.
If so [legislated], should this be part of the Act or separate
legislation?
5.3.21 A majority of respondents supported statutory provisions dealing with
ACDs being housed within the
One rationale commonly
asserted was alignment, given that the Act already governs instruments and
provisions relating to health care.
5.3.22 The Institute agrees. It is logical that one piece of legislation
encompasses all statutory provisions governing consent to
treatment rather than
requiring review of two Acts. It saves duplication and provides consistency. A
further benefit is that it facilitates
a clear articulation of the
interrelationship between ACDs and instruments.
Recommendation 5.1
(1) That Tasmania adopt a legislative framework for advance care
directives.
(2) That the legislative framework for advance care directives be included in
suggestions for statutory reform
5.4.1 Whilst it has been recommended that ACDs have statutory recognition,
the Institute has also considered other ways that the Act
could better recognise
and clarify how people can give directions and document their wishes. The Issues
Paper called for suggestions
If advance care directives were not adopted in legislation, are there ways
that the Act could be improved to confirm how people are
able to document their
wishes and views?
5.4.2 Responses are detailed below.
Clarifying how directions are to be
5.4.3 By way of background, ACDs may take two forms: they can provide
directions about future treatment (an ‘instructional directive’),
they may articulate a person’s values that should be considered when a
decision is being made (a ‘values
directive’).
submissions suggested that there should be greater clarity about the extent to
which both instructional directives and values
directives should be taken into
account or followed. This matter is relevant both when considering legislative
provisions surrounding
the effect of ACDs, as well as reform to the existing
provisions of the Act which enable a donor to provide directions to their
guardian or express wishes about future treatment (effectively an
instructional directive or values directive within an instrument).
Instructional directives
5.4.4 The OPG commented that there could be greater clarity about the extent
to which enduring guardians and health practitioners
must comply with directions
in an instrument. It observed that the Act presently requires that the powers of
an enduring guardian
must ‘be exercised in accordance with any lawful
directions specified in an
instrument.’
suggested that, instead, a more explicit statement be included, requiring
enduring guardians and health practitioners to
follow lawful directions. The
Institute agrees with these observations and considers this matter further
Values directives
5.4.5 Whilst MIGA supported the creation of values directives, it stated that
there must be careful consideration given to the extent
to which health
practitioners be required to give effect to them. It noted:
By their varying nature, such directives may be capable of differing
interpretations in various clinical situations. It may be difficult
substitute decision-makers and medical and other health practitioners to work
out how to give effect to such directives.
Given this, they should only be
something to consider, not be determinative to the situation at hand.
5.4.6 It suggested that this could be resolved through legislation:
• giving recognition to the potential relevance of a person’s
expressed values, as in Victoria;
• setting out a step-by-step process for representatives and medical
and other health practitioners to follow when considering
a values directive;
• providing a test of ‘reasonable practicality’ or similar,
for representatives and health professionals in giving
effect to such a
The Institute notes that the proposed Decision-Making
step-by-step process for representatives to follow in order to give effect to a
person’s values, wishes, and preferences.
This matter is further addressed
in Recommendation 5.6
below which considers the effect of directions in
Accessibility of ACDs
5.4.7 MIGA commented that it is ‘imperative that medical and other
health practitioners know where to find ACDs.’ The
OPMHS considered that a
register of ACDs, readily accessible by health care professionals would assist.
It was suggested that this
could be linked to the Tasmania Health Service (THS)
Digital Medical Records, as this is already in regular use and serves as
central information tool for health care in the public sector.’
The registration of ACDs is discussed at [5.5.53]–[5.5.60]
5.4.8 Consistent with submissions summarised earlier in this Part, PCT stated
that greater understanding of the role and use of ACDs
is required. The need for
community education is discussed in greater detail in Part 18.
5.4.9 MIGA commented that there should be a focus upon:
• Improving uptake of ACDs
• Increasing the knowledge and availability of relevant and succinct
decision-making tools and case studies to assist practitioners
in determining
their validity and applicability in particular circumstances, including through
differing platforms such as apps.
These suggestions are endorsed. Several of the recommendations in this Report
are intended to address the need to improve advance
care planning within the
community. Any practical tools, including the use of innovative technologies,
that assist people in understanding
and applying the legislative framework in
practice are also supported.
Other ways to improve how a person’s
views and wishes are considered
5.4.10 Social Work Services RHH stated that guardians should be required
• seek to understand the views of the represented person so far as
• seek input from the represented person and any other appropriate
significant person; and
• seek any views that the person has previously expressed in relation
to advance care planning.
These suggestions are incorporated in recommendations elsewhere in this
provisions surrounding advance care directives
5.5.1 The Issues Paper asked a series of questions about matters that would
need to be resolved if Tasmania introduced legislation
dealing with ACDs. Those
questions, and the responses received, are discussed below.
Who should able to make an advance care
5.5.2 At common law, any capable person can make an ACD, so long as it is
made voluntarily. In Victoria, statute provides that children
5.5.3 The Institute asked who ought to be able to complete an ACD.
If advance care directives were given legislative force, then who should be
able to make an advance care
5.5.4 Three written
submissions
referred to the
need for a person to be an adult to be ‘competent’ to make an ACD.
Other submissions did not refer to
age, instead focussing upon the
person’s ‘capacity’ or ‘competence’ to make an
ACD. Three submissions
specifically endorsed legislation permitting a child to make an ACD. PCT
commented that: ‘“Capacity” should not
be related to
age.’ Similarly, the OPG recommended that a child who is
competent should be able to make an ACD. The Interim Children’s
Commissioner observed that:
Having regard to the principles of the CRC [
Convention on the Rights of
], particularly article 12, the views of children and young people
on all matters affecting them should be given serious consideration
and be taken
into account. It is a natural consequence of these principles that the views of
children and young people be considered
in the planning and execution of future
medical treatments.
On this basis, the Interim Children’s Commissioner supported those
children with the capacity to give informed consent to medical
treatment having
the ability to provide instructions or express preferences in relation to their
future medical treatment.
5.5.5 The Institute considers that legislation should permit a child with
decision-making ability to make an ACD. This is consistent
with the common law
principle that a child who is
competent can provide their own
consent to medical treatment. Such a child should be able to prepare a document
that effectively
serves as a communication aid for times when they may be unable
to communicate their consent or refusal to consent. It is nonsensical
child with the ability to give their own consent to treatment to be able to do
so at the time, but not be able to document
that consent in a form that can be
recognised in the future, so long as the child understands the nature and effect
of doing so.
The focus should be upon whether the person has
‘decision-making ability’ to make an ACD, rather than a
pre-condition
based solely on age.
Recommendation 5.2
That the Act not preclude children with decision-making ability making an
advance care directive.
Decision-making ability
5.5.6 The decision-making ability required to complete an ACD is considered
In what form should an advance care
directive be made?
5.5.7 The Issues Paper asked for views about any formal requirements that
should be imposed to create an ACD.
If advance care directives were given legislative force, then what should be
the witnessing
requirements?
Formal requirements
5.5.8 Some commented that there are no formalities for the making of an ACD
at common law and that statute should not impose formal
requirements that might
create a barrier to a person making an ACD or having their lawful directions
recognised. The OPG, for example,
commented that a person is able to give an ACD
verbally at common law, and ‘there is a case for maintaining this
possibility.’
Others similarly commented upon the importance of
formalities not preventing a person’s wishes being upheld, and that the
should allow wishes and directions to be conveyed orally.
5.5.9 Given that the fundamental rationale for adopting a legislative
framework is to enhance recognition of ACDs, it is recommended
that provisions
give sufficient flexibility to maximise the possibility that a person’s
directions and wishes will be followed.
It is therefore proposed that the Act
contain an equivalent provision to that enacted in South Australia which
confirms that, although
an ACD may not have particular characteristics, this
should not prevent the ACD from being given
Members of the Elder
Law Committee endorsed this approach.
Recommendation 5.3
(1) That the Act confirm that an advance care directive is not invalid merely
because it does not possess certain formal characteristics.
(2) That legislation contemplate a person making a valid advance care
directive orally.
Witnessing requirements
5.5.10 Despite comments in the earlier paragraph expressing a desire for
informality, most responses supported witnessing requirements
for ACDs being the
same as for other documents — some referring specifically to instruments,
enduring powers of attorney and
Wills. The OPG stated that it did not hold firm
views but leaned towards a requirement that one of the witnesses be a medical
practitioner.
Another submission stated that one witness should be a lawyer,
whilst another supported the use of independent witnesses.
5.5.11 MIGA did not support witnessing requirements for ACDs:
Given the common law does not require an ACD to be witnessed, MIGA does not
support a requirement than an ACD be witnessed ...
It went on to comment that:
As witnessing can be a helpful indicia of ACD validity, its use should be
encouraged, but not mandated. The best way to encourage
this would be through
the development of a template ACD by the Tasmanian Department of Health and
Human Services, with input from
key stakeholders, including MIGA. This is
similar to an approach adopted by NSW Health for its ROAD project to develop a
ACD. Such a template could then be distributed widely as a best
practice approach.
5.5.12 The THS Advance Care Directive form requires one witness who is over
the age of 18 years, not related to the person concerned
or known beneficiary of
their Will. It also provides that the witness may be a registered health care
professional, but not a paid
5.5.13 It is not intended that a legislative framework restrict the existing
ability of a person to make an ACD at common law. It
is, however, considered
appropriate for the Act to include witnessing requirements for written ACDs as
evidence of the person’s
ability to understand the nature and effect of
the ACD and that they appeared to create the document freely and without undue
5.5.14 Equivalent witnessing requirements to instruments are endorsed in
order to provide consistency. It is critical, however, that
the Board have the
ability to declare an ACD valid despite non-compliance with witnessing
requirements, as is recommended in relation
instruments.
Recommendation 5.4
(1) That witnessing requirements for a written advance care directive be
consistent with requirements for instruments.
(2) That the Board be able to declare an advance care directive valid despite
any non-compliance with formal requirements.
Prescribed form
5.5.15 The Issues Paper asked whether the Act should prescribe a standard ACD
If advance care directives were given legislative force, then should there be
a prescribed form?
5.5.16 Respondents did not support a particular form ACD being mandated. It
was considered that legislation needs to be sufficiently
flexible and not impose
unnecessary restrictions: ‘Restriction to a prescribed form could create a
bureaucratic obstacle to
people’s wishes being
COTA submitted
that ‘professional advice and assistance should be available as to how
best to write an advance care directive.’
5.5.17 There was, however, support for the development of a template form.
One submission commented:
Although we often grizzle about forms and the bureaucracy implied, forms help
us to know what information to provide. They also help
carers discover relevant
information in a consistent way.
5.5.18 The OPG supported development of a clear template with solid
instructions and guidelines. Others commented on the need for
the form to be
user-friendly and accessible for those with low literacy levels. Members of the
Elder Law Committee suggested that
a suitable template should be developed with
medical and legal input. MIGA also encouraged emphasis being placed upon the
development
of a widely used template in consultation with key
stakeholders.
5.5.19 It is proposed that the Act include a template ACD form, but that it
also be possible to use a form with similar effect. This
adopts the existing
approach in relation to
instruments.
The Institute
agrees with submissions received that the focus should be upon ensuring strong
stakeholder input into the development
of the standard form ACD. Community
consultation would help to ensure that the form is user-friendly, clear and
functional. Stakeholder
‘buy in’ through the consultation process is
also likely to improve uptake and use of the form. This promotes advance
planning in the community, facilitating individuals retaining control of
decisions affecting their life.
Recommendation 5.5
(1) That a form advance care directive be included in a Schedule to the Act
but that use of this form not be mandatory.
(2) That there is strong community and stakeholder engagement and
consultation in relation to the development of the form advance
care directive
including consumer, medical and legal input.
Should an advance care directive be
binding, or only taken into account?
5.5.20 Legislation needs to articulate the effect of an ACD. Examples of
approaches from other jurisdictions include:
• in South Australia, a refusal of treatment is binding, so long as it
applies to the specified
circumstances.
cannot direct that treatment be
and any directions
that direct treatment to be performed are not
Guardians must give
effect to an ACD as far as reasonably
practicable;
• in Queensland and Western Australia, directions about treatment,
including special treatment, must be
• in the ACT, guardians must act consistently with an ACD unless it is
not reasonable do so.
Examples are provided of where it might not be reasonable, including where
treatment is urgent or where a decision-maker has been
unable to locate an ACD
after reasonable enquiries; and
• in the Northern Territory, an advance consent decision in an ACD has
the same effect as if the person made the decision with
fully informed consent
whilst they had capacity to do
It cannot be overridden
by a substitute decision-maker, unless one of the permitted exceptions
5.5.21 Examples where directions may not be given effect include:
• where there is no reasonable possibility that the person intended the
direction to apply in the circumstances or to the treatment
• where there has been a change in circumstances, the person’s
wishes or standards of health care between when the ACD
was made and when a
treatment decision needs to be
• where the person relied upon incorrect information or assumptions
when making the ACD;
• where it would result in unacceptable pain and suffering for the
• it is so wholly
unreasonable
or unlawful, or
would result in a health practitioner breaching a professional standard or code
of conduct;
• if the direction is
• the direction relates to mandatory treatment, for example under the
provisions of mental health
• directions about the withholding or withdrawal of life sustaining
5.5.22 In the Northern Territory, whether a direction can be disregarded is a
matter that the tribunal decides, rather than a decision
for a medical
practitioner or person responsible.
5.5.23 The Institute called for submissions about the extent to which
directions in an ACD ought to be binding on decision-makers
and treating
professionals. The following questions were posed:
Should directions in an advance care directive be binding on decision-makers?
Should there be any exceptions? Who should determine
whether an exception
applies? What penalties should apply where directions are not
5.5.24 There were 11 responses to this question. All respondents expressed a
view that certain decisions ought to be binding. This
was typically suggested to
occur where:
• the person had the decision-making ability to make the
• the person was not under duress;
• the direction was not made based on misinformation or
misunderstanding about the nature of their condition or the treatment;
• there has not been a material change in circumstances (for example,
advances in medical treatment);
• the direction is unambiguous; and
• the direction applies to the situation at hand.
A number of respondents expressed support for the exceptions listed at
[5.5.21] being adopted as circumstances where an ACD may not
be binding. Many
stated that directions in an ACD should only be non-binding in exceptional
circumstances. One respondent stated
that there should be no situations where
directions are not binding.
5.5.25 Two respondents clarified their position that only directions
expressing a
to consent to treatment ought to be binding. It was
submitted that a patient should not be able to
practitioner to provide treatment. It was suggested that directions in those
circumstances ought only be binding where
the treatment is proposed, offered, or
recommended by a medical practitioner.
5.5.26 The Institute agrees with these submissions. This accords with the
common law position and is consistent with other jurisdictions,
as outlined
5.5.27 The Institute recommends the following approach:
• that the Act confirm the difference between being able to direct that
be performed, as distinct from directing that a particular
performed (other than the withdrawal or withholding of
health care and treatment);
• that the Act confirm that certain directions may not be made in an
ACD — for example, where they would be unlawful,
would require a health
practitioner to breach professional standards or relate to compulsory treatment
(for example under mental
health laws). The Institute endorses the approach in
South Australia in this
Provisions purporting
to make these directions ought to be void and of no effect; and
• that the Act confirm the common law position that a direction to
refuse treatment is binding if:
o it was made voluntarily by a person with decision-making ability to make an
o it is clear and unambiguous; and
o it extends to the situation at hand; and
o that health practitioners be able to decline to comply with a direction in
an advance care directive if they are satisfied that
it does not reflect the
current wishes of the person. This approach promotes the views, wishes, and
preferences of a person being
given effect to.
5.5.28 The Institute also endorses the approach in the Northern Territory
which expressly states that the effect of a binding direction
in an ACD is to
operate as if the person had made the decision themselves with fully informed
consent and whilst they had capacity
This provides clarity and
understanding and eliminates confusion about the effect of a binding
Recommendation 5.6
(1) That an advance care directive or instrument not be permitted to contain
directions that:
· are unlawful;
· would require an unlawful act to be performed;
· would result in a health practitioner breaching a professional
standard or code of conduct; or
· relate to mandatory treatment, for example under the
Mental Health
Any directions of this type should be void and of no effect.
(2) That legislation clarify that a direction in an advance care directive or
instrument cannot compel a health practitioner to perform
a particular form of
health care and treatment other than the withdrawal or withholding of health
care and treatment.
(3) That legislation confirm that a direction amounting to a refusal of
health care and treatment is binding if:
· it was made voluntarily by a person with decision-making ability to
make the directive;
· it is clear and unambiguous; and
· it extends to the situation at hand.
(4) That the Act confirm that a directive in these circumstances has the same
effect as if the person made the decision whilst they
had the decision-making
ability to do so.
(5) That health practitioners be able to refuse to comply with a binding
direction in an advance care directive if they believe on
reasonable grounds
that it does not reflect the current wishes of the person.
5.5.29 There were a range of views about who ought to determine when the
directions in an ACD ought not be followed. The OPG considered
that a dispute
should initially be referred to the Public Guardian and, if unable to be
resolved, the matter should then be referred
to the Board. EOT considered that
the determination is a matter that could be made by the Board or OPG, also
commenting that there
ought to be dispute resolution processes within the Act.
MIGA supported the Board being the body to determine whether a direction
not be followed. Social Work Services RHH supported the matter being referred to
a hospital ethics committee (where arising
in the acute care setting). Members
of the Elder Law Committee stated that the matter should be determined by a
decision-maker.
5.5.30 The Institute considers that, consistent with recommendations made
elsewhere in this Report,
Public Guardian have power to consider a matter initially and attempt to resolve
disputes. A useful example of this approach
is included in the South Australian
legislation.
If the matter is
unable to be resolved this way, or the Public Guardian considers that it is more
appropriate that the matter be
dealt with by the Board, then it should have
power to refer the matter to the Board for
resolution.
5.5.31 This is similar to the approach already adopted in relation to
instruments, where the Board is able to order that directions
in an instrument
may not be followed.
independence and expertise of the Board acts as a safeguard aimed at protecting
the rights and interests of the patient.
Recommendation 5.7
(1) That the Public Guardian have power to mediate matters and attempt to
resolve disputes in relation to advance care directives
and instruments, broadly
consistent with
–(4) of the
Advance Care Directives Act
(2) That if the Public Guardian is not able to resolve a matter, or it
considers it more appropriate that the matter is determined
by the Board, that
the Public Guardian be able to refer a matter to the Board for
determination.
(3) That the Board have power to give advice and directions and make
declarations to resolve disputes relating to advance care directives.
5.5.32 The Institute further recommends that the Act confirm that guardians
(enduring and Board-appointed) and health practitioners
have a duty to seek to
give effect to a represented person’s ACD as far as possible. This is
intended to promote the represented
person’s expressed will and
preferences in circumstances where a direction in an ACD is not binding. This
might occur, for
example, where a direction in an ACD expresses a wish for a
particular form of treatment or treatment outcome, or expresses other
values that they wish to be taken into account when making decisions (sometimes
called ‘values
directives’
). It is not
intended that this vary the proposed Decision-Making Process outlined in
Recommendation 11.2, but is suggested on the
basis that explicitly stating a
duty to give effect to a person’s ACD reinforces the role of
representatives in advocating
for the represented person. It also promotes a
person’s will and preference being given maximum effect.
Recommendation 5.8
That there be an express duty upon enduring guardians, guardians and health
practitioners to give as much effect as possible to the
advance care directive
of a person without decision-making ability to consent to a particular health
care and treatment decision.
Should medical practitioners or
decision-makers be under any obligation to ascertain whether a person has an
advance care directive?
5.5.33 The Issues Paper noted that some jurisdictions require medical
practitioners and representatives to take reasonable steps to
ascertain whether
a person has an ACD. The intention is to promote a person’s ACD being
given effect. Clearly the first step
to upholding a person’s ACD is to
know that the patient has one and to obtain a copy.
5.5.34 In Victoria, medical practitioners and operators of health facilities
must make reasonable efforts to ascertain whether a person
In the ACT, any person
who becomes aware that a patient of a health care facility has made or revoked
an ACD must notify the person
in charge of the health care
In South Australia,
a guardian has a duty to take all reasonable steps to ascertain whether a
represented person has made an ACD.
An enduring guardian must confirm that they have read the donor’s
ACD upon accepting the role in
Recommendation 4.10
proposes that an equivalent reform be made to the Act.
5.5.35 The Institute requested views about whether legislation should provide
an obligation upon representatives or medical professionals
to ascertain whether
a patient has an ACD prior to seeking or providing substitute consent to
Should medical practitioners and decision-makers have a duty to take steps to
ascertain whether a patient has an advance care
5.5.36 All responses endorsed this
Qualifications were
made that only ‘reasonable’ attempts should be necessary.
5.5.37 PCT commented that one of the biggest failings of the system presently
is the absence of a central repository for health professionals
to search for an
ACD. The OPMHS also commented that health professionals should have a duty to
make enquiries particularly in circumstances
where the document is readily
available and accessible. The issue of the registration of ACDs is considered
5.5.38 Although Recommendation 4.10 already proposes that enduring guardians
be required to confirm when accepting the role that they
have read a copy of the
donor’s ACD, it is recommended that a separate provision confer a duty
upon guardians to enquire whether
a represented person has an ACD. This would
capture Board-appointed guardians and also addresses the circumstance where some
passes between the making of an instrument and the appointed enduring
guardian being required to act. During that intervening period,
the donor may
have made an ACD or altered any ACD that existed at the time the instrument was
5.5.39 Based on unanimous support for this reform, the Institute recommends
that health professionals and guardians have a duty to
take reasonable steps to
ascertain whether a patient/donor has an ACD. The Victorian approach is
endorsed, which extends to operators
of health facilities.
Recommendation 5.9
(1) That the Act provide that, except in relation to urgent health care and
treatment, before administering health care and treatment
to a person who does
not have decision-making ability to give consent to that health care or
treatment, health professionals must
make reasonable efforts in the
circumstances to ascertain whether that patient has either or both an advance
care directive or instrument.
(2) That the Act provide a duty upon prescribed health facilities (to be
defined in the Regulations) to make reasonable enquiries
to ascertain whether a
patient in their facility has either or both an advance care directive or
instrument and, if so, ensure a
copy is placed with the patient’s clinical
(3) That guardians have a duty to make reasonable enquiries to ascertain
whether a represented person has an advance care directive.
Should an advance care directive also
provide the ability for a person to appoint a medical treatment decision-maker?
5.5.40 Currently, to appoint a representative with power to consent to
medical treatment, an adult may appoint an enduring guardian.
An enduring
guardian has power to consent to medical treatment as a ‘person
responsible.’
have power to consent to health care or refuse consent to health
5.5.41 In Victoria, a person nominates a medical treatment decision-maker
separately to appointing an enduring
Enabling the
separate appointment of a medical treatment decision-maker could benefit those
individuals who want to appoint different
people to make decisions about
personal matters to medical treatment decisions, in the way that adults can
presently by appointing
attorneys for financial matters and enduring guardians
for personal decisions. On the other hand, reform enabling separate personal,
financial and medical treatment decision-makers may increase complexity and lead
to confusion.
5.5.42 The Issues Paper asked whether the community considered there would be
any benefit to legislation enabling a person to appoint
decision-maker with power to consent to medical treatment, as distinct from the
appointment of an enduring guardian for
personal matters.
Should separate decision-makers be able to be appointed for medical treatment
decisions, separate to personal and financial
5.5.43 There were six responses to this question, all of which supported the
ability to appoint a medical treatment decision-maker
separate to a
representative for personal and financial
Respondents
supported this approach on the basis that the roles may involve different skill
sets and possibly suit different individuals
and that this approach enables a
person to appoint who they consider best for each role. MIGA stated that the
powers of a medical
treatment decision-maker could be specified in the document
as either providing full or limited powers in relation to health care.
absence of the donor specifying, the medical treatment decision-maker would then
have powers consistent with a person responsible.
5.5.44 The Institute also enquired separately whether there was support for
the appointment of a medical treatment decision-maker
within an ACD.
Should a person be able to appoint a medical treatment decision-maker in an
advance care directive?
5.5.45 There were eight responses to this question, with six supporting the
Act permitting (but not requiring) a person to appoint
a medical treatment
decision-maker in an ACD. Members of the Elder Law Committee suggested that an
ACD could be used to appoint a
decision-maker for care planning, but not medical
treatment decisions as these fall within the scope of an enduring
power. Social Work Services RHH did not support this
alternative on the basis that it would complicate the system, given the existing
roles of the person responsible and enduring guardian. It considered that the
appointment of a medical treatment decision-maker should
continue by way of
appointment of an enduring guardian.
5.5.46 PCT commented:
the Person/s Responsible should be a signatory to the form. That way the
person would not have to appoint an Enduring Guardian, and
Responsible could be someone outside of the hierarchy.
5.5.47 The Institute observes that a person is already able to appoint a
representative to consent to medical treatment by appointing
an enduring
guardian. If an ACD could also be used to appoint a medical treatment
decision-maker, then:
• this would raise the question of what continuing role an instrument
plays — the effect may be to limit the role of an
enduring guardian to
lifestyle and other personal matters, but not those related to medical treatment
or health care;
• if an enduring guardian’s role were limited to personal
decisions, then for a person to appoint a ‘full suite’
representatives as part of comprehensive estate planning, it would be necessary
for the person to make an enduring power of attorney,
instrument, and an ACD.
The Institute is unpersuaded that there is merit to this level of complexity,
noting that one of the most
commonly expressed issues with the system currently
is that it is already overly complex;
• if, on the other hand, an enduring guardian’s role were not
limited to personal matters and there remained an ability
to delegate powers to
make medical treatment and health care decisions, then the system would create
confusion. Health professionals
would need to enquire whether a patient had both
an instrument and/or an ACD and then review the terms of both documents to
whether a decision-maker had been appointed in either or both. There
would need to be statutory provisions resolving who ought to
have priority in
circumstances where a patient may have granted powers to (different) enduring
guardians and medical treatment decision-makers
within separate documents;
• those with existing instruments would assume that their appointed
enduring guardians have power to consent to medical treatment
decisions —
this group of individuals would need to be considered and appropriate provisions
enacted during a transition phase
to ensure that there were no unintended
consequences of the reform;
• there is also a risk that a person may (incorrectly) assume that they
have appointed a medical treatment decision-maker by
appointing their enduring
guardian, unaware that this appointment needs to be made separately in an ACD;
• it would need to be resolved whether there would be any oversight of
a medical treatment decision-maker via the Board, noting
that currently the
Board has jurisdiction to review the activities of enduring guardians and remove
them if necessary.
5.5.48 There were no responses indicating a particular need to divide the
role of personal and lifestyle decisions with medical treatment
and health care
decisions. Respondents did not, for example, express their desire to appoint a
different medical treatment decision-maker
to their enduring guardian. Similar
skill-sets and personal attributes are likely to be desirable for both roles.
There is also likely
to be overlap between matters that might be
‘personal’ decisions and those that relate to a person’s
health care
— for example, decisions about where a person is to live
temporarily for the purpose of receiving health
5.5.49 Whilst Victoria provides for the separate appointment of medical
treatment decision-makers separate to personal matters, it
appointments of attorneys for personal and financial
The result is the
need for two documents to be completed to appoint a full suite of
decision-makers. In South Australia, whilst individuals
may appoint
decision-makers via an ACD, those decision-makers have powers in relation to
both personal and health care
The result is
effectively the same as the position applying in Tasmania, but with the document
called an ‘advance care directive’
rather than an
‘instrument’. A renaming of instruments adopting this approach could
alleviate the present community confusion
5.5.50 In all Australian jurisdictions, the enduring appointments of
representatives occur within either one or two documents. No
provides for three documents to complete appointments of representatives for
personal, financial and medical treatment
matters. Given the desire to simplify
the framework, and noting Recommendation 4.2 which proposes that the State
Government investigate
community support for combining the appointments of
attorneys and enduring guardians within a single enduring document, the
is unpersuaded of the merit of providing separate appointments of
medical treatment decision-makers, either within, or separate to
5.5.51 The Institute views the role of an ACD as being two-fold —
first, to enable a person to provide advance consent or refusal
to consent,
effectively making their own decisions in advance; and secondly, to provide
guidance and assistance to health professionals
and representatives about
values, views and beliefs that they must consider and promote when making
decisions consistent with the
patient’s views, wishes and preferences. It
is then the function of an instrument to appoint representatives who could act
as a last resort, where the ACD does not extend to circumstances requiring a
representative decision.
5.5.52 As discussed earlier in this Part, an instrument already effectively
enables a person to do all the things that an ACD does.
The only difference is
that the creation of an instrument requires the appointment of a representative.
An ACD enables a person to
effectively avoid the need for a representative by
making and communicating their own decisions in advance. The result is that an
ACD is not needed so that a person
appoint a representative —
it is needed so that people
do not have to
appoint a representative. In
summary, the Institute sees the role of an instrument as enabling appointment of
a representative, and
the role of an ACD as serving as a communication aid. The
Institute does not, therefore, propose that the Act provide for an ACD
used to appoint a medical treatment decision-maker.
Should advance care directives be
registered?
5.5.53 Presently, ACDs do not need to be registered. The ALRC has suggested
that they should not need to be registered because it
is already possible to
lodge an ACD on the ‘My Health Record’ online
The Institute notes
that the Standing Committee found almost unanimous support for the
implementation of a secure register of ACDs
for health care workers to
As already noted earlier in this Part, a number of respondents raised the
issue of the lack of central repository for ACDs as being
a significant failing
of the system at present.
5.5.54 The Issues Paper asked for feedback about whether legislation should
provide for the registration of ACD. As a secondary question,
if ACDs were
registered, the Institute asked which agency should maintain that register.
Should advance care directives be registered? If so, who should maintain the
5.5.55 All responses to this
introduction of a scheme enabling registration of an ACD. Two respondents
supported registration of ACDs but commented
that the lack of registration of an
ACD should not affect its validity. This is because at common law an ACD is not
required to be
registered and statutory provisions should adopt the same
approach. To do otherwise would impose a barrier to a person’s will
preference being given effect. The Institute agrees with these observations.
5.5.56 The Institute also notes the submission of Speak Out advocates that
there should not be a registration fee imposed for the
registration of an ACD.
They considered that this could act as a barrier to a person making an ACD,
noting that they observe this
is one of the reasons that people do not complete
instruments. This issue was also considered in Part 4 in relation to the
registration
of instruments. The Institute refers to and repeats the
observations made in that Part and makes the same recommendations in relation
the registration of ACDs as made for the registration of instruments.
5.5.57 There were a range of views about which body ought to be responsible
for maintaining the register of ACDs. Responses included:
• the Board (the most common response);
• the Recorder of Titles, via the Land Titles Office;
• the Public Guardian;
• the Public Trustee; and
• the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).
The OPMHS commented that the register could be linked to the THS Digital
Medical Records.
5.5.58 The Institute considers that there are benefits to having a single
repository for both instruments and ACDs. It therefore supports
the Board having
responsibility for maintaining the register of
It is noted that, for
this reason, it is imperative that the Board be adequately funded to maintain
the register and to develop systems
enabling a person with a legitimate
to search the
register of ACDs, including on an urgent basis and outside of business hours.
5.5.59 The Board also made comments about the need for a national approach:
while it is certainly desirable that medical practitioners and decision
makers have an obligation to ascertain whether a person has
an ADC, this is
hampered by the piecemeal regulation of directives across Australia, and the
absence of a national health database
which can be accessed outside of business
hours. Clarification in the Act as to whether ACD’s made and possibly
outside the State have effect in Tasmania is necessary.
5.5.60 The Institute considers that recommendations made earlier in this Part
address the issue of clarity about the effect of ACDs
made or registered in
other jurisdictions. This includes Recommendation 5.10(2) that the failure to
register an ACD should not affect
the validity of the document. The Institute
agrees that it is desirable that efforts are made to develop a national
repository for
ACDs to address the transient nature of the Australian
population. This assists to ensure that those who require access to a
ACD have easy access to do so when required.
Recommendation 5.10
(1) That the Act provide for the registration of advance care directives.
(2) That failure to register an advance care directive not affect the
validity of the document.
(3) That there not be a registration fee payable on the registration of an
advance care directive, but that the Registrar be given
a discretion to impose a
registration fee where more than one advance care directive is registered for a
person in a calendar year.
(4) That there not be a fee for the registration of a revocation of advance
care directive.
(5) That an online search function be developed to search the register of
advance care directives.
(6) That there not be a search fee to search the register of advance care
directives.
(7) That the State Government work with other state and territory governments
to develop a national repository for advance care directives.
5.6.1 Legislation in some jurisdictions incorporates offences for people who
dishonestly induce a person to create an
In South Australia, it
is an offence for a person to fail to advise the tribunal as soon as reasonably
practicable if they become
aware that the donor of an ACD wishes, or may wish to
revoke their ACD but they do not have capacity to revoke
5.6.2 The Institute did not seek specific feedback about whether legislation
ought to impose any offences in relation to the preparation
or use of ACD. It
does, however, consider it appropriate that there be broad consistency in the
provisions between ACDs and instruments.
This matter is addressed in
Part 12 which deals with safeguards for representative decision-making.
Decision-Making
Introduction
6.1.1 Assessment of a person’s decision-making capacity is critical to
the Act’s operation. In broad terms, the Act provides
that a person who
has a certain level of decision-making capacity can make their own decisions. A
person whose decision-making capacity
does not meet that test may have decisions
made for them. Whilst the Institute’s Terms of Reference did not
specifically ask
for consideration of whether there needs to be reform to those
parts of the Act dealing with a person’s decision-making ability,
implicit that this is required. This is because the Terms of Reference called
for consideration of the role and powers of representatives,
provisions in
relation to consent to medical treatment, consideration of safeguards and any
reforms desirable in light of international
and national trends in relation to
guardianship law. None of these matters can be properly addressed without first
reviewing when
the Act’s jurisdiction is invoked.
6.1.2 Except in relation to emergency orders, the Act presently provides for
substitute decision-making only for people with a
disability.
recommends removal of the need to establish a disability as part of assessing a
person’s abilities. It proposes a
single statutory test of decision-making
ability to then apply to personal decisions, financial decisions, medical
decisions, and
to make and revoke an instrument and advance care directive.
6.1.3 This Part then reviews and makes recommendations about how the Act
deals with the assessment of a person’s decision-making
abilities. The
Part concludes by examining whether and how the Act can improve safeguards that
promote assessment of a person’s
decision-making ability being conducted
appropriately.
for a disability
6.2.1 All of the tests in the Act that assess whether a person is able to
make decisions require the person to have a
disability.
6.2.2 The Convention requires equality before the law and non-discrimination
for people with disability.
The Convention Committee has stated that: ‘States parties must
holistically examine all areas of law to ensure that the right
of persons with
disabilities to legal capacity is not restricted on an unequal basis with
6.2.3 Guardianship legislation in the Northern Territory and Queensland do
not require the existence of a disability as a pre-condition
for substitute
decision-making.
recommendations by the NSWLRC also propose removal of the precondition of
disability in New South Wales’
legislation.
6.2.4 The VLRC recommended
that the existence of a disability
remain a pre-condition to the operation of guardianship
This was endorsed on
the basis that it gives an objective element to the test to ensure that people
are not subject to guardianship
orders because they engage in harmful behaviour
which is not the direct result of a
disability.
Whilst it made
this recommendation, the VLRC considered that the existence of a disability
should not be a separate condition to the
appointment of a
representative.
Instead, it
advocated that a single test be adopted to require a person’s
decision-making incapacity to be caused by a
disability.
recent draft Bill adopts this approach — enabling the tribunal to appoint
an administrator or guardian where
it is satisfied that, because of a
disability, the person does not have decision-making capacity in relation to
financial or personal
The Victorian
Powers of Attorney Act
does not, however, require the existence of a
disability before an attorney can commence acting on the donor’s behalf
only that the donor does not have decision-making capacity in relation
to a particular matter.
6.2.5 Currently, the Act already requires an assessment of whether the person
is unable to make a reasonable judgment because of their
disability.
In essence,
adopting the VLRC approach would involve removing the need for a disability as a
separate element, with the Act continuing
to refer to whether a person is unable
to make a reasonable judgment because of their disability.
6.2.6 The Issues Paper sought community feedback about whether the Act should
continue to require a person’s decision-making
incapacity to be the result
of disability.
Should the need for a disability remain part of the test that assesses a
person’s capacity?
6.2.7 There were 18 written responses to this question, along with three
verbal submissions. Five responses supported retention of
disability as part of
the test that assesses a person’s ability to make decisions. Four of those
submissions endorsed the Act
adopting a test similar to the VLRC’s
recommendations that disability not be a stand-alone test, but that the test
consideration of whether a person is unable to make decisions
a disability.
6.2.8 Dr Eckstein submitted that there should be a high threshold for a
person’s liberty to be effectively removed from them.
She stated that the
requirement for a disability provides such an objective test. The OPG and
members of the Elder Law Committee
considered that it is appropriate to retain
disability as a pre-condition so that application of the Act is not extended and
the risk of guardianship laws being used in relation to people who
might make unwise decisions or exhibit harmful behaviour.
6.2.9 Both the Board and Speak Out advocates observed that removing the
pre-requisite for a disability would likely impact individuals
dependencies, such as alcohol or drug dependencies. This is considered in Part
6.2.10 Thirteen written respondents and two verbal submissions expressed
support for removing the need for a disability to trigger
operation of the Act.
Many supported removing disability as a pre-condition on the basis that it would
provide greater compliance
with the Convention. Under the Convention, people
with disability must be treated equally before the law and not be subject to
discrimination.
Having guardianship laws apply only to people with disability
amounts to unequal treatment. Nevertheless, Sandra Taglieri SC commented
the criterion of disability is necessary because it is the fact of existence of
disability which may deprive a person of the
cognitive function required for
decision making. Further, she submitted that:
the test is not to be assumed automatically to be discriminatory, because the
absence of capacity to make decisions that are in a
person’s best interest
could mean that they are treated better rather than ‘less
favourably’ if disability is recognised
and an order made. Further, the
legal principles governing the meaning of ‘person with disability’
are well known and
established by authorities which have evolved over time. This
promotes expediency and good decision making when an application for
appointment
of a guardian or administrator is heard. In contrast, removing the
‘test’ will lead to potential ambiguity
in relation to any
alternative ‘test’, resulting in uncertainty and potential for
disadvantage to the very persons whose
rights and quality of life the
legislation is intended to protect.
On this basis, she endorsed adoption of a test that requires the existence of
incapacity because of disability.
6.2.11 Another reason that respondents supported removal of the need for a
disability was that the Act should instead focus upon a
person’s capacity
or ability. The Public Trustee commented, for example, that if the term
‘capacity’ is adopted,
then the need for a disability becomes
otiose. Similarly, Social Work Services RHH agreed that the focus should be upon
a person’s capacity, observing that a medical diagnosis might be
a relevant factor to this assessment. EOT also noted that
the existence of a
disability might be a factor that is considered relevant when assessing a
person’s ability to make decisions.
Speak Out also submitted that the Act
should apply to ‘anyone who needs that sort of help.’
6.2.12 Only having the Act apply to people with disability treats people with
disability differently. It effectively puts people with
disability at a higher
standard of proving their decision-making abilities than those without a
cognitive impairment. The Institute
acknowledges comments that removal of the
need for a disability may extend the Act’s operation to people without
disability.
The Institute notes, however, the view that: ‘Wherever a
society decides to allow a State to interfere with an individual’s
autonomy rights in the name of “protection,” it must do so on the
same basis for people with and without
disabilities.’
6.2.13 The OPG’s concerns that the Act not be sought to be used to
control those who might display harmful behaviour or make
unwise decisions are
noted. There is, however, already the risk of the Act being used to control
individuals exhibiting harmful behaviour
or unwise decisions — except only
in relation to people with disability. As discussed below, it is proposed that
the Act adopt
a functional assessment of a person’s ability to make
decisions. Whether a person has a cognitive disability affecting their
to make decisions could be a relevant consideration. It is proposed that the
focus be upon assessing a person’s ability
to make decisions, not the
outcome or quality of their decision. It is also proposed that it be confirmed
that a person not be assumed
to lack the ability to make decisions merely on the
basis that they make unwise decisions or display harmful behaviour. These
are discussed
Powers of Attorney Act
does not require the existence of a
disability to trigger the powers of an attorney. The Act only refers to the
powers of an attorney
during any ‘mental incapacity’ of the
The term ‘mental
incapacity’ is not defined. As a result, and subject to the terms of the
instrument, the existence of
a disability is not a prerequisite to an attorney
commencing to act for the
Attorney Act
is therefore an example of existing legislation in Tasmania
where substitute decision-making is permitted irrespective of whether
has a disability. This challenges concerns about extending operation of the Act
to people without disability.
6.2.15 The Institute is unpersuaded that a potential increase in workload
ought to itself be a consideration that should outweigh
the overriding need to
uphold the provisions of the Convention and ensure that the Act does not
discriminate against people with
disability. If people without disability are
able to choose not exercise their cognitive abilities and make unwise decisions,
why should people with disability not be able to? In either case, if a
person does not have the ability to make a decision, then
they should equally be
afforded access to support, and if necessary, the protection of representative
decision-making. This ensures
that support is available for those who, for
whatever reason, might require support when making decisions.
6.2.16 The Institute accepts that this reform might require amendments to
other legislation. One example is the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act
(Tas). If it is intended that those the subject of alcohol and drug
dependency remain subject to special provisions, then the Act
could confirm that
the provisions of the Act do not apply to those individuals to the extent that
they conflict. This approach is
already adopted in relation to the division of
Mental Health Act
. This matter is
discussed in
6.2.17 A new definition of ‘decision-making ability’ should focus
on a person’s
to make decisions. Whether a person in fact
exercises that ability in relation to a particular decision should be immaterial
the focus of the assessment is on the person’s ability to do so.
This serves an important protective function as it would arguably
discriminatory to not acknowledge the support needs of those who are determined
to lack the ability to make their own decisions.
6.2.18 This reform gives people with disability the equal right to make a
decision that might not be considered by others to be ‘rational’.
People without disability have the right to make ‘bad’ decisions
that could be assessed as being irrational or unreasonable
or at odds with their
‘best interests’. People with disability should have the same right
to do so if they wish.
Recommendation 6.1
That the test that assesses a person’s ability to make decisions for
the purposes of the Act not require the person to have
a disability.
of disability
6.3.1 Despite Recommendation 6.1, it may be necessary for the Act to continue
to refer to the term ‘disability’. For example,
the term may be used
when describing the functions and powers of the Public Guardian (discussed in
6.3.2 The Act defines ‘disability’ as ‘any restriction or
lack (resulting from any absence, loss or abnormality
of mental, psychological,
physiological or anatomical structure or function) of ability to perform an
activity in a normal
An equivalent
definition is adopted in the
Mental Health
The Review Committee
conducting the recent review of the
Disability Services Act
support the Act’s definition of disability, commenting that ‘policy
and practice have moved considerably over
those two decades [since the Act was
endorsed consistency with the
which outlines ‘disability
requirements’ rather than defining the term
‘disability’.
6.3.3 The Convention describes persons with disabilities to ‘include
those who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual
or sensory impairments
which in interaction with various barriers may hinder their full and effective
participation in society on
an equal basis with
As noted in
the Issues Paper, the Convention distinguishes between an
which is a malfunction of the body or mind, and a
‘a restriction in activities of a person with an impairment resulting from
society’s failures to socially include
persons with
disabilities.’
emphasis is not upon a medical condition itself, but the way in which barriers
create inability to participate in the community.
This ‘social
model’ of disability shifts the focus to making available supports that
eliminate the barriers that turn
a person’s impairment into disability.
6.3.4 The Institute sought feedback about whether there needs to be any
change to the existing definition of ‘disability’
in the Act.
If ‘disability’ remains part of the test, how should it be
6.3.5 There were five responses to this question, with three specifically
addressing the question of how the term ‘disability’
ought to be
6.3.6 Both EOT and the MHT supported the Act containing a definition that
confirms the social model of disability to focus upon the
way in which a
person’s impairment interacts with external factors within society and it
is this interaction that creates ‘disability’.
Both supported the
Act adopting the Convention definition of disability.
6.3.7 The Institute agrees with these submissions, observing that the
existing definition does not reflect a social model of disability,
and instead
focuses on the individual’s ‘absence, loss or abnormality’.
‘Ability to perform an activity in
a normal manner’ is also neither
respectful, nor adequately descriptive or helpful.
Recommendation 6.2
That, where necessary, the Convention definition of ‘disability’
be used in the Act.
to make decisions or consent
6.4.1 Under the Act, the existence of a disability is itself insufficient to
establish lack of decision-making capacity. The disability
must affect a
person’s decision-making ability. At certain levels, a person is deemed
incapable of making their own decisions:
• an enduring guardian can only commence acting where a donor is unable
to make reasonable judgments about their personal
circumstances;
• an administrator or guardian may only be appointed where a person is
unable to make reasonable judgments about all or any
part of their
• substitute consent to medical and dental treatment can only be given
where a person is incapable of understanding the general
nature and effect of
proposed treatment, or incapable of indicating whether they
6.4.2 Each of these is a functional approach to assessing a person’s
capacity as it is based upon an assessment of mental functioning
and ability.
The first two, however, combine an outcomes perspective, as they call for
consideration of the ‘reasonableness’
of a decision.
6.4.3 The reasonableness of a person’s judgment is not part of the test
for the appointment of a representative in the more
contemporary guardianship
legislation. The focus is instead upon a person’s ability to make a
decision, not the outcome of
their decision-making
The ACT, South
Australia, Queensland, Northern Territory, the UK, Irish Republic, and Victoria,
adopt a test that focuses upon a
person’s ability to:
• understand relevant information (including the consequences of a
• retain that information to the extent necessary to make the decision;
• use or weigh that information in the course of making the decision;
• communicate a
6.4.4 A similar test is adopted in Alberta in
It is also the test
Mental Health Act
The NSW Capacity
Toolkit sets out a similar
and it has ALRC and NSWLRC
endorsement.
6.4.5 The Issues Paper commented that adopting a single test to assess a
person’s decision-making capacity could provide clarity
and consistency.
The Issues Paper sought to establish the extent of community support for this
proposition.
Should the Act provide a single test of decision-making capacity for all
6.4.6 There were 19 responses to this question, although some appeared to
misinterpret the intent of the question.
6.4.7 Eight respondents indicated support for the Act adopting a single test
outlining a person’s decision-making ability. A
single test was supported
primarily for simplicity and clarity. It was observed that it can be difficult
for assessors to have to
apply different tests to establish a person’s
decision-making abilities, for example, under the
Mental Health Act
Powers of Attorney Act
, and under the Act. The Board commented that it
would also be useful for the
Powers of Attorney Act
to outline a
consistent test.
6.4.8 Those respondents that expressed concern about adopting a single test
did so because of the relative nature of a person’s
decision-making
ability. It was observed that decision-making is context specific, depending
upon the subject matter. For example,
a person might have the ability to make
personal decisions but not have the ability to make complex financial decisions,
for example,
in relation to the sale of a home or share portfolio. As EOT
commented, ‘the absence of capacity may be decision-specific,
specific or support dependent.’
6.4.9 The Institute agrees with these observations. It is not intended that
the Act fail to acknowledge the nature of each decision
to be made. Instead, it
is proposed that the Act refer to a person’s ‘decision-making
ability’ in relation to personal
matters, financial matters and health
care. ‘Decision-making ability’ would then be defined to refer to
the process of
a person having the ability to understand relevant information
(including the consequences of a decision), retain that information
extent necessary to make the decision, use or weigh that information in the
course of making the decision and communicate
What is meant by
‘decision-making ability’ would therefore be governed by a single
overarching test. Relevant sections
would then refer to this central definition
and require an assessment of a person’s decision-making ability in
relation to
a particular decision. This addresses concern that the Act must
ensure that a person’s ability is assessed with reference to
the subject
6.4.10 The Institute called for feedback about what test(s) the Act should
outline in relation to a person’s ability to make
What test(s) should the Act provide to assess a person’s
decision-making capacity?
6.4.11 There were 12 written submissions in response to this question, along
with observations made during public consultation meetings.
The Board, OPG and
members of the Elder Law Committee supported the Act adopting a test of
‘decision-making capacity’
as exists under the
Mental Health
. This test was endorsed as providing a rights-based approach to
assessing a person’s ability, rather than considering the
‘reasonableness’
of a person’s decision. Advocacy Tasmania
also emphasised that the Act should not require assessment of whether an
is making a rational decision. It commented that:
People, whether they have a disability or not, make decisions for a whole
range of reasons. Some decisions are emotive, some decisions
are reactive, some
decisions might be considered unwise or irresponsible by other people. If you do
not have a disability, no one
requires you to show a purely rational
cost-benefit type analysis of the processes that went into making a decision. It
reasonable standard to require people with disability to either show
more decision making logic than everyone else, nor to have their
doubted because of the outcomes of the decisions they make.
6.4.12 It is noted that the
Mental Health Act
definition of
‘decision-making capacity’ properly directs assessors to consider a
to make a decision, not whether they have in fact,
in relation to a particular decision, undertaken a ‘rational’ or
approach to decision-making.
6.4.13 The Institute proposes a minor revision to the terminology used in the
Mental Health Act
. It suggests that the Act refer to a person’s
‘decision-making
’ rather than
This is for three reasons:
• first, it properly directs an assessor’s attention to a
person’s abilities. This implicitly requires consideration
person’s ability to make decisions with support, rather than a
person’s ‘capacity’ which implies a more
static concept;
• secondly, the term ‘capacity’ is often misunderstood. The
terms ‘mental capacity’ and ‘legal
capacity’ can be
confused or conflated; and
• thirdly, and linked to the previous point, the word
‘ability’ is likely to be more broadly understood by members
community. This is consistent with one of the Institute’s overarching
objectives of making the law more accessible.
Recommendation 6.3
(1) That the Act adopt the term ‘decision-making ability’ when
referring to a person’s ability to make decisions
or give consent.
(2) That the definition of ‘decision-making ability’ be
consistent with the definition of ‘decision-making capacity’
contained in
Mental Health Act
(Tas) which
provides that an adult is taken to have the ability to make a decision unless a
person or body considering that capacity
is satisfied that they are unable to
understand information relevant to the decision, retain information relevant to
the decision,
use or weigh information relevant to the decision, or communicate
the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other means).
(3) That ‘information relevant to a decision’ be defined
consistently with
Mental Health Act
include information on the consequences of:
· making the decision one way or the other; and
· deferring the making of the decision; and
· failing to make the decision.
(4) That the Act refer to a person’s decision-making
‘ability’ rather than ‘capacity’.
OPG emphasised that the Act should confirm that the test requires consideration
of whether a person is able to make a decision
with support
similarly expressed concern that currently: ‘Capacity can be removed in
circumstances where it is not clear that a rigorous
assessment has been made or
where the capacity for decision making to be retained with the assistance of
aids and supports has not
been tested.’ Speak Out member’s
submission commented that ‘often we haven’t had any support to make
There should be training and support to help us make
decisions.’
6.4.15 The Convention emphasises the need to focus upon a person’s
ability to make decisions with support and the need to make
available the
supports necessary for a person to make their own decision. The ALRC and VLRC
recommended that a person not be considered
to lack the ability to make a
decision if they could make the decision with
Some jurisdictions
adopt this approach. For example:
• the Victorian
Powers of Attorney Act
provides that
‘a person has decision-making capacity for a matter if it is possible for
the person to make a decision in the
matter with practicable and appropriate
• in the Irish Republic and the UK, a person cannot be considered
unable to make their own decision unless all practicable steps
have been taken
to help them do so, without
This position is
also soon to be adopted in Queensland, providing that an adult is not to be
treated as unable to make a decision
have been taken to provide the adult with the support and access to information
to make and communicate a
6.4.16 If a person can make a decision with support, then there is no need
for operation of the Act. The Institute therefore recommends
that the Act
confirm that a person has the ability to make decisions if they can make a
decision with practicable and appropriate
support. It further recommends that
the Act provide that a person cannot be deemed unable to make their own decision
without having
first attempted to support the person to make their own
Recommendation 6.4
(1) That the definition of decision-making ability provide that a person has
decision-making ability if they are able to make a decision
with practicable and
appropriate support.
(2) That the Act provide that it may not be determined that a person does not
have decision-making ability unless all practicable
steps have been taken to
provide the person with appropriate support to make and communicate a
6.4.17 The OPG commented that the test that assesses a person’s ability
to make decisions needs to highlight that a person’s
ability is relative
to the subject matter. A person’s ability might also fluctuate. Other
respondents also highlighted this
issue, as outlined previously in this Part.
The Institute therefore proposes that, consistent with the
Mental Health
, the definition of ‘decision-making ability’ confirm that a
person need only have the ability to retain information for
a sufficient time to
make a decision. The
Mental Health Act
also confirms that a person is
taken to understand information relevant to a decision if it reasonably appears
that they are able
to understand an explanation given in a way that is
appropriate to their circumstances.
Recommendation 6.5
That the definition of ‘decision-making ability’ in the Act adopt
equivalent provisions to
Mental Health Act
(Tas), which confirm that:
(a) a person may be taken to understand information relevant to a decision if
it reasonably appears that he or she is able to understand
an explanation of the
nature and consequences of the decision given in a way that is appropriate to
his or her circumstances (whether
by words, signs or other means); and
(b) a person may be taken to be able to retain information relevant to a
decision even if he or she may only be able to retain the
information
test of capacity to make an instrument
6.5.1 There is no statutory test for capacity to make an instrument. The
common law test of capacity requires a donor to have the
capacity to understand
the nature and effect of an instrument when it is explained to
Capacity is assessed in
light of relevant facts and
circumstances.
6.5.2 The following statutory test of capacity to make an enduring power of
attorney is contained in the
Powers of Attorney Act
a donor is taken to understand the nature and effect of a deed or instrument
only if he or she understands the following matters:
(a) that the donor may, in the enduring power of attorney, specify or limit
the power to be given to an attorney and instruct an attorney
of the power;
(b) when the power begins;
(c) that, once the power for a matter begins, the attorney has power to make,
and will have full control over, the matter subject
to terms or information
(d) that the donor may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time when
he or she has the mental capacity to do so;
(e) that the power the donor has given continues even if the donor
subsequently loses his or her mental capacity;
(f) that the donor is unable to oversee the use of the power if he or she
subsequently loses mental
6.5.3 In Victoria, Queensland and the ACT, a person must meet a similar test
to appoint an enduring
appointing an attorney. In the Northern
Territory, the test of capacity to
appoint an enduring guardian focuses on a person’s ability to understand
and retain information,
weigh up that information, and communicate a
There is no
statutory test for capacity to complete an instrument in New South Wales or
Western Australia.
6.5.4 The Institute proposes that the Act outline a test of decision-making
ability required to make an instrument. It is suggested
that the Act outline
what ‘information relevant to a decision’ means in relation to
appointing an enduring guardian,
Powers of Attorney Act
effectively does presently. This provides guidance to those assessing a
person’s ability to make an instrument about what the
considerations are in order to understand the nature and effect of appointing an
enduring guardian.
6.5.5 This reform will provide greater clarity about the test that applies
for a person to be able to make an instrument. The intention
is to reduce the
likelihood of a person making an instrument when they do not have the
decision-making ability to do so. This acts
as a safeguard, by ensuring that a
person is able to properly understand the delegation of powers to an enduring
guardian. It is
also intended to reduce the likelihood of third parties seeking
to procure the creation of an instrument when the donor does not
decision-making ability to do so.
Recommendation 6.6
(1) That the Act require a donor to have decision-making ability to make and
revoke an instrument.
(2) That the Act outline what ‘information relevant to a
decision’ includes in relation to a donor’s decision-making
to make or revoke an instrument.
test of capacity to make an advance care directive
6.6.1 Part 5 recommends the introduction of a legislative scheme providing
for the creation and use of ACDs. This necessitates consideration
of whether the
Act should prescribe a test of ability to make an ACD and if so, what that test
6.6.2 The Convention Committee has stated that people with disabilities must
be given the opportunity to complete advance planning
on equal basis with
In South Australia
and Victoria, the common law test of capacity to create an ACD has been
codified, requiring a person to understand
the nature and effect of an
In Queensland, a person
must understand that the document will only operate while the person has
impaired capacity and that they
can revoke the document at any time that they
have capacity to do so.
6.6.3 Feedback was requested about who ought to be able to complete an
If advance care directives were given legislative force, then who should be
able to make an advance care
6.6.4 There were 11 written, and one verbal submission to this question. Most
responses identified that a person should be able to
make an ACD for themselves.
Social Work Services RHH commented that even a person deemed unable to make
their own decisions must
still be able to express wishes and have those wishes
taken into account and that an ACD is a vehicle or communication aid to assist
the person to do so.
6.6.5 Consistent with Recommendation 6.6, the Institute considers that the
statutory test to make an ACD be that the person making
the ACD has
‘decision-making ability’ to complete an ACD. It is proposed that
the test require assessment of a person’s
decision-making ability in
relation to each statement in an ACD, consistent with
This provides
flexibility and maximises opportunity for a person’s directions to be
followed, noting, for example, that a person
may have the decision-making
ability to make a ‘values directive’ (expressing broad values
relevant to a decision), but
not have the ability to make an
‘instructional directive’ (giving binding directions or consent or
refusal to health
care and treatment). Within one ACD might be both values
directives and instructional directives. Similarly, a person might be able
understand information relevant to one treatment decision but not another. This
approach recognises that decision-making ability
is context specific.
Recommendation 6.7
(1) That any person with decision-making ability to make an advance care
directive be able to make an advance care directive.
(2) That the Act acknowledge that a person’s decision-making ability
should be assessed in relation to each directive or statement
in an advance care
Presumption
of capacity
6.7.1 The Act does not state that it there is a presumption that a person has
capacity unless established otherwise. Whilst this is
the case, the Capacity
Toolkit, developed to assist those assessing a person’s abilities, states
that an assessment must start
with an assumption that a person has
As the Board noted
in its submission, this is the position at common law, and thus the approach
that it adopts at a hearing.
6.7.2 Some groups have recommended that legislation explicitly state that a
person is presumed to have capacity to make their own
decisions unless it is
objectively assessed
This is to ensure that a person is not assumed to lack the ability to make a
decision, particularly on the basis of status, such
as having a disability. On
the other hand, the ALRC does not endorse legislation that provides a
presumption of capacity, on the
basis that this necessarily creates delineation
between those who have capacity and those who do
includes a presumption of capacity, as does legislation in several
6.7.3 The Issues Paper asked for feedback about whether there is merit to the
Act confirming that there must be a presumption of capacity.
Should the Act include a presumption that all people have capacity to make
their own decisions?
6.7.4 There were 21 written submissions in response to this question, along
with two verbal submissions. All but one indicated support
for this reform, with
varying levels of support expressed.
6.7.5 Recommendation 6.3(2)
provides that a person is taken to have
the ability to make decisions unless one or more of the four criteria is not
satisfied. It
therefore confirms that the starting point must be that a person
is assumed to have the ability to make decisions unless there is
evidence that
they are unable to do one or more of the functions outlined. This is, in effect,
a statutory presumption of capacity.
6.7.6 The Institute considers that this formulation appropriately addresses
the need and support for the Act confirming that the starting
point must always
be that a person is assumed to have the ability to make decisions unless proven
otherwise. The Institute is not
against the Act also containing a separate
section confirming the common law presumption of capacity. It has not, however,
recommendation to this effect on the basis that it may unnecessarily
lengthen the Act without adding any benefit. If, however, reforms
implement the test of ‘decision-making ability’ in accordance with
Recommendation 6.3(2), then it would seem
appropriate for the Act to provide a
separate declaration confirming that there is a presumption of capacity.
Assumptions
6.8.1 The Act does not provide guidance about factors that must be considered
irrelevant when assessing a person’s abilities.
The Capacity Toolkit,
however, outlines factors that should not, themselves, lead to an assumption
that a person does not have
6.8.2 Some guardianship legislation lists factors that ought not be
considered relevant or lead to an assumption that a person does
not have the
ability to make decisions. These sections provide, for example, that it must not
be assumed that a person does not have
decision-making capacity merely on the
basis that:
• a person can only retain information for a limited
• a person’s capacity
fluctuates;
• a person makes a decision that is, in the opinion of others,
• a decision results, or may result, in an adverse outcome for the
• a person engages in unconventional behaviour or personal expression,
or because of a person’s
appearance;
• a person chooses a living environment or lifestyle with which other
people do not agree;
• a person does not have a particular level of literacy or education;
• a person engages in particular cultural or religious
• because of a person’s
These provisions are aimed at ensuring that people do not apply prejudice or
stereotypes when assessing a person’s abilities.
As the assessment of a
person’s abilities is critical to the operation of the Act, it is
important that an assessment of a
person’s abilities is conducted
appropriately.
6.8.3 The Institute sought feedback about whether stakeholders felt that a
list of irrelevant matters within the Act would serve any
useful purpose.
Should the Act list matters that must not be considered when assessing a
person’s capacity?
6.8.4 Sixteen respondents addressed this question. Nine respondents expressed
support for this reform.
Reasons given were largely consistent with observations made above, specifically
that there are factors that ought not be relevant
when assessing whether a
person has the ability to make decisions. The OPG commented that ‘it could
be helpful to list factors
that would eliminate irrelevant matters being
considered that might erroneously lead to an assumption of incapacity.’
Trustee noted that ‘[a]ny test of capacity should embrace legal
prescriptions relating to discrimination et cetera.’
6.8.5 Some respondents identified specific factors that ought to be included
in this list, including stereotypes around disability,
bad decisions made long
a bad credit history,
making deliberate bad choices (for example, smoking), anecdotal evidence,
criminal records, family history
and intergenerational decision-making,
educational history, IQ, age, appearance, behaviour, religion and/or political
affiliation.
The OPMHS noted: ‘Views that are not mainstream, but still
culturally appropriate for the person’s background and personal
system, should not be used as evidence of a lack of capacity.’ The MHT
commented that ‘decisions regarding the
treatment of mental illness should
be included under exclusionary criteria.’
6.8.6 Three submissions did not support this reform. The Board, for example,
observed that:
Whether the Act should list matters that must not be considered when
assessing a person’s capacity really depends on what test,
if any, the Act
provides to assess a person’s decision making capacity. If the Act is
amended to include a comprehensive test
of capacity, then it is questionable as
to whether principles stating what must not be considered when assessing
capacity, is required.
If only general guidelines are adopted then there may be
more benefit to list such matters.
6.8.7 In essence, the Board’s submission questions the utility of the
Act providing a separate list of irrelevant matters if
the meaning of
‘decision-making ability’ is sufficiently defined. The Institute
observes that Recommendation 6.3(2)
already provides that a person is
taken to have the ability to make decisions unless one of four criteria is not
satisfied. It therefore
does provide guidance about the factors that may be
considered when assessing whether a person has the ability to make a decision.
This questions the utility of including a separate provision outlining a list of
factors that must not lead to an assumption that
a person does not have the
ability to make decisions.
6.8.8 Members of the Elder Law Committee did not support the Act containing a
list of factors that should not be considered when assessing
decision-making ability. It also questioned whether this reform would serve any
useful purpose:
the Committee does not feel that a list of matters that must not, in and of
themselves, lead to an assumption of lack of capacity
(see pages 24–25 of
the issues paper) provides much or any utility. Each of those factors listed may
in fact be evidence of
lack of capacity. The Committee’s recommendation
that there be a presumption of capacity would, it is submitted, be sufficient
make the starting point for any investigation into capacity sufficiently
6.8.9 The Convention requires State parties to take appropriate measures to
combat stereotypes and prejudices relating to people with
disability.
The Institute
considers that the Act can, and should, play a positive role in challenging
stereotypes — particularly in relation
to disability, age and mental
health. It should also emphasise that, just because a person makes a risky
decision or a decision that
most people may not agree with, does not mean that
they do not have decision-making ability. A list of irrelevant matters also
attention on the need to ensure that there are no external factors that
are impacting upon the assessment of a person’s
Recommendation 6.8
That the Act list factors that must not, by themselves, result in an
assumption that the person does not have decision-making ability.
These should
· where a person makes a decision that is, in the opinion of others,
· where a decision results, or may result, in an adverse outcome for the
· where a person does not have a particular level of literacy or
· where a person engages in particular cultural, political or religious
practices; and
· assumptions because of a person’s age.
a person’s decision-making abilities
6.9.1 Some jurisdictions provide guidelines or obligations for individuals
assessing a person’s capacity under the
Recent legislative
reforms proposed in Victoria, for example, provide that: ‘a person who is
assessing whether a person has
decision-making capacity in relation to a matter
must take reasonable steps to conduct the assessment at a time at which, and in
an environment in which, the person’s decision-making capacity can be
assessed most
accurately.’
has recently recommended that New South Wales’ legislation provide similar
principles to guide the assessment of
decision-making
6.9.2 In line with the focus on a person’s abilities rather than
incapacities, the Act should ensure that the context surrounding
the assessment
of a person’s ability is optimum for the person to display their
decision-making abilities. The assessment of
a person’s ability to make
decisions is fundamental to the operation of the Act and needs to be conducted
appropriately. It
is also one way that the Act can itself be proactive in
ensuring that a person is supported with decision-making.
Recommendation 6.9
That the Act require a person assessing a person’s decision-making
ability to take reasonable steps to conduct the assessment
at a time, and in an
environment in which, the person’s ability can be most accurately
should assess a person’s decision-making ability?
6.10.1 As the Board highlighted in its submission, assessment of a
person’s decision-making ability arises in a range of contexts:
• in relation to a person making an instrument;
• in relation to whether a representative needs to be appointed;
• in relation to whether, in relation to a particular decision, a
represented person has decision-making ability; and
• in relation to whether a person has decision-making ability to
consent to medical treatment.
6.10.2 Applications to the Board for the review of an instrument, or
appointment of a representative must generally be submitted with
an accompanying
relevant health care professional report
‘Health Care
Professional’ is defined to include a medical practitioner and
psychologist.
‘psychologist’ is also
Applications in
relation to consent to treatment require a report from a registered
practitioner. ‘Registered practitioner’
is defined as ‘a
person who is a medical practitioner or person registered under the Health
Practitioner Regulation National
Law (Tasmania) in the dental profession as a
In relation
to any application, the Board may also receive and consider other evidence
relevant to the question of a person’s
capacity, and acts as the finder of
fact in relation to a person’s capacity.
6.10.3 The Issues Paper noted that, if guardianship laws shift towards
assessing people’s decision-making capacity by reference
to the supports
they need to make a decision, different processes and skills may be
Some provinces in
Canada have developed training and accreditation requirements for those
conducting assessments of a person’s
abilities for the purpose of
guardianship applications. For example, in Ontario, there is a separate Capacity
Assessment Office that
trains health professionals to be capacity assessors
under their legislation.
Similarly, in Alberta, capacity assessors can be not only a medical practitioner
or psychologist, but also a registered nurse, a
registered psychiatric nurse, an
occupational therapist or a social worker. Professionals must, however, be
designated as capacity
The relevant
minister has the power to establish or approve training courses for capacity
regulations also prescribe the fees payable for an assessment and enable
application to the Crown for those fees
The VLRC recommended
that training and certification processes be developed based on the approach in
6.10.4 The Issues Paper asked for comment about who ought to be able to
conduct capacity assessments for the purpose of establishing
decision-making ability.
Who should be able to conduct a capacity
assessment?
6.10.5 Nineteen submissions addressed this
There was a broad
range of observations but most respondents indicated that a medical opinion
ought to be provided. Four
respondents
supported there
being an accreditation scheme, requiring those providing medical opinion to the
Board about a person’s capacity
needing to have accredited qualification
or training. On the other hand, two respondents considered that a person’s
practitioner is best placed to conduct an assessment. Another submission
highlighted the importance of a person having a choice in
who conducts an
assessment.
6.10.6 Speak Out advocates commented that, because of the shift toward
assessing a person’s need for decision-making support,
an assessment
should be collaborative, and multidisciplinary. Speak Out members submitted that
‘[i]t shouldn’t be a doctor
that doesn’t know the person. A
doctor doesn’t know if we are capable of looking after our money.’
They submitted
that an assessment should be made by ‘[s]omeone who see you
every day and knows you best.’
6.10.7 The OPMHS submitted that:
Other countries make the person requiring a capacity assessment responsible
for that assessment. This has the advantage that this
person usually also has
the best background knowledge of the particular area of capacity in question,
e.g. a solicitor giving advice
on a will is already aware of the background and
required considerations to do this. Asking a psychiatrist or GP to make a
assessment re this while refusing to provide any detail about the
circumstances of the person is likely to lead to an inappropriate
assessment as
the complexity of the will play as much a role as the deficits the person has.
It can also lead to unnecessary costs
and delays to the patient. Therefore
solicitors/lawyers should be able to assess capacity relating to legal matters
like wills, enduring
guardianship and power of attorney matters. In difficult
situations like complex mental illness they should seek advice from a specialist
e.g. a psychiatrist, but this would require cooperation so the specialist
understands the complexity of the decisions and background
to be considered.
6.10.8 Members of the Elder Law Committee commented that:
The Committee supports the continuance of the current system whereby expert
opinion evidence about capacity and relevant medical conditions
and impairments
is given by one or more appropriately qualified health care professionals, which
then, along with other evidence
from family members, carers and the person
themself, is taken into account by the Board as the finder of fact.
6.10.9 The Institute agrees with the views of members of the Elder Law
Committee that it is appropriate for the Board to retain discretion
evidence it requires and the weight that it attaches to evidence presented. The
OPG and the Board also supported continuation
of the existing provisions. The
Institute does not, therefore, propose any statutory reform in relation to who
may assess a person’s
decision-making abilities.
6.10.10 The Board’s submission did, however, express concern that the
Act does not restrict family members from completing HCPRs
in relation to family
members. The Board advises that there have been situations where medical
practitioners have provided reports
the subject of a Board hearing. This can lead to dispute by other family
members, and
the need to obtain independent assessments causing delay.
6.10.11 In South Australia, legislation excludes medical practitioners who
are related by blood or marriage or their partner from
signing certificates or
reports about their family members’
situations similar to those described above occurring, the Institute recommends
that the Act adopt an equivalent provision.
Recommendation 6.10
That the Regulations exclude health practitioners submitting a report that
deals with the decision-making ability of a close relative
(defined in
accordance with Recommendation 4.9(2)) for the purposes of regs 4 and 8.
Obstructing
the completion of an assessment of a person’s decision-making abilities
6.11.1 Apart from in relation to emergency orders, for the Board to exercise
its jurisdiction, it must be satisfied that the person
the subject of an
application is unable to make their own decisions. If the Board is not satisfied
that the person is unable to make
decisions, then it has no power to appoint a
representative or give consent to medical treatment. This is a threshold test
upon the operation of the Board’s protective jurisdiction.
6.11.2 Situations can arise where the person in respect of whom a hearing is
being held refuses to undergo a capacity assessment.
Or, there is a risk of
family members obstructing this process for their own personal interests. The
following section considers
whether there needs to be reform to the Act to
facilitate the collation of evidence of a person’s decision-making
An individual’s refusal to attend or
participate in an assessment
6.11.3 The Act does not give any direct power to the Board or Public Guardian
to compel a person to submit to a medical examination
for the purpose of
ascertaining their decision-making ability. Under recent amendments to the
Regulations, the Board is able to hear
a matter in the absence of the usual HCPR
having been submitted.
Despite this reform, the Board has commented that: ‘The Board can request
the Public Guardian to investigate the matter but
we can do little else if there
is no medical evidence commenting on disability and incapacity.’
6.11.4 This issue requires reconciliation of conflicting issues —
first, the importance of protecting the interests of a person
who might be
vulnerable to harm or abuse, and secondly, the need to protect a person’s
freedom of liberty and choice. It also
requires legislation to ‘balance
the potential injustice if a person is subsequently assessed to be capable
against the possible
intervention.’
At a practical level, it may not be feasible to compel a person to undergo an
assessment of their decision-making abilities against
their will if they attend
an assessment but then refuse to participate.
6.11.5 The Board’s submission provided an example of where this issue
has arisen recently:
In an unreported matter, the proposed represented person (the PRP) came to
the attention of Tasmania Police who were concerned for
his welfare as he
appeared disorientated and confused. He refused to go to the hospital and so
police returned him home and contacted
Older Persons Mental Health Services
(OPMHS) for follow up. An emergency guardianship application was made by
Tasmania Police to
the Board. The application did not identify any immediate
risk to the PRP and no medical evidence was provided as to whether PRP
incapacity arising from a disability. The Board dismissed the Application. OPMHS
made contact with the PRP at his home and
established that he had not seen a
doctor for approximately 10 years and had refused to see one. There was concern
that he was at
risk of malnutrition, hypothermia and unable to cope with
activities of daily living. They arranged for an old age psychiatrist to
the PRP at his residence and the psychiatrist made an initial diagnosis of
dementia and possible delirium. The PRP refused
to attend the hospital, contrary
to medical advice. A further application for an emergency order together with a
report from the
old age psychiatrist was filed with the Board. On that evidence
the Board deemed the PRP to be at immediate risk of harm and made
an emergency
order appointing the Public Guardian, who gave consent for the PRP’s
conveyance and treatment at hospital. The
diagnosis of dementia was confirmed.
An application was made for guardianship and after a hearing, the Board made a
limited order
appointing the Public Guardian for 12 months.
If the PRP had refused OPMHS and the old age psychiatrist entry to his home,
the Board would not have had sufficient evidence to make
an emergency order. If
no immediate risk existed but there still appeared to be a need for the
appointment of a guardian without
medical evidence from the old age psychiatrist
the application would have been dismissed.
6.11.6 The Board’s submission also referred to its recent decision of
demonstrating one
way that the Board has developed pragmatic solutions to resolve the issue of
obtaining medical evidence:
In this matter KCP appointed his daughter MP as his guardian by an Instrument
appointing an enduring guardian. An application was
made by TP, son of KCP to
review the enduring guardianship instrument as he had had no contact with his
father since August 2016
and did not know about his care and accommodation. The
Guardianship and Administration Regulations 2007
did not require
report from a health care professional to accompany the Application. The Board
had no medical evidence before it
as to disability and incapacity. TP and MP are
estranged. MP stated that she had not exercised the power of an enduring
because KCP had capacity to make his own decisions. A directions
hearing was held and MP agreed to provide the Board with a medical
medical report was provided to the Board which reported KCP was capable of
making reasonable judgement about personal matters.
This medical opinion was
accepted by the Board. The Board received evidence that KCP wished to have
visits from TP. The Act enables
the Board to revoke or amend the instrument if
the Board is satisfied that the enduring guardian is not willing or able to act
that capacity. The Board was satisfied that MP was willing but not able to
act in the capacity of guardian. The reason for this conclusion
was that the
Board had no doubt that KCP had for some time desired a relationship with his
son TP. MP because of the intensity of
her feelings towards her brother TP had
been unable to ascertain and give effect to KCP’s wishes to see his son.
varied the enduring guardian instrument of KCP by substituting the
Public Guardian.
If MP had refused to facilitate KCP’s appointment with a medical
practitioner or KCP had refused to attend an appointment with
practitioner then the Board would have had no evidence as to KCP’s
capacity and his ability to make decisions as
to his relationships, including
visits by relatives.
6.11.7 The Issues Paper gave examples where legislation provides powers to
compel a capacity assessment. In South Australia, for example,
the tribunal can
require a person to submit to a capacity or medical
assessment.
If they fail to
do so, then in some circumstances it can order the Public Advocate to take them
for examination and
assessment.
A fine may be
imposed if a person hinders or obstructs this
In the Northern
Territory, the Public Guardian is given power to request a person to obtain a
medical report in the first
If that request is
not complied with, then the tribunal can make an order requiring a health
assessment.
In Saskatchewan
and Alberta, Canada, the court also has power to require a person to submit to
an examination.
person refuses to submit to a capacity assessment, or is prevented from
attending, the court may make a determination about
capacity if satisfied on the
available evidence.
also noted that the Queensland legislation allows the Tribunal to direct a
person to undergo examination by a doctor or
psychologist,
and that the
Mental Health Act
also allows for compulsory assessment of persons with
mental illness.
6.11.8 The Institute asked for views about whether the Act should give the
Board and/or the Public Guardian power to compel a person
to submit to a medical
examination, and if so, when.
Should the Board and/or the Public Guardian have power to require a person to
submit to a medical examination? If so, in what
circumstances?
6.11.9 There were 16 responses and division in the views expressed. Six
responses supported the Act enabling an assessment to be compelled,
equal number did not. Others did not express support or rejection of either
alternative — the OPG, for example, commented
that it held no firm view
but noted the practicalities of compelling a person to undergo a medical
assessment if they then refuse
to participate. Speak Out’s submission
commented that members it consulted with were not sure about this issue. Its
also queried the practicalities of requiring a person to submit to a
capacity assessment if they were not a willing participant.
They commented that
there should not be an assumption that a person does not have capacity merely on
the basis that they refuse to
answer questions.
6.11.10 Those who disagreed expressed concerns about the impact upon a
person’s freedom of decision and action. PCT commented,
for example, that
‘it can give rise to loss of personal freedom, discrimination or
discriminatory behaviour.’
6.11.11 EOT raised similar concerns:
This concern was reflected by the Community Affairs References Committee in
its report into violence, abuse and neglect against people
with disability in
institutional and residential settings:
‘At the heart of the issue of legal incapacity is the concept of
decision-making for a number of reasons. First, when decision-making
from the hands of a person, it becomes easier for the decision-maker –
whether it be parent, carer or departmental
officer — to then make
decisions on behalf of that individual that may seem “to be in their best
interests” but
may actually be completely counter to the wishes of that
person. Second, in every situation where a person has been forced to cede
own autonomy to another, there is the opportunity for abuse of that
decision-making power. Finally, when the erosion of control
from people with
disability is normalised it makes it easier for society to accept that even
those people with disability not subject
to legal guardianship order can have
their will subverted as happens with the use of restrictive practices or forced
treatments.’
6.11.12 Those in support of this option noted the importance of obtaining an
assessment of a person’s ability as a protective
mechanism to trigger
operation of the Act. It was typically considered that there may be a limited
number of circumstances in which
it might be appropriate to require a person to
submit to an assessment. Members of the Elder Law Committee commented:
The Committee’s view is that the protective nature of the Board’s
capacity to decline an
assessment that could, if made, lead to an appointment of a substitute decision
maker to act in their best
The Committee suggests that a hearing should first be conducted and a test
included in the Act requiring the Board to be satisfied
that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the person may lack capacity, and may be
in need of an Administrator and/or
Guardian, and that the circumstances (as
known to the Board without requiring findings about disputed matters) warrant
being required to undergo a capacity assessment.
The Committee’s view, however, is that the only consequence for a
person who refuses to undergo a capacity assessment when ordered
to do so should
be a rebuttable presumption that by doing so they lack capacity.
6.11.13 Social Work Services RHH also considered that it would be appropriate
to require a person to submit to an assessment where
there is evidence that the
person is suspected to be at risk. It submitted the following example of when
this might be appropriate:
Example: A person responsible obstructs cognitive and capacity assessment
because they are the perpetrator of elder abuse or neglect.
Where there is
sufficient evidence that the PRP is at risk and there is enough suspicion that
the PRP is a likely victim of (elder)
abuse, this would be a supportive
6.11.14 The OPMHS also suggested that there are situations where it may be
appropriate to require a person to undergo an assessment.
It commented that
provisions to this effect are already contained within the
Mental Health
in relation to assessment of mental illness, but with the Act leaving a
gap in relation to the protection of those who do not fall
within that
currently people with an illness or disability suffering from or at risk of
self-neglect and malnourishment or symptoms of untreated
illness, can only be
assessed compulsory under the
Mental Health Act
. This, however, does not
apply to people with certain illnesses including dementia, which leaves them in
a very vulnerable position
and puts services in a very difficult situation:
Older Person’s Mental Health Services on occasion get requests to assess
thought to be cognitively impaired and at risk. In some cases it is
possible to gain access and assess the person informally, but
in some instances
they refuse contact and any assessment, but significant concerns for the welfare
of the person remain. Unless there
is any indication of a mental illness as
defined in the
Mental Health Act
, in which case this can be used, there
is no pathway to actually get this person assessed. This forces services to
leave people in
a vulnerable situation without being able to assess capacity and
risk adequately. It also creates difficult standards depending on
what illness
people suffer from with patients with mental illness, to which the MHA applies,
can be taken into protective custody
by a range of professions for assessment,
while people to which the MHA does not apply cannot be taken for assessment.
The circumstances should be that:
• there is reason for concern about the person’s health and
safety or evidence of an illness or impairment (e.g. not going
out or shopping
any more, signs of self-neglect, history of cognitive impairment or disability);
• attempts to conduct a voluntary assessment have failed
• similar to provisions in the MHA the threshold should be a
suspected, not proven lack of capacity given that often it will
be community
staff rather than doctors who will make initial contact and assess the patient
at home. They can collect valuable information,
but at least under current
legislation are not able to make an official capacity assessment. If information
raising significant doubt
over a person’s capacity has been collected by
people unable to formally assess capacity, e.g. non-medical staff, or
information
suggesting this has been provided by others like family members or
neighbours, but the person refuses an assessment by a person able
capacity, the Board should be able to order the person to have an assessment.
This could either provide a legal framework
for an assessment at home against
the wishes of the person or if they do not cooperate admitting them to a
suitable hospital. This
would allow an assessment re diagnosis, treatable causes
of impairment and capacity.
6.11.15 At consultation meetings convened by Carers Tasmania, attendees
shared stories demonstrating the practical difficulties that
can arise. Examples
included family members applying to the Board but experiencing difficulties when
the person the subject of an
application refused to attend or participate in an
assessment. Inability to obtain medical evidence has resulted in the Board being
unable to intervene, despite the concerns of family members and their desire to
promote the interests of the proposed represented
6.11.16 The Institute has not made recommendations for reform in relation to
the gathering of evidence of a person’s decision-making
ability for the
purpose of operation of the Act. This is on the basis that:
• it would be contrary to a person’s will and preference and this
ought to be paramount;
• the Board has demonstrated ways in which it currently manages to
resolve this circumstance despite not having direct powers
to compel a person to
undergo an assessment;
• if the Board is unable to proceed because of the absence of a medical
report about a person’s decision-making ability,
it retains power to make
emergency orders if necessary (if the test for the making of an emergency order
• it is more appropriate that a person is offered support to make their
own supported decision. Complementary reforms giving
power to the Public
Guardian to negotiate or mediate a matter may
• at a practical level, it may be difficult to undertake an assessment
of a person’s decision-making ability where they
refuse to participate in
an assessment.
Third parties obstructing
assessments
6.11.17 Of greater concern to the Institute are circumstances where third
parties, for example family members or others close to a
person, may obstruct or
prevent an assessment of a person’s decision-making abilities from taking
place. This might be for
a range of reasons, but at worst, might be used as a
deliberate attempt to thwart the Board’s ability to intervene and make
orders to further an individual’s personal interests.
6.11.18 There is no specific provision within the Act dealing with these
circumstances. Potentially, the conduct might amount to hindering
proceedings under the Act which is an offence under
If the Board has
made a lawful order or direction requiring a representative to facilitate a
capacity assessment, then this might
amount to contempt of the
6.11.19 The Institute asked for views about whether the Act should create
penalties for third parties who prevent or obstruct a capacity
assessment.
Should there be any consequences for people who prevent or obstruct a
capacity assessment?
6.11.20 There were five responses to this question. Four indicated that there
ought to be penalties imposed in certain circumstances
where individuals
obstruct a capacity assessment. The fifth respondent did not specifically
indicate a preference.
6.11.21 The OPMHS commented that there should be criminal penalties available
for individuals who obstruct a capacity assessment.
This was supported on the
basis that failure to complete a capacity assessment ‘is likely a step
leaving people in a vulnerable
situation and potentially enabling elder abuse in
the long run, even if initially well meant.’ Members of the Elder Law
instead considered that moderate civil penalties ought to be imposed
where the Board determines that a person’s conduct is
unreasonable or
inappropriate. Dr Elizabeth
commented that the
consequence should be that the person not be able to act as the person’s
representative.
6.11.22 As already commented, the assessment of a person’s
decision-making abilities is fundamental to the operation of the
creates a risk of people intentionally withholding or obstructing the collation
of medical evidence as a strategic tool
to avoid the Board’s jurisdiction.
The Institute is concerned that this activity might be intended to conceal
potential abuse
or neglect.
6.11.23 The Institute does not propose that penalties be imposed where a
person has a reasonable excuse for attempting to prevent
an assessment being
conducted. It should be a matter for the Board to consider, at its discretion,
what amounts to a reasonable excuse.
This might, for example, include where a
person has the interests of a proposed represented person as paramount and is
uphold the wishes of the person who may themselves object to the
assessment. But, to effectively respond to circumstances where a
person seeks to
obstruct the obtaining of information relevant to a hearing, the Institute
considers it appropriate that an offence
be created.
6.11.24 Effectively, this is an extension of existing provisions that create
offences for those who fail to assist the Board to obtain
evidence. These
include offences for failing to comply with a summons to appear before the Board
or produce documents,
refusing to be sworn or to answer any relevant question when required to do so
by the Board.
noted, the Act also provides an overarching offence for those who hinder any
proceedings under the
6.11.25 Ultimately, penalties should only be imposed in exceptional of cases,
with mediation being attempted first. The use of alternative
dispute resolution
is discussed further in Part
Recommendation 6.11
That the Act create an offence where a person intentionally or recklessly
obstructs another person undergoing an assessment of their
decision-making
ability for the purpose of the Act, without reasonable excuse.
in relation to assessments
6.12.1 The Issues Paper observed that there are no offences imposed within
the Act for failing to properly conduct an assessment of
abilities. It might, however, have implications under other laws or result in a
breach of professional or ethical
6.12.2 In South Australia, guardianship legislation creates a specific
offence for a medical practitioner, psychologist or member
of the health
profession to:
• sign any certificate or report without having personally examined the
• wilfully certify that a person has a mental incapacity, not believing
that to be the case, or making any other false or misleading
It is also an offence to purport to be a medical practitioner, psychologist
or member of the health
profession.
6.12.3 The Issues Paper asked whether there ought to be consequences where a
person fails to adequately assess a person’s capacity
for the purposes of
Should there be consequences for failing to properly conduct a capacity
assessment? What might this
6.12.4 Eleven respondents answered this question. Three respondents suggested
that there should be consequences where a medical practitioner
does not properly
complete an assessment, with one commenting that fines ought to be able to be
imposed. Six respondents asserted
that the Act should not impose specific
penalties, with the majority commenting that inappropriate or negligent conduct
would already
be covered under other regulatory schemes, including the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA), the Tasmanian
Complaints Commissioner, or
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(Tasmania) Act 2010
(Tas), in addition to potential consequences for the
individual’s employment. The other two responses stated that consequences
for failing to properly conduct an assessment should include having the
individual reassessed, with two suggesting re-training for
the individual.
6.12.5 The Institute agrees that other regulatory schemes address
inappropriate conduct by health practitioners broadly and that this
conducting a capacity assessment for the purposes of the Act. The Institute
notes, however, the OPG’s suggestion
that a medical practitioner should be
required to record in a patient’s records the fact that they assessed the
as lacking decision-making capacity, and any substitute consent
sought. This matter is addressed in Part
Social Work Services RHH
also submitted that the Act should specifically require an assessor to have met
with the individual. This
is similar to the position in South Australia
(outlined above), where guardianship legislation creates a specific offence for
assessor to sign any certificate or report without having personally examined
the person.
The Institute
does not make recommendations for reform to adopt this proposal on the basis
that it does not have sufficient evidence
of the need for such reform.
and Formal Supported Decision-Making Frameworks
Introduction
7.1.1 The Institute’s Terms of Reference required analysis of how both
informal and formal assisted or supported decision-making
frameworks are working
for Tasmanians with impaired capacity, having regard to national and
international trends.
7.1.2 Parts 2 and 3 outlined what the Convention and ALRC say about providing
support for decision-making. In its simplest form, the
Convention mandates that
supports must be available for people to make their own decisions about matters
affecting their lives. This
Part reviews and makes several recommendations to
reform the Act to better recognise and strengthen the provision of support for
decision-making.
Convention and ALRC recommendations
7.2.1 Fundamental to the Convention is that people who require
decision-making support must have access to support to make their own
Article 12(3) of the Convention requires State parties to ‘take
appropriate measures to provide access by persons
with disabilities to the
support they may require in exercising their legal capacity.’
7.2.2 The ALRC has developed guidelines about providing support to people to
make decisions that are intended to reflect the principles
and obligations under
the Convention:
ALRC Support
(a) Persons who require decision-making support should be supported to
participate in and contribute to all aspects of life.
(b) Persons who require decision-making support should be supported in
making decisions.
(c) The role of persons who provide decision-making support should be
acknowledged and respected — including family members,
carers or other
significant people chosen to provide support.
(d) Persons who may require decision-making support may chose not to be
Assessing support needs
In assessing what support is required in decision-making, the following must
be considered:
(a) All adults must be presumed to have ability to make decisions that
affect their lives.
(b) A person must not be assessed to lack decision-making ability on the
basis of having a disability.
(c) A person’s decision making ability must be considered in the
context of available supports.
(d) A person’s decision-making ability is to be assessed, not the
outcome of the decision they want to make.
(e) A person’s decision-making ability will depend on the kind of
decisions to be made.
(f) A person’s decision-making ability may evolve or fluctuate over
7.2.3 A number of these principles were
considered and addressed in Part 6 in relation to how a person’s
decision-making ability
is assessed under the Act.
How current
support arrangements are working
7.3.1 As discussed in Part 3, the Act implicitly recognises and endorses the
use of informal support by requiring that the Act be
applied in a way that is
least restrictive of a person’s freedom of decision and action as is
Representatives may
only be appointed if there is a need for their appointment which cannot be met
by less restrictive
alternatives.
7.3.2 The Issues Paper gave examples of how current support arrangements are
being used in Tasmania.
arrangements occur informally within families and broader social networks and,
more formally, through advocacy groups and other
service providers.
7.3.3 The Institute asked for feedback about the effectiveness of current
informal and formal support arrangements.
What informal support arrangements are working well and what is not working
7.3.4 There were 17 responses addressing this
Examples given of
commonly used decision-making supports included informal support provided by
family, friends, general practitioners
and advocates. It is apparent that
informal supports are utilised frequently. The Board commented that
‘[i]nformal supported
decision making is not new. Much support for
decision making happens informally without the sanction of a legal
framework.’
TasCOSS noted that:
Most of us draw on formal or informal supports for making decisions at
different points in our lives – we turn to our partner,
friends, financial
and other professional advisors, life coaches and psychologists. For many of us,
our largest financial asset—our
superannuation—is usually managed by
someone else because of their expertise. In these cases our decision-making
capacity is
not assumed to be absent. Rather, it is simply recognised that
supported decision-making can enhance the outcomes we seek.
7.3.5 Some respondents stated that current informal support arrangements are
working well. The Board, for example, commented
The relatively low number of applications contrasted with the number of
people in Tasmania estimated as having a disability that affects
· informal supported decision making is already extensively and
effectively operating for many people in the Tasmanian community
· the ‘person responsible’ scheme in Part 6 of the Act is
working effectively. This scheme provides for the automatic
substitute decision
making hierarchy of ‘person responsible’ for consent to medical and
dental treatment where the patient
does not have capacity to provide or withhold
his or her own consent
· the appointment of enduring guardians and attorneys pursuant to
enduring powers of attorney is meeting the needs of many people
· informal decision makers may be acting as substitute decision
Given the relatively low number of appointments of substitute decision makers
compared with the high number of people accessing services
and support, an
inference may be drawn that informal supported decision making arrangements are
currently being used for the majority
of people with cognitive disability in
7.3.6 The Public Trustee’s submission echoed these views, stating that
it considers that current informal support arrangements
are working well. MIGA
and the OPG also submitted that informal support arrangements are generally
working well in relation to health
care. MIGA commented that ‘[i]t is
important not to impose additional, unnecessary requirements which could hinder
these arrangements.’
7.3.7 Other submissions endorsed reform to the Act to formally recognise the
use of decision-making support. This reform was supported
as a way of
acknowledging and legitimising the range of ways in which people make
EOT commented that ‘[i]t is imperative that Tasmania’s guardianship
laws cover all circumstances where a person’s
legal capacity is
challenged.’ The Institute notes that Recommendation 6.4(1) proposes that
the Act provide that a person has
decision-making ability if they can make a
decision with practicable and appropriate support. This approach provides one
to formally recognise and legitimise decision-making utilising support.
7.3.8 Some respondents that raised issues with current informal support
arrangements highlighted the lack of independent oversight
and safeguards. The
Board commented in its submission that:
A person with disability can vest a significant level of trust, reliance and
responsibility in their informal supports. The negative
side of informal support
is that people can, consciously or unconsciously, exercise enormous influence on
people with disabilities
during the process of decision making and can
essentially end up acting like a guardian but without the accountability and
of a formal order, or worst still, apply undue influence for their
own benefit. It is therefore critically important that an informal
supporter has
a clear understanding of the role they play.
7.3.9 Some members who attended meetings at Carers Tasmania indicated support
for independent monitoring of informal support arrangements
to identify
situations where informal supporters are acting improperly. It was suggested
that this could be achieved similar to the
way in which a person’s
residence is assessed for suitability and their need for in-home care or
assistance evaluated.
7.3.10 The Institute requested specific advice about barriers that exist when
utilising informal decision-making support.
Are there barriers to informal support arrangements working effectively? How
could these be resolved?
7.3.11 There were 15 submissions addressing this
Along with the
potential for abuse, barriers identified typically fell under two themes: lack
of formal recognition and the need
for capacity building. These are discussed
Lack of formal recognition
7.3.12 One of the critical barriers impacting the effectiveness of informal
arrangements was stated as being a lack of recognition.
Several respondents
commented that informal supporters may at times not be recognised without the
supporter’s formal appointment
as a representative. The OPG summarised
some examples of this occurring:
The biggest barrier to informal supports for decision-making is lack of
recognition for the ‘authority’ of the supporter
to provide support,
and for the ‘validity’ of a decision made by someone who has
impaired capacity for decision-making
and has required support to make the
decision. The OPG is concerned about the propensity of organisations to
formal substitute decision-making for their own peace of
mind to avoid perceived risk. We see this with some residential aged care
facilities ‘demanding’ that a new resident has an enduring or
Board-appointed guardian and/or power of attorney. The
NDIS (paradoxically) is
resulting in an increase in guardianship appointments for the express purpose of
someone with authority to
sign service agreements between the provider and the
participant — the NDIS itself doesn’t require these agreements to
signed, but service providers sometimes do. At least part of the reason Roy
Fagan Centre staff insist on the consent of a guardian
rather than a person
responsible for admissions to that facility is a fear of legal ramifications
associated with false imprisonment.
7.3.13 Carers Tasmania also commented about the lack of recognition that
informal supporters are given:
Carers Tasmania’s members often speak of not being recognised or
included in decision making processes, in spite of a current
Tasmanian policy
that encourages this to be the case. There is change required to build a culture
of carer inclusion. While this
is the case, carers continue navigate and
advocate for the needs of the person they care for, but are sometimes blocked by
providers who state they are unable to engage with them due to privacy
and confidentiality.
7.3.14 At an individual level, the Institute heard several examples during
facilitated consultation meetings where carers and family
members had
encountered difficulties accessing information that they stated they needed in
order to perform their role as a supporter
7.3.15 The Issues Paper asked how informal support arrangements could be
better recognised.
How can we improve how informal support arrangements are
recognised?
7.3.16 There were 11 submissions that addressed this
Two respondents
highlighted the need to educate the community about the role of informal
supporters. Several responses suggested
that the Act should play a role in
improving the recognition of informal support arrangements. Suggestions
• requiring a person’s capacity to be assessed based on an
ability to make decisions with
This suggestion
aligns with Recommendation 6.4(1);
• requiring that all reasonable support options be exhausted before a
substitute decision-maker can be
This is the effect
of Recommendation 6.4(2);
• that the Act could explicitly state the importance of informal
This suggestion is
included within Recommendation 3.3;
• by clarifying the role and duties of informal
supporters.
suggested that the Act could include key concepts and principles of informal
support arrangements:
‘For example, it could be legislated that an informal supporter’s
role is to recognise the rights of the person to participate
in decision making
and to make their own decision wherever possible and to being directed by their
will and preferences when providing
support. Further it could be legislated that
informal support arrangements take priority over substitute decision
Recommendation 3.4 aligns with this proposal. It provides that any person
assisting someone or making a decision for a person informally
must apply the
Act’s guiding principles. The reformed guiding principles would require
decision-making support to be made available,
and decisions to reflect a
person’s will, preferences and rights;
• inclusion of an acknowledgement about the role of carers, a
definition of ‘carers,’ and a statement regarding
their inclusion,
drawing upon the
Tasmanian Carer
Recommendation
3.3 includes a proposal to include as one of the guiding principles of the Act
the importance of respecting and acknowledging
the role of families, carers, and
other significant persons in an adult’s life; and
• possibly some form of central
registration.
In summary, other than the suggestion of a registration process for informal
supporters, all alternatives for legislative reform presented
have been adopted
as recommendations within this Report.
Building the capacity of decision-making
7.3.17 Some responses highlighted the need for cultural change and education
to maximise the effectiveness of informal supported decision-making
arrangements. Carers Tasmania noted that, when supporters are themselves not
supported, this affects the quality of support they
Providing good support takes time, patience and skill. Identifying and
responding to changing capacity can be complex; carers may
be over cautious when
the decision making capacity of the person they care for has declined,
unnecessarily limiting their input.
7.3.18 Speak Out advocates also commented on the importance of capacity
building. They suggested that training and education should
be available to
build decision-making skills and confidence. They noted that this is
particularly important where a person has previously
had a representative acting
and has not had opportunity to practice decision-making.
7.3.19 The Board commented that education is required both at an individual
and broader systemic level:
Barriers to informal support arrangements working effectively can be reduced
by investment in training and skills development for
decision makers and
education and skills development for informal supporters.
Further education in the broader community and systemic advocacy is
considered appropriate to emphasise the need to support people
to make their own
decisions, and what this means in practical terms.
7.3.20 EOT made similar comments:
At a policy level efforts should continue to improve education and awareness
of the rights of people who may require decision making
support and support
principles should be widely promoted throughout the community.
Availability of supports
7.3.21 Another barrier identified was the availability of support,
particularly for those who are socially isolated or do not have
informal supporters within their existing networks.
7.3.22 EOT highlighted the need to ensure that decision-making support is
made available to individuals in the community who require
the State also has a role to play in enabling those with decision-making
capacity to exercise choice by making available the sorts
of services that will
lives in ways that are consistent
with their views and preferences. This is to
acknowledge that rights can also be denied in circumstances where individuals
lack access
to most basic needs such as shelter or appropriate health
Ensuring everyone has access to a minimum level of high-quality service
provides an important platform from which human rights can
be met and the needs
and preferences of individuals can be realised.
7.3.23 The Issues Paper asked how people who are socially isolated could be
better supported to make decisions.
How could we better support people who do not have family or other networks
of support?
7.3.24 There were a range of suggestions made to improve the availability of
decision-making support for those who are socially isolated.
A number of
responses highlighted the importance of developing advocacy supports that are
readily available and properly
Another submission
referred more broadly to the development of adequately funded decision support
programs as a means of ensuring
that decision-making support is available for
those who require or request
7.3.25 The OPG’s submission made two practical suggestions to improve
the provision of decision-making support. Firstly, it
commented that:
The onus should be on the professional involved in significant decisions
(e.g. doctor, support provider, social worker), to ensure
advocacy/decision
making support has been discussed and offered to the person. This may also have
overall safeguarding implications.
7.3.26 Secondly, it suggested that:
Prior to making an application to the Board for appointment of a guardian or
administrator, the applicant should be required to thoroughly
explore whether
all supported decision-making options have been attempted. There should be a
requirement for the applicant to document
the process and outcome of such
investigations. As noted, the Board should only proceed to make an appointment
of a substitute decision-maker
if it is satisfied that all other reasonable
options have been tried and failed. The OPG considers such requirements would be
a significant
move towards recognition of informal supports, and much stronger
and more concrete than the current Act’s requirement that
the principle of
the least restrictive alternative is observed.
7.3.27 Education can play an important role in improving recognition of
informal support arrangements. Information should be readily
available in a
variety of formats and easily accessible. Educational materials should explain
the role and duties of informal supporters
and the importance of offering
decision-making support so that, wherever possible, individuals make their own
decisions. More broadly,
there must be community education explaining the rights
of people with disability to equality and non-discrimination as articulated
the Convention.
Recommendation 7.1
That an adequately funded public education program be developed and delivered
to ensure that Tasmanians understand the rights of people
with disability
articulated in the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
including the need to provide adults requiring support with decision-making with
access to the support they may require to make
and implement decisions about
matters affecting their lives and the duties of individuals who provide that
7.3.28 The Institute emphasises the importance of ensuring that
decision-making supports are equally available to all members of the
Support must be available in a variety of formats, accessible to people living
in rural, regional and remote areas, and
culturally appropriate. Decision-making
supports must be able to be utilised at low or no cost to ensure that an
individual’s
financial position does not preclude equal access to
7.3.29 These recommendations are fundamental to the Convention which requires
State parties to ensure that people with disabilities
have access to the support
they require to exercise their legal
Recommendation 7.2
That adequately funded decision-making support programs be developed,
ensuring equity of access.
7.3.30 The Institute proposes that revisions be made to the Board’s
application forms to signify the importance of first attempting
informal support
options before applying to the Board for more formal intervention. Currently,
the Board’s forms require an
applicant to give details of lesser
restrictive alternatives that have been considered, and describe why those
methods are not sufficient.
Implicitly, this involves an applicant describing informal supports have been
considered and/or provided. It is suggested that the
need to consider and
attempt informal support arrangements be an explicit component of the
Board’s application forms. This
could be achieved by revising the existing
questions asking about lesser restrictive alternatives attempted to explicitly
informal decision-making support as being a less restrictive
alternative. Alternatively, a separate question could be added to require
applicant to describe the informal supports offered to a proposed represented
person or attempted prior to making an application.
Recommendation 7.3
That the standard Board application forms ask specifically about the informal
decision-making supports that have been offered to a
proposed represented person
and/or attempted prior to the making of the application.
The role of
legislation
7.4.1 Many responses to the Issues Paper highlighted the need for policy
reform to better recognise and facilitate the use of informal
arrangements. These were explained and discussed earlier in this Part.
7.4.2 Several of the recommendations already made in this Report contain
suggestions for legislative reform to ensure that the Act
recognises and
endorses the use of informal decision-making support. The question is whether
there is any need to introduce a formal
legislated supported decision-making
scheme within Tasmania’s legal framework.
Legislated assisted decision-making
7.4.3 Some guardianship laws establish formal, legislated assisted
decision-making arrangements that formally recognise an ‘in
between a person making their own decision and the making of a representative
This approach
provides legislative recognition that ‘no person should have another
person appointed to make a decision on their
behalf, if they could make the
decision themselves with assistance and
7.4.4 The Institute uses the term ‘assisted decision-making’ as
an umbrella term to describe situations where a person
makes their own decision
with some level of assistance. Within assisted decision-making is both supported
decision-making and co-decision-making.
Supported decision-making describes
decision-making where an individual makes their own decision but with support.
Co-decision-making
involves the making of a joint decision between two people
— in other words, where decision-making is shared.
Legislated supported decision-making
arrangements involve a
person or group of people (a ‘supporter’) providing a person with
support to make, communicate
or implement a decision. The supporter cannot make
a decision on behalf of a supported person. Their role includes to:
• access, collect or obtain relevant information, or assist a person to
• communicate information about the person which is necessary or
relevant to a supported decision;
• explain relevant information and
considerations;
• help a person understand options, responsibilities and consequences
of a decision;
• assist a person to ascertain their will and
preferences;
• communicate a person’s supported
• take any reasonable action or do anything reasonably necessary to
give effect to a supported decision, subject to
Co-decision-making
is similar to supported decision-making
except that, instead of the supported person making their own decision, they
make a joint
decision with another person.
7.4.7 The Issues Paper provided examples of legislated supported
decision-making and co-decision-making models in other
Several bodies
have recommended the development of legislated supported decision-making schemes
in other jurisdictions.
Others express concern that legislated supported decision-making has a
theoretical basis and that it has not been sufficiently tested
through empirical
The South Australian Office of the Public Advocate has commented, however, that
lack of empirical evidence should not be a barrier
to legislative
7.4.8 The Institute called for submissions to
ascertain what level of support exists for a legislated supported
decision-making scheme
in Tasmania.
Do you support legislation in Tasmania enabling the formal appointment of
supporters to support people with decision-making impairments,
co-decision-makers to make joint
7.4.9 There were 14 responses to this question. Nine submissions expressed
support for introduction of legislated supported decision-making
Three submissions
expressed qualified support, or support in principle. One submission did not
support a legislated supported decision-making
7.4.10 As it was considered a matter of policy, the Board did not express a
position. The Board’s submission instead commented
whether there is a need
for legislated supported decision-making:
Given the relatively low number of appointments of substitute decision makers
compared with the high number of people accessing services
and support, an
inference may be drawn that informal supported decision making arrangements are
currently being used for the majority
of people with cognitive disability in
Tasmania. If this is the case, then it remains a significant question whether
the likely consequences
associated with the introduction of a formal appointment
process, including significant workload and resourcing implications for
Board, are justified.
Further as soon as informal support is formalised and legislated it no longer
is informal decision making, but becomes a statutory
scheme with increased
formality and complexity.
Support for a legislated supported decision-making scheme
7.4.11 Nine submissions supported introduction of legislated supported
decision-making, with some expressing strong
7.4.12 Some respondents stated that it is not possible for the Act to comply
with the obligations of the Convention without formally
recognising the role of
supporters.
It is of particular relevance to note that the current approach seems to
preclude formal recognition of supported decision-making
and those who are
available to provide that support. Without a re-conception of guardianship and
administration law to incorporate
mechanisms for formal recognition of the
continuum of decision-making
and the benefits of
formal recognition of support, it is difficult to see how this area of
legislation can be part of Australia’s
compliance with its Convention
obligations under Article 12. The legal and lay meaning of
‘guardianship’ in particular
and the principle that it is a
last-resort intervention need to be recognised and a broader schema for
supported decision-making
be established through legislation.
7.4.13 Others stated that legislated supported decision-making is an
‘essential part’ of ensuring that substitute decision-making
only as a last resort.
Issues raised in relation to a legislated supported decision-making scheme
7.4.14 Two submissions expressed support in principle for a legislated
supported decision-making scheme, but noted that it would depend
upon the detail
and specifics of the scheme.
MIGA, for example, commented that it supports developing understandings about
supported decision making but commented that: ‘How
a support person is
appointed, the extent of their role and obligations, and issues which they
should be required to give consideration
to, are not clear.’
7.4.15 Speak Out advocates also commented that much would depend upon how the
scheme was systematised. They noted, however, that a
legislated supported
decision-making framework may be beneficial if it builds people’s
decision-making capacity and avoids
guardianship orders.
7.4.16 Both the OPG and the Board stated that it is critical that a
legislated supported decision-making scheme not adversely impact
informal support arrangements. The OPG commented that ‘[w]e do not want to
see such a scheme resulting in pressure
to turn informal arrangements that are
working satisfactorily into formal support appointments.’
7.4.17 EOT also emphasised the need to avoid unintended adverse consequences:
It is important however that the establishment of a formal category of
supporters not deflect the need for meeting broader legal obligations
supports and adjustments where these are required. It is unlawful under the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
(Tas), for example, not to make adjustments
or other changes to ensure that people with disability have the same access to
and services as others unless it would cause unjustifiable hardship to do
so. We would not wish to see increased calls for the appointment
of formally
appointed supporters in circumstances where the service or Agency would
otherwise have a responsibility to make the relevant
adjustment.
7.4.18 The OPG suggested that these issues could be reduced or avoided by
ensuring that there is greater recognition of informal support
arrangements.
7.4.19 Submissions emphasised that, for a legislated supported
decision-making model to be successful, there would need to be:
• supports available in a variety of forms;
• capacity building for people with cognitive disability and those
around them;
• adequate education about the role of a support person and the extent
of their powers; and
• adequate resourcing.
Concerns with legislated supported decision-making
7.4.20 Members of the Elder Law Committee did not endorse supported
decision-making arrangements being established as separate roles
legislation. They stated that existing substitute decision-makers can and should
play a role in supporting a person to make
their own decisions:
Developing the ability for substitute decision makers to assist with
supported decision making (including through enhanced education
around concepts
such as will and preference, capacity and so on) is the best way to incorporate
the principles from the UN Convention
into our legislation. In reality this is,
in our experience, what those same people, on the whole, already do in their
role. It would
add in the potential for confusion and dispute to have a
supporter as a different person. Capacity to make decisions usually fluctuates
and the complexity of different people needing to drop in and out (according to
their role) is not in the best interests of a person
with a disability.
The Institute’s view
7.4.21 The Convention Committee has stated that the effect of the Convention
is to require ‘both the abolition of substitute
decision making regimes
and the development of supported decision making
alternatives.’
7.4.22 The main rationales given in support of introduction of a legislated
supported decision-making scheme were:
• the lack of formal recognition of the legitimate role of
decision-making support;
• the lack of oversight and other safeguarding mechanisms to avoid the
potential abuse or undue influence of informal supporters;
• that it might improve the quality and availability of decision-making
supports; and
• that it provides another strategy to ensure that a representative
decision is only required as a last resort.
These are considered below:
Recognising the legitimate role that support plays in
decision-making
7.4.23 Recommendation 6.4(1) proposes that the Act provide that a person has
decision-making ability if they are able to make a decision
with practicable and
appropriate support. Recommendation 7.3 proposes that the standard Board
application forms require applicants
to outline what informal supports have been
considered and attempted prior to making an application for the appointment of a
representative.
Recommendation 8.1(2) (discussed in the following Part) also
proposes that, when considering the ‘need’ for a representative,
Board be required to consider whether the decision may be more suitably made by
more informal means. These proposals complement
the revised guiding principles
of the Act outlined in Recommendation 3.3 which proposes that two of the guiding
principles that all
individuals must uphold and promote are:
• that people who require support in decision-making must be provided
with access to the most effective support necessary for
them to make,
communicate and participate in decisions that affect their lives; and
• that the role of families, carers and other significant people in an
adult’s life to support the adult to make decisions
must be acknowledged
and respected.
7.4.24 Four of the recommendations made in this Report thus propose
legislative reform aimed at promoting and legitimising decision-making
support. These, combined with recommendations made in Part 18 about the need for
community education, provide a range of strategies
aimed at improving the way in
which informal support arrangements are recognised and acknowledged as a
decision-making tool.
7.4.25 The Institute notes observations that a culture of risk management and
concern for legal liability is affecting the use of
informal decision-making
alternatives.
The former President of the Board commented that ‘[f]inancial institutions
are increasingly refusing to accept informal arrangements
for management of
funds, such as bank signatories, where the holder of the account is
incapacitated for financial
transactions.’
have made similar
observations.
Powers of Attorney Act
enables attorneys to act upon the
instructions of the donor prior to any loss of ‘mental capacity’ of
the donor. Conversely,
the Act, which governs the role and powers of enduring
guardians, does not provide for enduring guardians having authority prior
donor losing the ability to make their own personal decisions. Section 32(5) of
the Act provides that:
Subject to any conditions specified in the instrument, an instrument
appointing an enduring guardian authorizes each appointee to
exercise the powers
of a guardian under
if the appointor subsequently becomes unable by reason of a disability to
make reasonable judgements in respect of matters relating
to his or her personal
circumstances.
Section 32B then provides that:
An enduring guardian has a right to all the information to which the
appointor is entitled ... if the information is reasonably required
purpose of exercising a power, or determining whether to exercise a power, of
the enduring
7.4.27 These sections have the effect of restricting an enduring
guardian’s powers and rights in ways that attorney’s
powers are not.
Subject to the terms of an enduring power of attorney, the effect of the
Powers of Attorney Act
is to give attorneys rights and powers prior to
the donor losing the ability to make their own financial decisions. This gives
authority to:
• access, collect or obtain relevant information, or assist the donor
• communicate information about the donor which is necessary or
relevant to a decision;
• communicate a donor’s supported decision;
• take any reasonable action or do anything reasonably necessary to
give effect to a supported decision, subject to limits.
These are the same functions and powers as typically granted to supporters.
Provided that an attorney understands the extent and scope
of their authority
whilst the donor retains the ability to make decisions with support, the
appointment of an attorney facilitates
that attorney informally supporting a
donor prior to taking on a more formal representative role if required.
7.4.28 The Institute considers that there is merit to the Act providing the
same approach in relation to enduring guardians. This
would enable donors to
grant powers to their enduring guardian to access and communicate information
and implement decisions, as
directed in their instrument. Having this option
available may remove some of the barriers that presently hinder the provision of
decision-making support.
7.4.29 It must remain possible (as is the case for attorneys) for a donor to
limit their enduring guardian’s powers to times
when they do not have the
ability to make their own decisions. The standard form instrument should provide
clear guidance about a
donor’s options to elect when the powers of their
enduring guardian commence.
7.4.30 An example of this approach is the Victorian legislation which
39 When attorney’s power is
exercisable
(1) A principal may specify, in an enduring power of attorney, a time from
which, a circumstance in which or an occasion on which
the power for all matters
or the power for a specified matter under the power of attorney is exercisable,
which may be—
(a) immediately on the making of the power; or
(b) when the principal ceases to have decision making capacity for the
matters or matter; or
(c) any other time, circumstance or occasion
(2) If a specification is not made in an enduring power of attorney under
subsection (1), the power for all matters under the enduring
power of attorney
is exercisable on and from the making of the power of
Recommendation 7.4
(1) That the Act provide that a donor may specify in an instrument a time
from which, a circumstance in which or an occasion on which
the authority for
all matters or the authority for a specified matter under the instrument is
exercisable, which may be:
· immediately on the making of the instrument; or
· when the donor ceases to have decision-making ability for the matters
or matter; or
· any other time, circumstance or occasion.
(2) That the standard form instrument provide guidance to donors about their
options to nominate when the authority of their enduring
guardian is to
7.4.31 One limitation of this approach is that it does not address
circumstances where a donor does not wish to confer any decision-making
upon a representative and only wishes to grant them authority to support them
with decision-making.
person called an ‘enduring guardian’ might, for example, be assumed
by third parties to have powers to make decisions,
whilst the terms of their
appointment may in fact only grant them powers to support the donor. Whilst
Recommendation 7.4 will provide
donors with greater options to enhance the
provision of decision-making support, it would not address situations where a
donor wishes
to limit a person’s authority to only providing them with
support. The Institute therefore concludes that additional legislative
are required, as outlined in the following paragraphs.
Lack of oversight and safeguards
7.4.32 One of the ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines provides that
‘support in decision-making must be free of conflict of interests
undue influence.’
Presently there is no structured oversight of the activities of informal
supporters in the same way that there is structured, periodic
monitoring and
oversight over the activities of Board-appointed representatives. There is,
however, also no periodic monitoring of
attorneys or enduring guardians, a
matter discussed further in Part
The Board does, however,
have jurisdiction to hear applications for the review of enduring powers of
attorneys and instruments, and
thus still plays a role in supervising the
activities of attorneys and enduring guardians. A similar situation also occurs
in relation
to informal supporters. Interested parties can apply to the Board
for the appointment of a representative where they are concerned
informal support arrangements and consider that there is a need for a formal
appointment of a representative. The
Board is not, however, able to formally
remove an informal supporter or penalise inappropriate conduct. A legislated
supported decision-making
scheme could give the Board specific powers to
supervise, and if necessary, remove supporters who acted contrary to the
Improving the quality and availability of decision-making supports
7.4.33 One potential benefit to introducing a formal legislated supported
decision-making scheme is that it may trigger the development
of a range of
quality, accessible decision-making supports. This is particularly valuable for
individuals who do not have people
within their existing social networks from
which to draw informal supporters. Recommendation 7.2 proposes that adequately
decision-support programs be developed, ensuring equity of access. It is
suggested that this priority can and should be developed
irrespective of whether
a formal, legislated supported decision-making scheme is established.
Nevertheless, designating a role of
supporter within statute mandates the need
for decision-making supports to be made available. This is part of ensuring that
is equity of access to effective decision-making support for all members
of the community, consistent with the
Convention.
Providing another strategy so that a representative decision is only made
as a last resort
7.4.34 A further reason that respondents expressed support for introduction
of a legislated supported decision-making scheme was that
it facilitates
representative decision-making occurring as a last resort. The Institute
observes the following benefits to a formal,
legislated system of supported
decision-making:
• having the option to formally grant authority to support
decision-making, rather than make decisions, provides a further alternative
the making of a representative decision;
• whilst individuals can delegate authority to attorneys to support a
person to make and implement their own decisions, and
this Report recommends
that this approach to be extended to enduring
the Board does not
have a corresponding ability to formally authorise a person to support another
person with decision-making —
it may only appoint a representative. The
new approach advocated gives the Board more tools through which to tailor its
required; and
• it provides a less restrictive alternative to the appointment of a
representative or the making of a representative decision.
7.4.35 Article 4 of the Convention requires State parties to adopt all
appropriate legislative measures to implement the rights recognised
Convention.
The Convention
Committee has stated that the Convention requires the development of supported
decision-making regimes in place of
substitute decision-making
arrangements.
It states that
establishing a supported decision-making framework whilst maintaining substitute
decision-making regimes does not
comply with the
Convention.
7.4.36 Some respondents raised concerns that introducing a formal legislated
supported decision-making scheme would add complexity
and formality to
arrangements, with the risk that it could result in pressure being placed upon
individuals to formalise informal
arrangements. It is agreed that this risk
needs to be mitigated, with it being suggested that this can be achieved via
robust community
education. The risk of it being used to abuse or exploit a
supported person was also raised. This risk is acknowledged, whilst observing
that this is the same risk that already exists in relation to the appointment of
representatives. Both require legislative responses
that safeguard the rights
and interests of individuals requiring support.
7.4.37 Whilst other recommendations in this Report advance obligations under
the Convention, the Institute concludes that a legislated
decision-making scheme is necessary to establish a legislative framework for
individuals to be supported with decision-making
without affecting their
decision-making rights. This reform is consistent with the views of the majority
of respondents who addressed
this question in the Issues Paper.
7.4.38 To the Institute’s knowledge, there have not been any formal
trials of supported decision-making within Tasmania although
there have been
several within other jurisdictions and
The Institute observes that public awareness and understanding of supported
decision-making is limited. It therefore considers, consistent
recommendations of the
that legislative
reforms should be enhanced by an appropriate lead-time during which public
education campaigns can ensure community
understanding of the reforms and
provide time for capacity building within the sector. As discussed earlier in
this Part, public
education must emphasise that legislated supported
decision-making is intended to complement, not replace current informal support
alternatives. This approach also enables Tasmania to develop a legislative
framework that reflects best-practice approaches in other
7.4.39 The Institute further recommends that, as part of enacting these
reforms, the Act be renamed. This is because the Act will
then no longer be
limited to the appointment of guardians and administrators and the title of the
Act needs to acknowledge and reflect
the additional role of supporters within
the legislative framework.
Recommendation 7.5
(1) That a legislated supported decision-making scheme be introduced in
(2) That, as part of introducing legislative reforms to establish a supported
decision-making scheme, the Act be renamed to reflect
the new framework.
(3) That legislative reform to establish a formal supported decision-making
scheme be supported by an appropriate lead-time incorporating
a comprehensive
public education campaign explaining the reforms, emphasising that the scheme is
intended to complement not replace
existing informal support arrangements.
Elements of
legislated supported decision-making
7.5.1 The Issues Paper asked a range of questions that would need to be
resolved if legislation established a formal role of a supporter.
• what types of decisions supporters should be able to provide support
• who should be able to appoint a supporter;
• who should be able to be a supporter;
• what role, duties and powers supporters should have;
• whether supporters should be formally supervised, and if so how and
by whom; and
• other safeguards that would protect the rights and interests of
people being supported.
7.5.2 These matters are addressed in the following paragraphs.
7.5.3 The Issues Paper asked whether legislated supported decision-making
should exist in relation to some or all decisions involving
financial, personal
and medical treatment matters.
If a supported decision-making model was incorporated into the Act, should
supported decision-making be available for personal decisions?
decisions? Medical
7.5.4 There were six responses to this question. Three respondents expressed
support for legislated supported decision-making to be
available for personal,
financial and medical treatment decisions. MIGA’s submission focussed on
medical treatment decisions,
agreeing that legislated supported decision-making
should be available in this area. One submission expressed support for the
being available for personal decisions, without forming a confirmed view
7.5.5 The Institute recommends that the legislated supported decision-making
scheme be available for personal matters, including in
relation to consent to
health care and treatment. Further consultation is appropriate to decide whether
and how legislated supported
decision-making should be available for financial
matters given that it would require reform to the
Powers of Attorney Act
and that review of that Act falls outside of the scope of the Institute’s
reference for this project. Broader and targeted
consultation with key
stakeholders is needed, including the financial services industry. This should
part of the proposed review
Powers of Attorney Act
, discussed in
Recommendation 7.6
That a legislated supported decision-making scheme be available for personal
matters, including consent to health care and treatment.
Who should be able to appoint a supporter?
7.5.6 The Institute asked who should be able to appoint a supporter.
Who should be able to appoint a
7.5.7 There were five responses to this question, although some submissions
addressing other questions in the Issues Paper were also
relevant to this
Own appointment of a supporter
7.5.8 Six submissions stated that an individual should be able to appoint
their own supporter. EOT commented that: ‘For some,
the ability to
formally appoint a support responsible for assisting them to make decisions may
provide an important avenue to continue
to assert their legal authority.’
7.5.9 PCT submitted that it is important that young people be able to
participate in decision-making, along with people with dementia
and intellectual
disability.
7.5.10 MIGA’s submission stated that a competent person should be able
to appoint a supporter. This was the only submission
that raised the issue of
the level of ability that ought to be required for a person to appoint a
supporter. The Institute notes
that, in Victoria, a person must have
‘decision-making capacity’ to appoint a
A similar test
applies in the Irish
7.5.11 The Institute considers it fundamental to a legislated supported
decision-making regime that individuals be able to appoint
their own supporters.
It enables a person to express their will and preference and exercise autonomy.
It enables them to choose the
level of support that they wish to have available
to them. Enabling a person to appoint their own supporter has been described as:
‘The least invasive end of legislatively recognised supported
decision-making’.
this basis, the Institute recommends that legislation permit an individual to
appoint their own supporter for personal matters.
Specific recommendations are
not made about any formal requirements to appoint a supporter. It is recommended
that these details
adopt best practice models from other jurisdictions. Broad
consistency with the appointment of enduring guardians and creation of
however, endorsed.
Recommendation 7.7
(1) That legislation enable an individual to appoint their own supporter for
personal matters including consent to health care and
(2) That, to appoint a supporter, an individual needs ‘decision-making
ability’ to appoint a supporter.
Board appointed supporters
7.5.12 Three submissions expressed support for the Board being able to
appoint supporters. The OPG commented that the Board should
only be permitted to
appoint a supporter where the individual is unable to appoint their own
supporter and the supported person agrees
(or at the least does not object) to
the appointment. This approach is consistent with the previously expressed views
of the Office
of the Public Advocate in Victoria, which proposed, as part of the
review of guardianship laws in Victoria, that ‘any supported
decision-making arrangement must have the free agreement of the person and their
supporters.’ It advocated an approach where
the supported person could
terminate the arrangement at any
7.5.13 Fundamental to the Convention is that people who require support with
decision-making have access to the support they require.
Support must be
available on an equal basis. It follows that all individuals should have equal
access to the formal appointment of
a supporter as a means of offering
decision-making support. It should not, however, be mandated where an individual
chooses not to
receive support.
7.5.14 Further consultation is desirable to decide upon the details of when
and how the Board should be able to appoint supporters
and the Institute has not
made recommendations about these elements.
Recommendation 7.8
(1) That legislation enable the Board to appoint supporters for personal
matters, including consent to health care and treatment.
(2) That the Board not be permitted to appoint a supporter where the proposed
supported person objects to that appointment.
7.5.15 It is critical that a legislated supported decision-making regime
provides appropriate safeguards to protect the rights and
interests of those
being supported to make decisions. The Institute asked for views about
safeguards that ought to be built into
legislation to ensure that supporters act
What safeguarding measures should be put in place to prevent
7.5.16 Five submissions addressed this question. Safeguarding options that
were put forward included:
• clearly defined duties, functions and
responsibilities;
• safeguards that ensure that a supported person is not subject to
undue influence in the making of a supported decision-making
arrangement;
• the ability for a supported person to revoke a supported
decision-making agreement and remove their
• the ability for the Board to revoke its own appointment of a
• regular reviews of
appointments
including the
creation of a monitor
• power for the Public Guardian to receive and investigate complaints
or concerns;
• a requirement for supporters to notify the Board if they consider
that a supported person is unable to make decisions with
• allocation of a role of a ‘coach’ to support and educate
supporters.
7.5.17 The Board’s submission commented that: ‘As a general
comment, if a formal supported decision making model is introduced,
operate with as little formality and legal complexity as possible and
appropriate safeguards for the supported person need
7.5.18 The Institute makes the following recommendations in relation to
safeguarding provisions to protect those with formally appointed
supporters:
Recommendation 7.9
That legislation contain the following safeguarding provisions in relation to
supporters:
(a) that there be a clear description of a supporter’s role. Subject to
the terms of their appointment, and the directions of
a supported person or the
Board, a supporter’s role should include:
· to obtain and disclose personal and other information on behalf of
the supported person relevant to a decision;
· to assist the supported person to understand information relevant to
a decision;
· to provide advice to the supported person about a decision;
· to assist the supported person to communicate their decision;
· to endeavour to ensure the decisions of the supported person are
given effect.
(b) That legislation state explicitly that a supporter cannot make decisions
on behalf of a supported person.
(c) That supporters only be permitted to act during periods in which the
supported person has decision-making ability for the relevant
(d) That supporters be required to comply with the duties outlined in
Recommendation 8.3(2).
(e) That a supported person be able to direct their supporter to report to a
person or body when they are acting as supporter.
(f) That a person be able to revoke their own appointment of a supporter.
(g) That the Board be able to revoke the appointment of a supporter in
defined circumstances, broadly consistent with the test to
representative.
(h) That supporters have a duty to notify the Board if they consider that the
test for the appointment of a representative may be
Eligibility to be a supporter
7.5.19 Noting that the Act precludes certain classes of individuals from
being appointed as an enduring
the Issues Paper
asked for views about who ought to be able to be a supporter and whether there
should be any individuals or groups
excluded from acting in the role.
If a supported decision-making model was incorporated into the Act, who
should be able to be appointed as a supporter? Who should
not be able to be
7.5.20 Seven submissions addressed this question. Answers typically endorsed
supporters being someone with an existing relationship
with the supported
person. PCT commented that supporters should be a person who knows the supported
person best. MIGA suggested that
any person who falls within the definition of a
person responsible ought to be eligible to be a supporter. It expressed support
children who are
competent being able to act as supporters.
One submission supported the Public Guardian being eligible to act in the
7.5.21 Two submissions commented about the question of assessing a
person’s suitability. The OPG commented:
Tasmania is well on its way to establishing a ‘working with vulnerable
people’ registration scheme — Board-appointed
supporters should be
eligible for registration. Someone should not be appointed as a supporter where
there have been allegations
of abuse or neglect, or where there is a conflict of
interest that cannot be mitigated.
A supporter must be able and agree to act in accordance with principles as
defined by the Act.
7.5.22 Speak Out advocates suggested that it would be inappropriate for
support workers to act as formal supporters due to the conflict
between their
duty to support the development of decision-making skills and their personal
interest in continuing to provide the
person with care. The OPG, on the other
hand, suggested that it might be appropriate to enable paid workers to act as
supporters:
The OPG is not opposed to consideration of paid workers acting as supporters
and being able to be appointed in that role. The OPG
believes people with
disabilities should be able to choose who they seek support from and we
understand that this might be a paid
worker with whom they have a long-term
close relationship. Obviously appropriate safeguards would need to be put in
place, and appointments
should be precluded where there is the possibility of a
supporter obtaining personal gain.
7.5.23 The Institute considers that whether any classes of individuals ought
to be ineligible to act as a supporter be further evaluated.
The Institute takes
this opportunity to note that previous supported decision-making trials have
observed difficulties in recruiting
volunteers to provide decision-making
support, finding that training individuals within a person’s existing
social network
can provide a better
alternative.
Oversight of supporters
7.5.24 The Issues Paper asked for views about who ought to supervise the
activities of supporters.
Who should oversee the activities of
supporters?
7.5.25 There were six responses to this question. The OPG suggested that the
Board be responsible for overseeing any register of supported
decision-making
arrangements and reporting requirements. The OPG would then provide education
and support to supporters, have responsibility
for conducting investigations in
relation to allegations of misconduct and have powers in relation to dispute
resolution. MIGA’s
submission also supported this type of division of
functions between the Board and the OPG, consistent with the existing
arrangements
in relation to the oversight of representatives.
7.5.26 Two submissions stated that the Board should be responsible for
oversight of the activities of supporters, whilst TasCOSS suggested
function could be allocated to a new Office of the Public Advocate. One
submission did not refer to the specific body that
ought to oversee supporters,
but commented that it is appropriate that there be some assessment of the
quality of supporters.
7.5.27 The Institute agrees with the submissions of MIGA and the OPG that the
oversight of supporters should align with the provisions
governing oversight of
representatives.
Recommendation 7.10
That Recommendation 5.7 (providing a mediation role for the Public Guardian)
be extended to supporters.
A legislated
co-decision-making scheme
7.6.1 The Issues Paper explained the use of co-decision-making models in
other jurisdictions.
Co-decision-making involves the appointment of a ‘co-decision-maker’
whose role it is to make a joint decision with the
person requiring that level
of support. In Canada, both Alberta and Saskatchewan have legislation providing
for co-decision-makers,
as does the Irish Republic. Hybrid models exist in
Japan, Norway and Denmark.
There is no legislated model of co-decision-making in Australia. Both the VLRC
and the ACTLRAC have recommended that there is a place
for co-decision-making as
part of a ‘suite’ of decision-making
alternatives.
They recommend that co-decision-making be available where there is an
unreasonable risk of substantial harm if a person were to make
7.6.2 The Institute’s consultation considered whether there is merit to
the establishment of a co-decision-making model in Tasmania.
If a co-decision-making model were incorporated into the Act, should it be
available for personal decisions? Financial decisions?
7.6.3 Two submissions supported the introduction of
co-decision-making.
respondents did not support this
including the OPG
which commented that:
If the Act is flexible in allowing room for the role, function and definition
of supported decision making to evolve as suitable models
are developed, then it
would not be necessary to incorporate a co-decision-making model into the Act.
Further, we see the role of
education and advocacy as key in assisting our
community to move towards supported decision-making. The OPG does not support a
co-decision-making
model and holds the view that co-decision making models
adopted in other jurisdictions have inherent challenges and short-falls.
this as a lesser alternative to supported decision making.
7.6.4 Several submissions expressed concerns about the lack of compelling
evidence supporting introduction of a co-decision-making
Whilst we appreciate that for some people it may provide a degree of
flexibility without the need to resort to a substitute decision
maker. However,
in circumstances where the principal decision maker retains the capacity to make
their own decisions we would expect
that there would be a preference to respect
that ability. This will, however, depend on exact circumstances and it is
difficult to
be entirely prescriptive regarding this approach. It could be
useful mechanism in circumstances where the principal decision maker
assistance in particular areas of life (for example with regard to financial
decisions) but retains capacity to exercise
their will and preferences in other
areas of decision making. We would, however, wish to see more detail about how
the model would
be applied prior to finalising our views and would, in any
event, wish to ensure that any decisions made represented the will and
preference of the person or what the person would likely want based on all
available information. We would not wish to see this model
used as a mechanism
to reintroduce a ‘best interests’ model of decision making.
7.6.5 The Board stated:
The Board notes the detail and reasoning behind co-decision making is not
clearly established and safeguards have not yet been demonstrated.
7.6.6 Similarly, MIGA commented:
Co-decision making is a new model, which requires significant research and
trials before it could be considered for use in a broader
healthcare context or
recognised under legislation.
There is not presently any compelling case for co-decision making, it is
potentially confusing and differs from supported decision-making
model already reflects the realities of informal relationships.
7.6.7 Consistent with these views, the Institute has not made recommendations
for the introduction of a legislated co-decision-making
scheme in Tasmania at
this time. The State Government should maintain a watching brief in relation to
the development and evaluation
of co-decision-making models in other
Other matters
7.7.1 Members of the Elder Law Committee’s submission raised specific
recommendations in relation to improving recognition of
the role of parents in
supporting children with disability upon that child attaining the age of 18
years. Their submission made the
following observations and recommendations:
The Committee suggests for consideration a
process by which parents and other long term full time carers for persons with
have a clear entitlement to be appointed by the Board as
Administrator and Guardian for the person who they care for ...
The Committee feels that a formal appointment
giving clear and defined legal authority to the parent/carer may often be
appropriate,
and in the best interests of the person with a disability. A parent
or other carer who always has, and likely always will, provide
daily personal
care for a person should be given the clearest possible formal legal authority
to act for that person in their best
interests. They should also have the
ability to plan for and put in place arrangements for their own
replacement/succession in advance
of that need arising.
The Committee suggests that a model that could
achieve this would be the Act giving parents/carers who meet stated objective
a statutory right to apply and be appointed as Administrator and
Guardian, with appointments being longer and reporting requirements
other types of appointments. The existing requirement for a ‘need’
for the appointment should not apply in
the same way in these cases. For
example, the criteria could include being a parent with the full time care for a
person who lacks
capacity to live independently. It is felt that having a clear
statutory right to an appointment is an appropriate starting point,
encourage applications by reducing the fear of unnecessary intervention of the
Public Trustee in appropriate close family
arrangements, and to reflect the
reality that the parent/carer will otherwise most likely act informally
The parent/carer so appointed should otherwise be
subject to the same duties, and apply the same considerations when making
as any other appointed Administrator and Guardian. Whilst reporting
and review should in the Committee’s view be at a low level,
would nevertheless have oversight and a protective role where appropriate that
does not presently exist for ‘informal’
arrangements. The Board
should retain the power in exceptional cases not to appoint the parent/carer,
and the power to shape the
terms of the appointment to the needs and
circumstances of the individual person.
It should be recognised that parents/carers who
live with the person long term are different to adult children or others who
on decision making roles for a person later in that person’s life.
Parents/carers should be more strongly recognised and supported
by the Act, to
make their (often very difficult) role as long term carer easier when it comes
to the legalities around decision making.
The Committee feels that facilitating these types
of appointments within the existing Administrator/Guardian framework is
to creating a separate ‘co-decision maker’ or
‘assisted decision maker’ role, whilst being likely to facilitate
and advance the public policy/intent behind those ideas being to involve the
person themselves in their own decision making as far
as possible and
appropriate.
7.7.2 Carers Tasmania made similar observations in relation to difficulties
faced by parents of children with profound disability
upon that child attaining
the age of 18 years:
Some Carers Tasmania members have shared experiences of confusion, distress
and practical inconvenience when their child with a profound
intellectual
disability becomes legally independent, aged 18. The implications of this change
are not well communicated, and can
result in substantial adverse changes to care
arrangements. Carers Tasmania believes a more streamlined approach should be
to facilitate the appointment of the guardian, wherever
appropriate.
7.7.3 Both the VLRC and NSWLRC’s reviews considered the issue of
whether parents of adult children with severe disability should
involve any
different treatment in relation to their appointment as a representative upon
their child attaining the age of 18 years.
The NSWLRC’s recent Question
Paper summarised this issue:
2.64 Currently, many relatives and friends provide informal support to people
who require decision-making assistance. Others act as
formal guardians or
financial managers. They may understandably have concerns about who will take on
these roles if they are unable
to do so in the future. As the VLRC observed,
‘[t]his matter is of particular concern to ageing parents and carers of
with lifetime disabilities’.
Guardianship Act
already allows for some forms of succession
planning. The Tribunal can appoint a person to act as an alternative guardian
continuing guardianship order. The alternative guardian takes on the
guardianship role if the original guardian is absent or becomes
incapacitated.
The alternative guardian also acts as a person’s guardian if the original
guardian dies and there is no surviving
joint guardian to take over the original
guardian’s functions.
2.66 The VLRC recommended that the Victorian guardianship legislation should
contain another form of succession planning. Under the
VLRC’s proposal,
family members, carers and decision-makers for a person with ‘ongoing
impaired decision-making capacity’
could file a ‘succession
document’ with the Victorian tribunal. In this document, they could state
their wishes about
what the person’s future decision-making arrangements
2.67 However, the VLRC believed that the legislation should not require the
Victorian tribunal to give effect to these wishes. Instead,
the VLRC recommended
that the tribunal should simply be required to consider them. This is because
the tribunal’s ‘decisions
must be made in the light of current
circumstances’.
2.68 The Victorian Bill proposed a similar arrangement. This would have
allowed relatives, primary carers, guardians and administrators
(among others)
to state who should be appointed as a guardian or administrator in the
2.69 The Bill proposed to require the Victorian tribunal to consider such a
statement when deciding if a person is suitable to act
as a guardian or an
administrator. In contrast to the VLRC’s proposal, the Victorian Bill
stated that the Victorian tribunal
would have to appoint the nominated person
· the statement was made by the current guardian or administrator
· the nominated person is over 18 and consents to act as guardian or
administrator, and
· the nominated person meets other applicable eligibility
7.7.4 The NSWLRC’s draft recommendations did not make recommendations
for reform to deal specially with parents’ appointment
as representative
upon their child becoming an
7.7.5 This matter has not been the specific subject of public consultation as
part of this review. Further consultation would be necessary
to ascertain the
degree of support for this reform. As the matter falls outside of the
Institute’s Terms of Reference, specific
recommendations are not made. The
Institute observes, however, that fundamental to the recommendations made in
this Report is that
the appointment of a representative should be a last resort.
It is important that this remain a critical consideration when considering
parent’s appointment as representative for their adult child. Any
appointment of a representative should also reflect the
proposed represented
person’s will and preference. A proposed representative’s
suitability remains an important consideration
to safeguard to promote the
rights and interests of a represented person. For these reasons, the Institute
considers that there remains
an important role for the Board to play in
assessing the need for, and suitability of proposed representatives including in
to a parent’s application to be appointed as representative for
their adult child.
Representative
Decision-Making
Introduction
8.1.1 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to report on the role of
guardians and administrators in advancing the interests
of people with
decision-making impairments and to consider these provisions in light of the
overarching principles and rights articulated
in the Convention and developments
in other jurisdictions.
8.1.2 Part 7 of this Report reviewed how support can be provided to enable a
person to make their own decisions. This Part reviews
and makes recommendations
their own decisions or
their own decisions with support. Parts 9 and 10 then
consider the role and powers of guardians and administrators respectively.
a representative may be appointed
8.2.1 To appoint an administrator or guardian for a person, the Board must be
satisfied that:
• the person has a disability;
• the person is unable, by reason of that disability, to make a
reasonable judgment about their personal or financial affairs;
• the person is in need of an administrator or
• it is in the person’s best
The Board must also consider whether the person’s needs could be met by
less restrictive means.
8.2.2 The need for a disability and the assessment of a person’s
ability to make a ‘reasonable judgment’ were discussed
This Part reviews the
other elements of the existing test to appoint a representative.
8.2.3 A representative may only be appointed if the Board considers that it
is in the person’s best
As discussed in
Part 3, the need to uphold a person’s ‘best interests’ is an
overriding principle governing the
Part 3 considered
whether the term ‘best interests’ ought to remain within the Act,
concluding that, where it is appropriate
to continue to assess whether a course
of action is in a person’s best interests, the term ‘personal and
social wellbeing’
8.2.4 For the Board to appoint a representative, there must be a
for that appointment. Requiring there to be a need for a representative is
consistent with the overriding principle of the Act of
adopting a course of
action that is least restrictive of a person’s freedom of decision and
action as possible.
principle was discussed in Part 3.
8.2.5 The Act does not define or further explain what is meant by there being
a ‘need’ for a representative. It is a matter
that the Board
determines based on the circumstances. An issue raised in the Issues Paper was
that if ‘need’ is interpreted
to mean an immediate, present need,
then applicants may be unsuccessful if they seek to be appointed as a
representative in anticipation
of a likely future need. This can impact the
ability of families to plan and put in place arrangements to minimise disruption
delay. The Issues Paper explained that the VLRC made recommendations to
define what is meant by the ‘need’ for a representative
legislation.
reforms that have been proposed to the Victorian
legislation
(in cl 31 of the Victorian
Guardianship
and Administration Bill 2018
) would require VCAT to consider the following
factors in determining whether there is a need for an appointment:
• the will and preferences of the proposed represented person (so far
as they can be ascertained);
• whether decisions in relation to the personal or financial matter for
which the order is sought:
o may more suitably be made by informal means; or
o may reasonably be made through negotiation, mediation or similar means;
• the wishes of any primary carer or relative of the proposed
represented person or other person with a direct interest in the
application;
• the desirability of preserving existing relationships that are
important to the proposed represented person.
8.2.6 The ‘need’ for a representative is explained in the ACT and
Queensland,
with inclusion of
such guidance endorsed by the
Factors for the
tribunal to consider when assessing the ‘need’ for a representative
are also outlined in the Northern
That section
provides that ‘need’ is to be assessed taking into account:
• the nature and extent of the decision-making impairment
o whether it is continuous or episodic;
o whether it is likely to be permanent or, if not, the likely duration;
o the matters for which the adult’s decision-making capacity is
• whether the adult already has an agent with authority for the matters
for which the adult’s decision-making capacity
is impaired;
• any views and wishes stated by an interested person;
• the desirability of preserving existing family relationships and
other relationships that are important to the adult; and
• whether the adult’s needs could be adequately provided for in a
way that is less restrictive of the adult’s freedom
of decision and action
than appointing a
8.2.7 The NSWLRC’s recent recommendations propose that in considering
whether there is a need for an order, the Tribunal should
take into account,
where relevant:
• the adequacy of existing or available formal or informal arrangements
in meeting the person’s decision-making needs;
• the availability and suitability of less restrictive and intrusive
measures to meet the person’s needs, including but
not limited to a
support order or support
Public Consultation
8.2.8 The Issues Paper asked what test should apply to appoint a
representative.
What test should apply to appoint a guardian or
administrator?
8.2.9 There were 13 submissions addressing this question. Five referred to
the importance of ensuring that the appointment of a representative
is only made
as a last resort. Advocacy Tasmania commented, for example, that:
We do not believe that the ‘need’ test is a necessary aspect of
the Act. This wording does not reflect a rights-based
understanding of
substitute decision making, similar to language around best interests. The
appointment of a guardian or administrator
should be legal appointment of last
resort, after all decision support options have been undertaken and where it is
not possible
to ascertain a person’s will and preferences in relation to
8.2.10 Another submission stated that a representative should only be
appointed if it is established that the proposed represented
completely unable to function, for example, where they are in a coma. The Public
Trustee suggested that it should be a
capacity test that determines whether a
representative is appointed.
8.2.11 Members of the Elder Law Committee supported retention of the current
test to appoint a representative. PCT also supported
continuation of the
existing test, but removing the requirement for the appointment to be in a
person’s ‘best interests’.
8.2.12 Responses demonstrated the need to balance competing considerations.
On one hand, respondents stated that representatives should
not be appointed for
the sake of mere convenience. On the other hand, it was explained that not
appointing representatives as part
of forward planning can create inconvenience,
delay and the potential for harm to the person involved. Some respondents stated
they had observed that aged care facilities may require their residents to
have an appointed representative. Associate Professor
Wallace commented
A common sense approach should apply. The moving of a family member into a
nursing home is often a stressful time, and the extra paperwork
involved in
making an application, attending a hearing (which may be in another location) is
additive in stress — if it could
be avoided the better.
8.2.13 The OPMHS, however, commented about the practical difficulties that
can arise where an appointment is not made because the
‘need’ is not met:
The necessity to have a ‘need’ prior to appointment of a guardian
or administrator is problematic as this does can lead
to significant delays due
to not being able to appoint a guardian before the need arises even when it is
clear it will at some stage.
The other issue is that it is debatable whether
having a guardian/administrator is really more restrictive than not having one
the latter means that different people take over functions without proper
appointment or scrutiny and without clear rules of engaging/consulting
person affected. A formal guardian or administrator with defined role and duties
can in fact safeguard a person’s voice
being heard and their rights being
protected. A best interest concept would be more suitable than having to prove a
current need
for a specific decision.
8.2.14 The Institute asked specifically whether the test to appoint a
representative should continue to require assessment of the
for a representative and, if so, whether the term ‘need’ should be
(i) If the ‘need’ to have a representative remains part of the
test to appoint a representative, should it be defined?
(ii) If so, what should ‘need’
8.2.15 There were 14 responses to this question. The Board considered that
there was no need to revise the existing test. The majority
of submissions
supported the test continuing to require a ‘need’ for a
representative.
8.2.16 Seven responses stated that the term ‘need’ could usefully
be defined or explained. The OPG stated that:
The OPG believes the ‘need’ for a guardian or administrator
should remain part of the test and should be strengthened
and clarified. The
need should be current and demonstrated and relate to substitute decision/s
required to be made.
Ordinarily, when a person is not objecting to a proposed course of action, if
there is no question as to coercion and if there is
no contention about the
options at hand, there should not be a need for substitute decision-making.
There may well be, however, a
need for an advocate or a supporter to properly
explore wishes/lack of objection, ensure the provision of services and to look
broader alternatives or options. The need for a representative should only
be established when all such options for informal supports
and advocacy have
been exhausted.
‘Need’ should not be confused with ‘risk’: it is
common for risks to arise from poor judgement and risk-taking
behaviour of a
person with a disability — as for any person — and/or from a lack of
appropriate resources or services.
But the presence of risk does not necessarily
mean substitute decisions need to be made. For example, a person with a
may face risks associated with being homeless, but if they would
clearly accept an offer of housing, the appointment of a guardian
substitute decision as to where the person is to live is not needed. Or a person
with a disability may make poor decisions
regarding intimate relationships with
associated risks of exploitation, emotional hurt or sexually transmitted disease
— substitute
decision-making is often not viable in such circumstances,
whereas support, counselling and education can be beneficial and empowering.
The OPG believes consideration should be given to adopting the approaches of
the new Victorian legislation and the Northern Territory.
8.2.17 Two other submissions also supported the term ‘need’ being
defined consistently with the approach in the Northern
Territory. Members of the
Elder Law Committee preferred the Queensland approach, whilst PCT did not
support the Queensland example.
8.2.18 Two responses observed difficulties with the test requiring a
‘need’ for a representative. Carers Tasmania submitted
that the test
should be revised to consider a carer’s perspective, including:
· While not having a representative appointed may be the least
restrictive option, it may be important to closely assess exactly
significant the caring role is, and to consider how difficult it currently is
for the carer to advocate on behalf of a person
without a formal decision making
role, and the dilemmas and consequences this creates for both parties.
· If a family member is not able to be appointed in anticipation of a
future need, what impact will this have on the person and
the carer if an
unexpected need arises needing urgent attention.
· The family or friend in a caring role’s capacity (ie time,
emotional resilience, skills, support) to perform these decision
responsibilities, and associated requirements if appointed.
8.2.19 The OPMHS commented that the appointment of a representative can act
as a safeguard:
The current provision that there needs to be a need for a guardian often
leads to people clearly lacking capacity not having a guardian.
This can lead to
others making decisions for a person without authority, scrutiny and often not
very aware of the principles of alternative
decision making. This is
particularly a risk for dementia patients in nursing homes and given the aging
population, this vulnerable
group will increase over time ... It would be good
if guardians could be appointed for those people, preferably family or friends
unless there is a conflict of interest. The guardian would then be clear as the
decision maker around life style decisions, when
restrictions of movement are
put in place due to safety issues, how personal funds are spent etc. Often this
is just done by nursing
often focus on safety rather than personal preferences and individual freedoms
and the fact remains that there is little scrutiny and support for the person if
they disagree with decisions.
8.2.20 The Institute also asked whether the test to appoint a representative
ought to have regard to the extent to which decision-making
support has been
attempted and failed.
Should an applicant need to satisfy the Board that all reasonable support
options have been attempted before a representative is
8.2.21 There were 11 submissions addressing this question, seven of which
supported the Act explicitly stating that the Board should
need to be satisfied
that all reasonable support options have been attempted before a representative
is appointed. Some submissions
expressed strong support, with others commenting
that it was critical and part of ensuring that the appointment of a
representative
is a last resort.
8.2.22 The Board and the Public Trustee did not support the Act explicitly
stating that a representative may only be appointed if
all reasonable support
options have been attempted. The Board commented that this requirement is
implicit in upholding the guiding
principles of the Act which require the least
restrictive alternative to be adopted. The Board noted that, as part of
upholding this
principle, it enquires about other options attempted to satisfy
itself that the appointment of a representative is the least restrictive
alternative.
8.2.23 Social Work Services RHH made the following observations, without
explicitly supporting or rejecting this potential reform:
In many cases, ensuring that all reasonable support options have been
attempted before a representative is appointed will be appropriate.
there are many times with clients who have a significant
decision-making-impairment can’t trial the least restrictive
without a Guardian or Administrator.
Example: A represented person is unsafe at home and refuses support services
which would enable them to remain at home. There are
times a Guardian is
required to consider the risks of whether a person can return home with enforced
support services (sometimes
requiring the financial support of the administrator
or Enduring power of attorney) versus needing to move to permanent residential
aged care. A Guardian is often required to consent to implementing support
services with an overarching consideration for the persons’
wishes, what
is in their best interests and considering at what point living at home is no
longer sustainable. Therefore a Guardian
is sometimes required to promote the
least restrictive option.
The Institute’s view
8.2.24 The Institute proposes that the test to appoint a representative
remain substantially the same. Minor revisions are, however,
recommended in
response to feedback received. The proposed revisions are as follows:
8.2.25 Firstly, it is recommended that the Act provide a single test for the
Board to apply when determining whether to make an order
appointing a
representative. Currently, whilst the tests are the same, the Act outlines them
within separate sections in relation
to the appointment of a guardian and
administrator.
with comments made elsewhere in this Report, the Institute promotes reforms that
assist to simplify and shorten the Act,
so that it is accessible as possible.
8.2.26 Secondly, the Institute recommends that, instead of assessing whether
the appointment of a representative is in a proposed
represented person’s
best interests, the test require consideration of whether the appointment
promotes their ‘personal
and social wellbeing’. The rationale for
this reform is discussed in Part
8.2.27 The final revision proposed is to outline what must be considered when
assessing the need for a representative, consistent
with the approach in
Victoria. Most respondents supported the Act clarifying what is meant by the
‘need’ for a representative.
The proposed Victorian approach is
endorsed because:
• it requires consideration of the will and preference of the
• it explicitly requires an assessment of the availability and
suitability of other informal means. Whilst it is acknowledged
that this may
already be implicit, this reform is consistent with responses that it should
only be possible to appoint a representative
if other alternatives have been
unsuccessful and a representative is needed as a last resort;
• consistent with submissions made by Carers Tasmania, it requires
consideration of the views of those close to a proposed represented
• it calls for an evaluation of what impact the appointment of a
representative may have on existing support relationships.
This consideration
promotes the rights and interests of the proposed represented person. It is not
dissimilar to the existing requirement
that the Board consider the desirability
of preserving existing family relationships when considering the suitability of
a guardian.
8.2.28 These reforms complement other proposals made in Part 6 which would
require the Board to only determine that a proposed represented
person does not
have the decision-making ability in relation to a personal or financial matter
(the first limb of the test) if it
is satisfied that they are unable to make a
decision with support.
Recommendation 8.1
(1) That the test to appoint a representative require the Board to be
satisfied that:
(a) the proposed represented person does not have decision-making ability in
relation to one or more personal matters (in the case
of a guardianship order)
or financial matters (in the case of an administration order);
(b) the proposed represented person is in need of a guardian or
administrator; and
(c) the guardianship order or administration order will promote the proposed
represented person’s personal and social wellbeing.
(2) That, when considering whether there is a need for a representative, the
Board be required to consider:
(a) the values, wishes and preferences of the proposed represented person;
(b) whether the needs of the proposed represented person could be met by
other means less restrictive of that person’s freedom
of decision and
action, including whether the need could be met by informal means, through
negotiation, mediation or similar means,
or in the case of a guardianship
order, through the appointment of a supporter;
(c) the wishes of any primary carer or close relative of the proposed
represented person or other person with a direct interest
in the application;
(d) the desirability of preserving existing relationships that are important
to the proposed represented person.
Plenary orders
8.3.1 Representatives may be given authority over all of a person’s
personal or financial matters. The Act calls this a ‘full’
appointment. It is often also called a ‘plenary’ appointment.
Alternatively, the Board may give representatives powers
over only some matters.
The Act calls this a ‘limited’ appointment.
8.3.2 The Act provides that the Board must not appoint a full guardian unless
satisfied that a limited appointment would be insufficient
to meet the
person’s needs.
equivalent statement is not included in relation to
administrators,
although it
confirms that: ‘Where the Board makes an order appointing an administrator
of a person’s estate, the order
is to be that which is the least
restrictive of that person’s freedom of decision and action as is possible
in the circumstances.’
This is also one of the overriding governing principles of the Act, as discussed
8.3.3 The Convention provides that safeguards for decision-making must be
proportional and tailored to a person’s
circumstances.
In light of
the Convention, the ALRC recommended that any appointment of a representative
must be limited in scope and
proportionate.
recommended that plenary guardianship be
The Northern
Territory has adopted this
The revised
Victorian Bill also provides that VCAT may only appoint a representative if
satisfied that a person does not have the
decision-making capacity in relation
to the personal/financial matter in relation to which the order is
Effectively, this
will require the tribunal to tailor its orders. The NSWLRC’s recent
recommendations also implicitly require
abolition of plenary orders by proposing
that the tribunal be required to specify the decisions that the appointed
representative
8.3.4 The Issues Paper commented that full orders provide flexibility and may
reduce the need for multiple applications to the Board
if a representative
requires extended powers. On the other hand, requiring the Board to consider and
then list the powers given to
a representative ensures that orders are tailored
and that a person’s freedom of decision and action is only restricted to
the extent that it is necessary.
8.3.5 The Public Guardian reports that 32 (15 per cent) of the orders
appointing the Public Guardian as guardian as at 30 June 2017
were plenary
This compared to 16 plenary guardianship orders appointing the Public Guardian
as at 30 June 2016 (or 9.5 per cent of orders appointing
2016–2017, 46 (21 per cent) of orders appointing the Public Guardian were
limited to a single power. This compares to 27
per cent as at 30 June
8.3.6 The Issues Paper asked for stakeholder’s views about whether full
guardianship orders ought to continue.
Should plenary (full) guardianship Orders continue, and if so, in what
circumstances?
8.3.7 Seven respondents addressed this question. Two submissions stated that
the Board should not be permitted to make plenary orders
and should need to
tailor its orders according to an individual’s circumstances. Social Work
Services RHH, for example, commented
that: ‘Abolishing plenary orders
makes a Board consider the powers given and ensures that members must deliberate
restrictive practices by only giving powers for necessary
8.3.8 Both the OPG and the Board observed that it is difficult to see how
plenary orders are a least restrictive alternative. Both
stated that, if the
ability to make plenary orders did continue, then such orders should be reserved
for the most exceptional circumstances.
The Board submitted:
Generally speaking it is difficult to see how plenary guardianship orders are
‘the least restrictive of a person’s freedom
of decision and
action’ (s 6 of the Act). Further, it is arguable that plenary
guardianship orders appear contrary to Article
12 of the UN
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
If plenary guardianship orders are retained then it would appear that such
orders should only be made in exceptional circumstances.
8.3.9 The OPG made similar comments:
On balance, the OPG leans towards abolishing plenary orders. It is extremely
difficult to envisage a plenary order being the least
restrictive option, and it
is never the case that the full range of powers possible under a plenary order
would be required for one
represented person. It is almost unheard of, for
example, for a guardian to be required to make decisions about whether and where
a person should work. The OPG believes plenary orders are often made where there
are multiple areas of decision-making and it seems
more expedient to confer full
powers rather than to consider and specify a list of powers. Orders should be
tailored to the decisions
needing to be made in the circumstances of the case.
Even a person with profound impairments resulting in an inability to make any
decisions is unlikely to need decisions to be made across all lifestyle/personal
The circumstances in which a plenary order might be justifiable include
extremely complex cases where there are multiple risks, no
clear solutions at
the time of the hearing and a high degree of problem solving required to arrive
at protective measures for which
a guardian’s decisions are needed. The
OPG is not completely opposed to the option of plenary orders continuing, but if
is to be retained, the law should make it available only in exceptional
circumstances, for a short term (perhaps 6 or 12 months)
limited period and
reviewable.
8.3.10 One submission
supported retaining the Board’s ability to make full guardianship orders
in appropriate circumstances. Sandra Taglieri SC commented
that in cases of
severe and permanent disability a full guardianship order can promote a
person’s best interests by giving
flexibility to deal with the likelihood
of circumstances eventuating where the person’s needs may be fluctuating
and variable.
In these cases, it was commented that a full order would avoid the
need for multiple applications to the Board. This was a particular
relation to consent to medical treatment in cases where:
• there was a potential for conflict between a limited guardian and the
person’s represented person;
• there is confusion on the part of a limited guardian about what power
he/she has; or
• where a limited guardian was concerned about acting outside of their
power (so refuses or delays in giving consent) or the
medical professional
involved in the anticipated treatment will not provide treatment because of fear
of committing an offence (s
39, despite the terms of s 40).
In cases referred to above, it was submitted that there is a risk that if a
guardian is given powers that are too limited (for example,
to consent to only
one particular type of treatment), this can lead to difficulties if the
patient’s medical condition changes
or a medical practitioner recommends a
supplementary investigation or treatment (for example, due to complications
arising) that
were not anticipated at the time of the Board’s hearing. It
was noted that the patient may have already been on a wait list
for treatment
for some time and an order that is too limited may not be flexible enough to
deal with all circumstances that arise
whilst a represented person is receiving
professional care. If substitute consent is unable to be provided at that time
because the
limited guardian believes they do not have power to give consent to
that intervention, or there is conflict between the limited guardian
person responsible, there can be resulting delay whilst a guardian applies to
the Board for enlarged powers, with the potential
need to then have to join a
further wait list to receive the treatment. Ms Taglieri commented that this
could potentially result
in significant adverse consequences for a represented
person and those close to them. At worst, it was noted that this could create
the potential for allegations against carers or service providers in
circumstances where they were aware that treatment was required
but were unable
to facilitate treatment due to these constraints. Ms Taglieri did observe that
an application for an emergency order
may be open to hopefully avoid or
alleviate adverse outcomes, it is by no means certain that the application would
be made and determined
to ensure the represented person’s best
8.3.11 Ms Taglieri further submitted that constraining the Board by removing
its ability to make plenary orders comprises an interference
with the function
and duty of a statutory decision-maker, whose role it is to make appropriate
orders based on the evidence at the
hearing. It was commented that the appeals
system permits scrutiny of the Board’s decisions and that this is the
appropriate
forum to address any grievance relating to excess power being
granted in any given case. Further, Ms Taglieri commented that the
making of a
plenary order does not prevent a guardian from engaging in consultation and
co-operative decision making with a represented
person if that is possible, but
it will promote the best interests of represented persons in cases of severe
disability.
8.3.12 The Institute accepts these concerns but considers that, reflecting on
the rights of individuals articulated in the Convention
and the need to adopt
the least restrictive alternative, the Board should be required to tailor its
orders and only confer powers
upon a representative to the extent that is
necessary. This would complement Recommendation 8.1(2) which emphasises the
of considering the ‘need’ for a representative. The
intention is to ensure focus upon a proposed represented person’s
circumstances and that the appointment of a representative is a last resort and
only permitted where less restrictive alternatives
(for example the provision of
decision-making support) have been unsuccessful.
8.3.13 This reform would not eliminate the Board’s ability to make
orders granting powers in relation to multiple or even all
aspects of a
represented person’s personal affairs if satisfied that powers in each of
those areas is necessary and the least
restrictive alternative to meet the
represented person’s needs in the circumstances. It might be, for example,
that the Board
considers it appropriate to grant powers in relation to all
consent to health care and treatment matters to provide a degree of flexibility
where appropriate. But, for that same individual, it might be unnecessary to
grant their guardian powers in relation to work, or
restricting visits because
of a lack of need. The Victorian Bill provides a useful example of this
Recommendation 8.2
That, when conferring authority upon a representative, the Board need to be
satisfied that the test for the appointment of a representative
is satisfied in
relation to each function conferred.
representatives
8.4.1 The Issues Paper outlined the duties of administrators and guardians
separately.
It asked what
ought to be included within with scope of duties of each separately. Responses
were broadly consistent, indicating
that respondents viewed the duties of both
administrators and guardians as being equivalent. The Institute proposes reform
a separate section within the Act articulating the duties of all
representatives. This ensures that the duties of representatives
are explicit
and easily located. The Board’s submission also commented that the
difference between a
should be made distinct.
Outlining the duties of representatives within a separate section achieves this.
The following paragraphs
outline proposals for what should be included within
the scope of a representative’s duty. Recommendation 7.9 proposes that
these duties also apply to formally appointed supporters.
Current duties of representatives
8.4.2 The Act provides that representatives must act in accordance with the
guiding principles of the
They are required to act
at all times in accordance with a represented person’s best
The Act explains
that this means that representatives must act as far as possible:
• in consultation with the person, taking into account their wishes, as
far as possible;
• as an advocate for the person; and
• in a way that encourages the person to participate in the life of the
community as much as
8.4.3 The Act then separately provides that, for guardians, it also means
acting as much as possible in a way that:
• encourages and assists the person to become capable of caring for
themselves and making reasonable judgments; and
• protects them from neglect, abuse or
exploitation.
8.4.4 The Institute notes that the National Standards for Financial Managers
outline the need for administrators to:
• keep people informed about all aspects of their financial affairs in
a format that is best for the person; and
• provide a represented person with every opportunity appropriate and
possible to take back control of managing some or all
of their financial
8.4.5 The Institute enquired what stakeholders considered ought to be
included within the scope of duties of representatives.
What duties should a guardian
What duties should an administrator
Answers are outlined below.
Duty to apply the guiding principles of the Act
8.4.6 The most common response was that representatives should continue to be
required to apply the Act’s guiding
principles.
The Institute
agrees that this is fundamental to ensuring that the guiding principles govern
all activities under the Act. Revised
guiding principles are outlined in
Recommendation 3.3.
Involving those close to the represented person
8.4.7 The second most common response was that representatives should have a
duty to include those close to a represented person in
decision-making.
attendees of consultation sessions convened by Carers Tasmania expressed
frustration that they felt they are at times excluded
from decisions where
another person is acting as a representative. Some commented that it can make it
difficult to carry out their
role as primary carer if they are not included in
the decision-making process or kept informed of matters relevant to their role.
Speak Out’s submission observed that speaking with family or someone who
knows a represented person well can help to ascertain
the person’s
8.4.8 This issue was also discussed in Part 3 when considering reform to the
guiding principles of the Act. One of the proposed new
guiding principles is
that the role of families, carers and other significant persons in an
adult’s life to support the adult
to make decisions must be acknowledged
and respected. As it is proposed that representatives have a duty to uphold the
guiding principles,
they would be required to act in accordance with this
Duty to act with reasonable diligence
8.4.9 Three submissions referred to and supported reform to include an
explicit duty upon representatives to act with reasonable diligence.
Institute supports this reform as it promotes the rights and interests of a
represented person. This reform is consistent with
legislative provisions in
Queensland and the Northern
Duty to treat the represented person with respect and dignity
8.4.10 Three respondents supported an express duty to treat a represented
person with respect and dignity. This reform is endorsed
on the basis that it
promotes the rights of represented people and is consistent with the principles
of the Convention.
Duty to protect the represented person from violence, abuse, neglect and
exploitation
8.4.11 Three respondents endorsed a duty upon representatives to protect a
represented person from violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation.
existing elements of a guardian acting in accordance with a represented
person’s best interests is protecting them
from neglect, abuse or
exploitation.
The Institute
recommends that this remain, and that it also extend to administrators.
Duty to build the represented person’s skills and ability
8.4.12 Four responses supported a duty for representatives to build a
represented person’s skills and
advocates highlighted the need for capacity building and the importance of
building a person’s skills and confidence
so that a person can make
decisions for themselves. Speak Out’s submission stated that:
‘Teaching should be part of the
representative’s job and
8.4.13 Currently, the Act provides that, for guardians, acting in accordance
with a represented person’s best interests means
encouraging and assisting
them to become capable of caring for themselves and making reasonable
administrators, it means encouraging and assisting a represented person to
become capable of administering his or her
It is proposed that
the duty to build the skills and ability of a represented person remain in the
Act. It ensures that representatives
have an active duty to assist to improve
the decision-making abilities of a represented person, with the aim of no longer
a representative. This is one component of providing people with
decision-making support.
Duty to keep the represented person informed
8.4.14 Three responses stated that representatives should have a duty to keep
a represented person informed about decisions and actions
Speak Out Advocacy
also commented that ‘the Act should be clear that people need to be told
if they have a guardian or administrator
and who it is.’ The Institute
heard many examples where people felt that a represented person was not kept
adequately informed
of a representative’s decisions and actions. One
example shared included funds being transferred between accounts without
the represented person, causing them distress when later viewing their
bank account summary to find funds withdrawn.
8.4.15 One of the existing components of acting in accordance with a
represented person’s best interests is acting ‘in
consultation with
the person, taking into account their wishes, as far as
proposed that representatives have a duty to keep a represented person informed.
This proposal strengthens the existing requirement
of acting ‘in
consultation’ with the person — which may be interpreted to relate
primarily to a need for consultation
before making a decision, without
adequately signifying the importance of keeping a person informed as a decision
is implemented.
Ensuring that a represented person is kept informed is a
critical element of treating a person with respect. Providing information
also critical to supporting a person to make their own decisions and capacity
building. A duty to this effect is already captured
in the National Standards
for Financial Managers.
Duty to act honestly and in good faith
8.4.16 Two responses suggested a duty upon representatives to act honestly
and in good faith.
with the VLRC’s recommendations and subsequent legislative reform proposed
in Victoria,
and statutory
provisions in Queensland and the Northern
a duty upon
representatives to act honestly and in good faith is endorsed.
Duty to build a relationship with the represented person
8.4.17 Two respondents suggested that representatives should have a duty to
build a relationship with the represented person. The
Institute agrees, noting
that, to uphold and promote a person’s will and preferences, the first
step is to ascertain the person’s
will and preference — a strong
relationship may assist with
An effective
relationship may also assist with the provision of support. The Institute has
not, however, recommended that this be
included as a separate duty. This is
because it forms an essential component of other duties proposed —
notably, duties to
uphold the Act’s guiding principles, to act with
reasonable diligence, treat a person with respect and dignity, build their
skills and abilities and keep a represented person informed.
Duty to communicate with the represented person in a way that they
8.4.18 Three responses supported a duty upon representatives to communicate
with a represented person in a way that they understand.
It is proposed that
this be included as one of the duties of representatives. The intention is to
promote respect, and comprises
one means of supporting a represented person to
make and participate in decisions.
Duty to uphold the represented person’s wishes
8.4.19 Two respondents commented upon the role of representatives in ensuring
that a represented person’s wishes are upheld.
8.4.20 The Institute notes that the revised guiding principles of the Act
provide that ‘the will, preferences and rights of
persons who may require
decision-making support must direct decisions that affect their
The enactment
of Recommendations in Part 11 would also require representatives to adopt a
particular ‘decision-making process’,
developed with the need to
uphold and promote a person’s will and preferences as a paramount
consideration.
Part 5 also
considered specific duties upon guardians to uphold a person’s wishes as
conveyed in an advance care
This duty is
therefore captured elsewhere.
The Institute’s view
8.4.21 In addition to those duties identified in responses, the Institute
considers it appropriate to maintain the existing requirement
representatives to act as an advocate for a represented person. One example of
this was discussed in Part 5 in relation to the
requirement for guardians to
advocate for a person’s views and wishes contained in their advance care
The duty to act as
an advocate for a represented person is also conferred in the Northern
8.4.22 The Institute also proposes that representatives have a duty to
consult with each other in circumstances where there is more
representative appointed. This might occur where both an administrator and
guardian are appointed, or where there are joint
representatives appointed (for
example, joint guardians). Presently the Act does not impose any obligations
upon jointly appointed
representatives about how they must fulfil the role
jointly. In Queensland and South Australia, jointly appointed representatives
are required to regularly consult and keep each other informed about substantial
decisions or actions.
representatives a duty to consult with each other encourages strong
communication to assist them to effectively perform their
8.4.23 The Institute further proposes that the Act provide a duty upon
representatives to respect a represented person’s right
to privacy.
Maintenance of a person’s right to privacy is an obligation under the
Convention. Article 22 provides:
Article 22 – Respect for privacy
1. No person with disabilities, regardless of place of residence or living
arrangements, shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful
interference with his
or her privacy, family, or correspondence or other types of communication or to
unlawful attacks on his or
her honour and reputation. Persons with disabilities
have the right to the protection of the law against such interference or
2. States Parties shall protect the privacy of personal, health and
rehabilitation information of persons with disabilities on an
equal basis with
8.4.24 Draft legislation in Queensland provides the right to privacy as one
of the general principles of its
In making suggestions
for improvements to the safeguarding components of the Act, the Board submitted
There is often a misunderstanding from a family member or other interested
person that they are entitled to information, documentation
including a
financial statement relating to a person’s estate from an administrator.
Usually a request is made informally to
the Board or Public Trustee rather than
a request by virtue of section 86 of the Act. Such a request does not accord
with a person’s
right to privacy and the principles set out in the UN
Convention. This common misunderstanding could be assisted by a reference in
Act to a person’s right to privacy.
8.4.25 Privacy considerations are addressed further in Part 12 as part of a
broader discussion about safeguards for representative
decision-making. As part
of considering improvements to the Act to reflect an individual’s right to
that respecting a person’s right to privacy be one
of the duties of representatives.
Recommendation 8.3
(1) That the duties of representatives be outlined in a separate section of
(2) That the duties of representatives include the following:
(a) to uphold the guiding principles of the Act;
(b) to act honestly, diligently and in good faith;
(c) to treat the represented person (the ‘person’) with respect
and dignity;
(d) to communicate with the person by any means that they consider the
person will be best able to understand;
(e) to keep the person informed about decisions made and steps taken by the
representative as appropriate in the circumstances;
(f) to regularly consult with any other appointed representative of the
person and them keep informed about substantial decisions
or actions, subject
to the terms of their appointment;
(g) to act as an advocate for the person;
(h) to encourage and support the person to develop their decision-making
abilities where possible;
(i) to act in such a way so as to protect the person from violence, neglect,
abuse or exploitation; and
(j) to respect the person’s right to privacy.
Ending of the
powers of representatives
8.5.1 Representatives may only be appointed if a person does not have the
ability to make a decision about their personal or financial
circumstances. It
follows that a representative’s power should end upon a represented person
gaining the ability to make their
own decision. The Act does not state that
representatives have a duty to monitor a represented person’s ability to
own decisions or require them to report improvements.
8.5.2 In the UK, the
Mental Capacity Act
confirms that a
representative does not have power to make decisions if they know or have
reasonable grounds to believe that a represented
person has capacity in relation
to that matter.
In the Irish
Republic, representatives
have a duty to monitor and report improvements to a person’s
The Northern
Territory makes it an offence for representatives to intentionally exercise
their authority when the represented person
does not have impaired
decision-making and they are reckless about
Higher penalties apply
if this conduct is undertaken with the intention of obtaining a benefit for
themselves or another person.
The QLRC supported this
8.5.3 The Issues Paper asked stakeholders the extent to which the Act should
outline obligations and duties upon representatives to
monitor a represented
person’s decision-making abilities during the course of their appointment.
(i) Should representatives have a duty to monitor a represented
person’s capacity whilst they are acting?
(ii) Should the Act state that representatives may only make decisions when a
represented person does not have decision-making
Duty to monitor a represented
person’s abilities
8.5.4 Most respondents
supported introduction of a duty upon representatives to monitor a represented
person’s decision-making ability whilst acting
or appointed to the role.
The Board stated that this requirement is already implicit in the Act. Speak Out
submitted ‘[p]eople
shouldn’t make decisions if they think the
person can make them.’
8.5.5 The OPMHS commented that it did not consider that the need for
representatives to monitor a represented person’s capacity
is consistent
with the position that assessment of a person’s abilities is a matter for
professional assessment. Advocacy Tasmania
also expressed concern about the
potential need for a represented person to then regularly submit to a capacity
assessment:
A representative should have a duty to continue to support a person to make
decisions and to give effect to the person’s will
and preferences. We do
not believe an ongoing capacity assessment is an appropriate way to undertake
8.5.6 Social Work Services RHH also raised the question of what is meant by
‘monitoring’ a person’s capacity and
the frequency with which
this should be required.
8.5.7 The proposed Decision-Making Process outlined at Recommendation 11.2
addresses this issue. It requires representatives to consider
whether there is a
need for a representative decision which involves consideration of a represented
person’s own ability to
make a decision. It also requires a representative
to consider the person’s ability to make their own decision with support,
including offering the person that support. The Decision-Making Process then
requires a representative to consider whether they believe
that the represented
person may be able to make their own decision in the future and if so, whether
there would be any detriment
caused in deferring a decision until that point.
Each of these stages of the Decision-Making Process involves consideration of
represented person’s ability to make their own decision.
Duty to report to the Board about a
represented person’s decision-making ability
8.5.8 Some respondents suggested that Board-appointed representatives should
have a duty to advise the Board if they consider that
a represented
person’s decision-making ability has improved and they are able to make
their own decisions. The Board informed
that it advises representatives that
they should apply for the review of an order if they believe that a represented
person is able
to make their own decisions.
8.5.9 The OPG submitted that, in addition to a requirement to advise the
Board when a person’s decision-making ability has improved,
representative should need to do so if they consider that there is no longer a
need for an appointment — as the test to appoint
a representative involves
other factors in addition to assessment of the person’s abilities.
8.5.10 The Institute agrees with the OPG’s submission to ensure that
orders appointing representatives do not last any longer
than necessary. A
decision or series of decisions taken by a representative following their
appointment may satisfactorily address
the relevant need. For example, a
representative might establish direct debit payment arrangements, or make a
decision in relation
to a represented person’s move to alternative
accommodation. Once those decisions have been implemented, there may no longer
be a need for a representative. Whilst Recommendation 12.15 proposes that the
Board be required to take this matter into account
when determining the duration
of an order, this further measure promotes orders appointing representatives
only lasting for as short
a duration as possible.
Recommendation 8.4
That the Act require Board-appointed representatives to apply to the Board
for the review of an order if they consider that the test
for the appointment of
a representative would no longer be met.
representative
8.6.1 The Institute asked for views about whether the Act needs to be revised
to deal with what happens when a representative dies.
The Issues Paper commented
that the death of a representative could create a situation where the
represented person does not have
a representative available to make decisions.
Where a decision needed to be made urgently, this could result in a need to
the Board for an emergency order.
Should the Public Trustee or Public Guardian be automatically appointed as a
temporary representative upon the death of a
representative?
8.6.2 The Institute understands that this situation is rare and was not
informed of any examples where this had caused a problem.
The matter can already
be resolved urgently if required, by making an emergency order appointing the
Public Trustee or Public Guardian.
Having a default but temporary appointment of
the Public Trustee or Public Guardian would not, therefore, have any meaningful
other than avoiding an application to the Board. The Board commented
It appears a cumbersome process that on the death of a guardian or an
administrator appropriate records need to be provided to the
Public Guardian
and/or Public Trustee for a short period of time and then returned to another
family member who satisfies the eligibility
test for appointment in the Act
(section 54), just in case decisions may need to be made.
8.6.3 The situation can be mitigated by the Board making flexible orders, for
example, by appointing joint or substitute representatives
to act where a
representative dies or is otherwise unable to act. The default appointment of a
temporary representative is contrary
to the principle that a representative
should only be appointed for a person if there is a need. The appointment of a
representative
should also consider the views, wishes and preferences of the
represented person — a default appointment would not achieve
this. As the
Public Trustee observed in its submission, these circumstances justify a fresh
look at the order.
representatives
8.7.1 Parts 9 and 10 deal separately with the rights of guardians and
administrators. One matter that is relevant to both is their
right to access
information. The right to access a represented person’s Will is also
relevant to both, but is considered in
in relation to safeguards
more broadly.
8.7.2 As noted in the Issues
the Act sets out
explicitly the rights of enduring guardians to access
information.
An equivalent
provision is not included in relation to Board-appointed guardians or
administrators. The
Powers of Attorney Act
includes an equivalent section
dealing with the rights of an attorney to access
information.
submission stated that equivalent provisions should be included in legislation
in relation to representatives’
rights to information however appointed
(ie, whether by the Board or an individual). The Institute agrees that it is
appropriate
that the Act provide representatives with equivalent powers and
rights in relation to accessing information.
Recommendation 8.5
That the rights of enduring guardians to access information in s 32B(1) of
the Act also be included for Board-appointed guardians
and administrators.
and Powers of Guardians
Introduction
9.1.1 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to consider:
• how the role of guardians advances the interests of people with
impaired capacity; and
• the need to ensure that the powers and duties of guardians are
effective, appropriate, and advance the interests of people
with impaired
9.1.2 This Part reviews the powers given to guardians in the Act and proposes
reform to these provisions in light of the Convention
and developments in
policy, law and practice.
9.2.1 Currently, guardians are appointed if a person is unable to make a
reasonable judgment about their ‘person or
circumstances’.
does not define ‘person or circumstances’. Other jurisdictions
describe the role of a guardian as relating to
a person’s personal or
lifestyle affairs,
and welfare.
The Institute
considers that, to better describe the role using plain English, the role be
described as relating to a person’s
‘personal matters’. This
is also the term that the
Powers of Attorney Act
Recommendation 9.1
That the Act describe the scope of a guardian’s role as relating to
‘personal matters’.
9.2.2 The Act describes the powers of full guardians as being consistent with
the powers that a parent has in relation to their
The VLRC described
this as an outdated description and recommended it be
It does not appear
in the revised Victorian Bill.
9.2.3 The Institute sought views about whether the description of the role of
a guardian being akin to that of a parent ought to be
removed from the Act.
Should the description that a guardian’s powers and duties are akin to
those ‘that a parent has over a child’ be
9.2.4 There was overwhelming support for this reform. Respondents commented
that, apart from perpetuating paternalistic notions of
guardianship, it also
does not in fact assist to explain the role. It was observed that the role that
a parent plays in relation
to decision-making for their child depends, amongst
other things, upon the particular relationship and the child’s age. It
considered unhelpful to make broad generalisations about the role that a parent
has in relation to a child.
9.2.5 The Institute considers that the description of having authority over
‘personal matters’, along with inclusion of
a non-exhaustive list of
powers of guardians, adequately describes the role and that this description
does not add to public understanding.
Recommendation 9.2
That the description in the Act that a guardian has a role akin to that of a
parent in relation to a child be removed.
List of powers of guardians
9.2.6 The Act lists the powers of a full guardian as including:
• deciding where a person lives whether permanently or temporarily;
• deciding with whom a person lives;
• deciding whether a person should work and related matters;
• restricting visits on behalf of a represented person where it is in
their best interests, and prohibiting visits where the
guardian reasonably
believes that they would have an adverse effect on the person; and
• consenting to health care that is in the best interests of the
person, or refusing or withdrawing consent to any such
Powers of Attorney Act
defines a ‘personal
matter’ as also including:
• education or training;
• applications for a licence or permit, other than for business or
commercial reasons; and
• day to day matters relating to diet, recreation, hobbies, companions,
pet ownership, sexual expression, dress, hairstyle,
with whom a person
associates, or clubs, associations or political parties the person may
9.2.8 The Issues Paper gave examples of other functions of guardians
conferred in other jurisdictions, including:
• legal matters that relate to personal or lifestyle
• the provision of care
9.2.9 The Act does not presently refer to litigation as one of the roles of a
guardian. The Board’s guidelines, however, note
that it may be within the
scope of a guardian’s power to conduct litigation where legal proceedings
relate to non-financial
Non-financial matters might include applications for restraint orders, Family
Court children’s matters or child protection
9.2.10 The Institute asked whether the list of powers of a guardian needs to
be revised, and if so, how. It also asked specifically
to guardians’ powers to conduct litigation.
(i) Does the list of powers of a guardian need to be revised, and if so,
(ii) Should the list confirm guardians’ powers to conduct
litigation?
9.2.11 There were 10 responses to the first question. Some responses
indicated that there is no need to revise the existing list of
powers. Two
submissions raised the issue of guardians’ powers to access a represented
person’s Will. This is addressed
9.2.12 Suggestions to revise to the list of powers of guardians included:
• making the list clearer;
• reducing the powers of guardians;
• clarifying powers in relation to restricting a person’s travel
and movement, for example, by removing passports; and
• confirming the extent and scope of guardians’ powers in
relation to detention and other restrictive practices. (These
matters are
addressed in Parts 13 and
The OPG commented:
Guardians can also be requested to make decisions on day-to-day matters which
would normally be minor and not require a substitute
decision. Such matters
might include the person’s diet and smoking (although such decisions might
fall under health care consent);
recreational pursuits; dress; hairstyle; access
to the phone and internet; and pet ownership or relinquishment ... We do not
that these types of decisions should be included in the list as they
are only very rarely required, but consideration could be given
to the need for
the Board, on occasion, to give a very specific power in relation to one (or
more) of these daily living issues.
Subsection 25(2)(c) rather prominently sets out various decisions a guardian
could make in relation to a represented person’s
work. These powers are
rarely (almost never) granted and consideration should be given to removing them
from the list, or at the
very least distilling them into single line.
9.2.13 There were six responses to the second question asking whether the Act
should explicitly provide a power for guardians to conduct
litigation. All
endorsed this reform, with the Board noting that provisions to this effect are
included in the ACT and WA legislation.
9.2.14 The Institute proposes revisions to the existing list of powers of
guardians reflecting submissions received. To clarify what
is meant by a
‘legal matter’, it is proposed that the Act define the term to
include retaining legal services and bringing
and defending a legal proceeding
or hearing in a court, tribunal or other body, consistent with the recent
Victorian Bill.
Recommendation 9.3
(1) That ‘personal matters’ be defined to include:
· deciding where and with whom a represented person lives whether
permanently or temporarily;
· restricting visits on behalf of a represented person where it
promotes their personal and social wellbeing, and prohibiting
visits where the
guardian reasonably believes that it would have an adverse effect on the
· consenting to, or refusing or withdrawing consent to health care and
treatment other than special treatment;
· deciding upon education, training, and work arrangements of a
represented person; and
· legal matters that relate to personal matters.
(2) That ‘legal matter’ be defined to include:
· the use of legal services for a represented person’s benefit;
· bringing or defending a legal proceeding or hearing in a court,
tribunal or other body on behalf of the person.
Meaning of ‘health
9.2.15 The Act gives powers to guardians to consent to ‘health
care’. The term is not defined. The same sub-section then
provide that guardians may also refuse or withdraw consent to ‘any such
treatment.’ This language creates
ambiguity about what comprises
‘medical treatment’ and what comprises ‘health care’ and
the extent to which
these terms differ.
9.2.16 In South Australia, the term ‘health care’ is used and is
defined as follows:
‘health care’ means any care, service, procedure or treatment
(including medical treatment) provided by, or under the
supervision of, a health
practitioner for the purpose of diagnosing, maintaining or treating a physical
or mental condition of a
‘health practitioner’ means a person who practises 1 or more of
the following:
(a) a health profession (within the meaning of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia));
(b) any other profession or practice declared by the regulations to be
included in the ambit of this
definition.
9.2.17 In Queensland, the term ‘health care’ is used and is
defined as follows:
Health care
, of an adult,
is care or treatment of, or a service or a procedure for, the adult:
(a) to diagnose, maintain, or treat the adult’s physical or mental
condition; and
(b) carried out by, or under the direction or supervision of, a health
9.2.18 In the Northern Territory, ‘health care’ is defined as
‘health care’ means health care of any kind, including:
(a) anything that is part of a health service, as defined in section 5 of
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law; and
(b) the removal of tissue from a person’s body in accordance with Part
Transplantation and Anatomy
9.2.19 The NSWLRC recommend the following revised definition of ‘health
(1) ‘Healthcare’ includes
(a) any care, service, procedure or treatment provided by, or under the
supervision of, a registered health practitioner for the purpose
of diagnosing,
maintaining or treating a physical or mental condition of a person
(b) in the case of healthcare in the course of a medical research procedure
– the giving of placebos, and
(c) any other act declared by the regulations to be healthcare.
(3) ‘Registered health practitioner’ means a person who practises
(a) a health profession within the meaning of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(NSW), and/or
(b) any other profession or practice as declared by the
regulations.
9.2.20 In Victoria, the term ‘medical treatment’ is used but is
defined to include treatments performed by health practitioners:
medical treatment means any of the following treatments of a person by a
health practitioner
purposes of diagnosing a physical or mental condition, preventing disease,
restoring or replacing bodily function in the face
of disease or injury or
improving comfort and quality of life—
(a) treatment with physical or surgical therapy;
(b) treatment for mental illness;
(c) treatment with—
(i) prescription pharmaceuticals; or
(ii) an approved medicinal cannabis product within the meaning of the Access
Medicinal Cannabis Act 2016
(d) dental treatment;
(e) palliative care— but does not include a medical research
9.2.21 Presently, under the Act, for the purpose of confirming who may
complete a Health Care Professional Report for the Board, the
Act defines
‘Registered practitioner’ as ‘a person who is a medical
practitioner or person registered under the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Tasmania) in the dental profession as a
9.2.22 The Institute sought feedback about whether, and how, the phrase
‘health care’ ought to be defined.
(i) Does the term ‘health care’ need to be defined?
(ii) If so, how should it be
9.2.23 There were 12 responses to this question with a range of responses
received. It was generally considered that the current approach
of using both
terms ‘health care’ and ‘medical treatment’ without
defining what ‘health care’
is creates confusion and that it would
be beneficial to provide clarity. The Board commented that, if both terms
remain, then the
distinction should be made clear.
9.2.24 Seven respondents supported the term ‘health care’ being
used and defined. The OPG instead suggested that the phrase
‘health care
and medical treatment’ be used, to capture both matters and removing the
distinction between the terms.
COTA considered that the term health care should
not be used, and that ‘medical treatment’ should be used as a more
9.2.25 Answers to the following question in Part 10 also contained statements
How should ‘medical and dental treatment’ be defined, or should a
different term be used?
9.2.26 In response to this question, the Board submitted that:
The Board’s view is that clarification is required of the meaning of
‘medical treatment’ to include ‘matters
relating to health
care’ more broadly, as has been adopted in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) schedule 2 para 5(1). This proposal for
redefining ‘medical treatment to include ‘health care’ is
being considered
by other jurisdictions. It recognises the need for
clarification and, if necessary, regulation of what is commonly occurring in
in the decision making of persons
responsible.
9.2.27 The MHT instead submitted that the Act should not adopt the Queensland
definition of health care:
The definition of medical treatment is limited to procedures, operations and
examinations carried out by a medical practitioner. The
Act requires a
definition of examination and should exclude procedures, operations,
examinations and assessments relating to the
treatment of mental illness.
It is noted at [10.2.10] (page 112) that other jurisdictions have differing
definitions of medical treatment. For example, in Queensland,
‘the phrase
“matters relating to health care” is used. Health care is defined
broadly to mean care or treatment
of, or a service or a procedure for an adult
to diagnose, maintain, or treat a person’s physical or mental
The adoption of this definition in Tasmania would not be supported by the
Mental Health Tribunal as it includes the treatment of an
adult with a mental
condition. This should be excluded under any definition of health care.
9.2.28 The OPG submitted that:
The OPG has a firm view that the definition of medical treatment should be
termed ‘health care and treatment’ and broadened
to include other
health care provided by or under the supervision of a health practitioner as
defined by the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law. This includes dental
practitioners so dental treatment would not, then, require a separate
definition...
The OPG believes the definition of health care and treatment should refer to
the assessment, diagnosis, treatment, management and
prevention of physical and
mental conditions, and should specifically include the admission to and
discharge from treatment facilities
and hospitals.
To avoid the potential for any confusion or overlap, the Act needs to be
explicit that treatment covered under the
Mental Health Act
9.2.29 Dr Lisa Eckstein commented:
The term ‘medical and dental treatment’ is currently unclear and
warrants definition. I support including a relatively
broad statutory definition
for the term, including expressly extending it to cover matters that are
incidental to treatments. Guardians
also need a clear power to consent to health
care that goes beyond treatment and matters incidental to treatment. This could
for example, nursing care—such as tooth brushing and other
hygiene interventions.
9.2.30 Based on a majority of submissions received, the Institute considers
it both appropriate and necessary to redefine the powers
of guardians (and
persons responsible) to clarify their powers in relation to what has been termed
‘medical treatment’
and ‘health care’. Consistent with
the OPG’s submission, it is proposed that the term ‘health care and
be used, and that the term be defined. It is suggested that the
single term ‘health care and treatment’ be used to describe
powers of both guardians and persons responsible. This ensures that guardians
and persons responsible have complementary powers,
enabling a person or the
Board to appoint a guardian to avoid the otherwise default powers of persons
responsible and removing the
current gap in relation to ‘health
9.2.31 Several submissions provided suggestions about what ought to be
included within the definition of ‘health care’.
The OPMHS submitted
it needs to be clarified whether it [health care] includes decisions around
attending healthcare appointments, spending time in a
hospital, including
whether the guardian can consent to a stay in a secure unit (either hospital or
e.g. residential aged care facility)
for care and treatment.
9.2.32 PCT submitted that:
For people with life limiting illnesses, the definition in the Act should
incorporate the following:
Palliative care is an approach that improves the quality of life of patients
and their families facing the problems associated with
life-threatening illness,
through the prevention and relief of suffering by means of early identification
and impeccable assessment
and treatment of pain and other problems, physical,
psychosocial and spiritual – World Health Organization.
9.2.33 MIGA commented that ‘[i]t is important to develop a definition
which reflects the variety of actions which constitute
healthcare, including
assessment, investigation, care and treatment.’ It supported the Northern
Territory approach of defining
health care by reference to s 5 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law
(Queensland), being services
provided by registered health practitioners. As noted above, the OPG also
endorsed this approach. Under
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law,
‘health practitioner’ means an individual who practices a
profession’.
profession is defined to mean
the following professions,
including a recognised specialty in any of the following professions:
• Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practice;
• Chinese medicine;
• chiropractic;
• dental (including the profession of a dentist, dental therapist,
dental hygienist, dental prosthetist and oral health therapist);
• medical radiation practice;
• nursing and midwifery;
• occupational therapy;
• optometry;
• osteopathy;
• pharmacy;
• physiotherapy;
• podiatry; and
• psychology.
9.2.34 ‘Health service’ is defined as follows:
health service
the following services, whether provided as public or private services:
(a) services provided by registered health practitioners;
(b) hospital services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) to (g);
(i) services provided by dietitians, masseurs, naturopaths, social workers,
speech pathologists, audiologists or audiometrists;
(j) pathology
9.2.35 Consistent with approaches in other jurisdictions, and as supported by
respondents to the Issues Paper, the Institute proposes
that the term
‘health care and treatment’ be defined by reference to the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law.
Consistent with the MHT’s
submission, assessment and treatment for mental illnesses covered by the
Mental Health Act
is excluded from the proposed definition. Discussion
the definition is addressed separately in
Recommendation
(1) That the terms ‘medical treatment’ and ‘health
care’ as used in the Act be replaced with the single term
care and treatment’.
(2) That ‘health care and treatment’ be defined to include
‘health care’ of any kind, including:
(a) anything that is part of a health service within the meaning of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(b) an intimate forensic procedure and a non-intimate forensic procedure
normally carried out by a person authorised to carry out
the procedure under
Forensic Procedures Act 2000
(c) any other act declared by the Regulations to be health care and
treatment for the purposes of the Act.
(3) That the term ‘health care and treatment’ exclude the
assessment and treatment of mental illness given to a patient
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) and any other matter that is declared by the
Regulations to not be health care and treatment.
(4) That the term ‘health practitioner’ be defined to mean a
health practitioner within the meaning of the Health Practitioner
National Law, and any other profession prescribed in the Act’s
Regulations.
outside of a guardian’s authority
9.3.1 The Act does not list matters that fall outside of a guardian’s
authority. A list may help individuals to understand the
limits of the powers of
representatives.
This includes, most
recently, amendments proposed in Victoria under the
Guardianship and
Administration Bill
9.3.2 The Institute asked whether it would be beneficial for the Act to
provide a list of matters that fall outside of the powers
of a guardian.
Should the Act list matters that a guardian does not have power
9.3.3 Most respondents endorsed the Act containing a list of matters that are
excluded from a guardian’s power. This was supported
on the basis that it
gives clarity to the role and provides consistency with other jurisdictions. The
OPG stated that the list should
include decisions about marriage and divorce,
voting, care of a represented person’s children, making, revoking or
Wills, powers of attorney and advance care directives.
9.3.4 Two submissions did not support the Act containing a list of excluded
matters. Members of the Elder Law Committee considered
that it would be
difficult for this list to be exhaustive and that a guidebook for guardians
would be the better forum to include
a list. Another respondent considered the
reform unnecessary.
9.3.5 The Institute is of the view that providing lists of matters that fall
outside of the powers of a representative can assist
to promote understanding of
the nature and extent of the role. It may avoid a representative inadvertently
acting outside of their
powers due to a lack of understanding. It also ensures
that members of the public understand those powers that are outside of the
authority of a guardian. The Institute endorses examples of excluded matters
articulated in other jurisdictions’ legislation
and in Tasmania within the
Powers of Attorney
It is proposed that
the list explicitly confirm, to avoid confusion, that a representative does not
have power to act following the
death of a represented person.
9.3.6 In light of the comments of members of the Elder Law Committee, it is
suggested that the statutory list be expressed as being
non-exhaustive.
Recommendation 9.5
That the Act provide a non-exhaustive list of matters that fall outside the
authority of a guardian, including:
· those matters within the scope of an administrator’s
· consenting to, or refusing or withdrawing consent to special treatment
(unless giving consent to the continuation of special
treatment is approved by
the Board);
· consenting to assessment and treatment for mental illness covered by
Mental Health Act 2013
· making, revoking, or amending a represented person’s Will,
enduring power of attorney, instrument, or advance care directive;
· voting on behalf of a represented person;
· consenting to marriage or the dissolution of marriage or significant
relationship, or a sexual relationship of the represented
· making decisions about the care and wellbeing of a represented
person’s child;
· consenting to the adoption of children, surrogacy arrangements and
parenting orders;
· acting after the death of the represented person;
· disciplining, chastising or punishing the represented person; or
· consenting to an unlawful act.
9.4.1 The Issues Paper asked whether there needs to be any other reform to
the rights of guardians contained in the Act.
Should guardians have any other or different
9.4.2 Submissions addressing this question raised representatives’
access to a represented person’s Will (addressed in
), and rights in relation
to information (addressed in Part
9.5.1 The Issues Paper asked whether there are any other ways that provisions
governing the powers and duties of guardians could be
How else could the Act be improved in relation to the powers and duties of
9.5.2 Responses received have been captured elsewhere in this Report as
• that legislation should confirm whether an enduring guardian or
guardian has priority in circumstances where both are
This matter was
addressed in Part 4;
• that the Act confirm the priority of an ACD over the decisions of a
representative.
This matter
is addressed in Parts 5 and
• that a guardian should be able to withdraw from the
This matter was
addressed in Part 4 in relation to enduring
Board-appointed
guardians are already able to resign by applying to the Board for the review of
an order on the basis that they are
unwilling to
• that the identification, inclusion, support and education of carers
when someone else is required to make decisions on behalf
of a person would
improve outcomes.
Recommendation 3.3 proposes reform to the Act to provide as one of its guiding
principles the importance of acknowledging the role
of carers and others
significant in a person’s life;
• that advice, information and support should be provided for private
representatives to develop their
Maintaining
documentation and providing reports, and to confidently interact with review
processes were given as examples. Education,
the use of guidebooks and plain
English were also suggested as means to assist representatives. The need for
education is addressed
• the Board raised the issue of consent to restrictive
which is addressed
in Part 17.
9.5.3 EOT stated that:
Whilst much of the detail with regard to these issues is more relevant to
those with direct responsibility for the appointment and
management of
representative decision makers, we are strongly supportive of transparent
procedures for determining whether a representative
should be appointed, the
terms of that appointment and arrangements for review of that appointment.
This matter is addressed throughout this
and Powers of Administrators
Introduction
10.1.1 The Institute’s Terms of Reference asked for consideration
• how the role of administrators advances the interests of people with
impaired capacity; and
• the need to ensure that the powers and duties of administrators are
effective, appropriate and advance the interests of people
with impaired
10.1.2 Part 8 reviewed and made recommendations about the duties of
representatives. This Part reviews the powers given to administrators
and makes recommendations for reform.
administrators
10.2.1 An administrator has power to do anything that a represented person
could have done in relation to their ‘estate’
if not under a legal
disability.
‘estate’ is not
‘property and affairs’ is used in the
Powers of Attorney Act
clearly describe the powers of an administrator,
particularly because the term
‘estate’ is often used in reference to a person’s assets after
death. The Board endorsed
use of plain English and terms that are likely to be
broadly understood within the community. Members of the Elder Law Committee
submitted that ‘[a] definition of ‘estate’ should be included
and use terms such as financial affairs to create
clarity of role.’
10.2.2 The Institute proposes that the Act use the term ‘financial and
property matters’, and that an equivalent reform
is made to the
of Attorney Act
to provide consistency. The term ‘financial and
property matters’ adopts commonly used language and avoids ambiguity
uncertainty.
It clarifies
that it encompasses financial transactions as well as dealings with real
property. The term ‘matters’ provides
consistency with proposed
reforms in relation to the powers of guardians which would be described as
Recommendation 10.1
That the authority of administrators be described in the Act as relating to
‘financial and property matters’.
List of powers
10.2.3 The Act provides a non-exhaustive list of the powers of
administrators.
differences between this list and the powers of an attorney listed in the
Powers of Attorney Act
. These include:
• an attorney may enter into a lease with unlimited duration. An
administrator may only enter into a lease for a maximum of
• the list of attorneys’ powers includes power to renounce a
person’s rights to apply for a grant of probate or
grant of letters of
administration;
• the list of attorneys’ powers includes powers in respect of
superannuation.
10.2.4 The Issues Paper also listed other powers included in other
• holding a licence or
• obtaining or surrendering insurance for the adult (in addition to
their property);
• continuing investments, including taking up rights to issues of new
shares or options for new shares to which the person becomes
entitled by their
existing shareholding;
• retaining any existing investments that are not authorised trustee
investments;
• purchasing or retaining property as a joint tenant or tenant in
• granting powers of attorney to another person to do any act or thing
that the administrator has power to
• suffering judgment or consenting to any judgment or order in an
action or proceedings;
• surrendering, assigning, or otherwise disposing of onerous property,
without consideration;
• lodging caveats over
• applying for a grant of letters of administration or probate and
acting as an administrator or
10.2.5 The House of Representatives also endorsed representatives having
power to renew, or make, binding death benefit nominations
in relation to a
superannuation.
10.2.6 The Issues Paper asked whether the list of powers of an administrator
needs to be revised.
Does the list of powers of an administrator need to be revised and if so
10.2.7 The Board submitted:
A revision of the list of powers could consider the language used in section
56 of the Act, ensuring it is clear and not legalistic
and could include more
everyday financial functions such as insuring the person’s property;
withdrawing money from, or depositing
money into a person’s account with a
financial institution.
10.2.8 Both the Board and Social Work Services RHH raised the need for
clarity between the respective roles of administrators and
guardians in relation
to litigation. This was addressed in Part
Recommendation 9.3
proposes that a guardian’s role may include participating in legal
proceedings involving non-financial matters
on behalf of a represented person.
It is proposed that a complementary reform be made to the list of powers of
administrators, confirming
that their powers extend to litigation involving
financial and property matters.
10.2.9 Other responses
endorsed consistency between the provisions of the
Powers of Attorney Act
and the Act to provide mirror powers for attorneys and administrators.
10.2.10 Speak Out members submitted that ‘[a]n administrator
shouldn’t be allowed to sell things you own without your
permission while
you are alive.’
10.2.11 The Institute agrees with these submissions and proposes reform to
provide clarity and consistency with other jurisdictions.
As a non-exhaustive
list, there may be additional matters conferred upon administrators despite not
being included in this list.
Recommendation 10.2
(1) That the existing non-exhaustive lists of powers of administrators in s
56(2) of the Act and powers of attorneys in
Attorney Act
(Tas) be made consistent.
(2) That both the Act and the
Powers of Attorney Act
clarify that administrators and attorneys’ powers extend to legal matters
relating to financial and property matters.
(3) That the lists of matters falling within the scope of an attorney’s
and administrator’s authority be revised to avoid
use of legalistic terms
and to include:
· description of more day-to-day financial transactions for example,
insuring a person’s property, withdrawing money
from, or depositing money
into a represented person’s account with a financial institution;
· power to apply for and hold a license or permit;
· obtaining or surrendering insurance for the represented person;
· as exceptions to the power to invest money in any manner in which a
trustee may invest, power to:
○ retain any of the represented person’s existing investments
that are not authorised trustee investments, including
taking up rights to
issues of new shares or options for new shares to which the person becomes
entitled by their existing shareholding;
○ retain property owned by the represented person as a joint tenant or
tenant in common;
· lodging and removing caveats over land; and
· lodging and removing caveats against the issue of a grant of probate
or administration in an estate.
10.2.12 The NSWLRC is presently reviewing laws that apply to accessing and
controlling a person’s digital assets upon their
incapacity.
This review may
make recommendations for reform to NSW guardianship laws dealing with the powers
(if any) of representatives in relation
to a represented person’s
‘digital estate’, meaning a person’s digital property and
electronic communications,
including photographs, videos, emails, online banking
accounts, cryptocurrency, domain names, blogs and online gaming
The NSWLRC notes
Digital assets can have significant personal, sentimental and even financial
value. Permitting access to these assets after the person’s
incapacity is therefore essential. However, family members and fiduciaries can
encounter significant barriers in acquiring
access, largely due to the terms of
service agreements between users and service
10.2.13 This is an important matter but falls outside of the scope of the
Institute’s Terms of Reference for this project. It
is appropriate that
this matter be dealt with separately, taking into account developments in other
Recommendation 10.3
That the State Government review pending recommendations of the NSWLRC
dealing with the rights and powers of representatives in relation
person’s digital estate and consider any need for legislative reform.
10.3.1 The Act does not list matters that fall outside of the powers of an
administrator. The
Powers of Attorney Act
lists matters over which an
attorney does not have power.
The Institute sought feedback about whether there is any utility in the Act
containing a list of matters over which an administrator
does not have
Should the Act list matters that an administrator does not have power
10.3.2 There were seven responses to this question, with five endorsing the
Act containing a list of excluded powers. As explained
in Part 9, members of the
Elder Law Committee considered that a guidebook is a more appropriate mechanism
to clarify matters excluded
from an administrator’s power.
10.3.3 Consistent with Recommendation 9.5, for reasons articulated in Part
it is recommended that the
Act also contain a list of matters excluded from the powers of an administrator.
The proposed list effectively
adopts the list in the
Powers of Attorney
. It explicitly confirms, to avoid confusion, that a representative does
not have power to act following the death of a represented
Recommendation 10.4
That the Act provide a non-exhaustive list of matters that fall outside the
authority of an administrator, including:
· personal matters included within the scope of a guardian’s
· making, revoking or amending a represented person’s Will,
enduring power of attorney, instrument or advance care directive;
· voting on behalf of a represented person;
· consenting to marriage or the dissolution of marriage or significant
relationship, or a sexual relationship of the represented
· making decisions about the care and wellbeing of a represented
person’s child;
· consenting to the adoption of children, surrogacy arrangements and
parenting orders;
· acting after the death of the represented person;
· disciplining, chastising or punishing the represented person; and
· consenting to an unlawful act.
administrators
10.4.1 An administrator has power to do anything that a represented person
could have done in relation to their estate if not under
disability.
The Issues Paper
asked whether there needs to be reform to the rights of administrators contained
in the Act.
Should administrators have any other or different
10.4.2 Submissions addressing this
representatives’ access to a represented person’s Will (addressed in
), and rights in
relation to information (addressed in Part
10.5.1 The Institute requested comments about any other changes needed in
relation to the powers, rights and duties of administrators.
How else could the Act be improved in relation to the powers and duties of
administrators?
10.5.2 Most observations were consistent with suggestions made in relation to
the powers and duties of
Several responses
indicated a need to improve implementation of the legislative framework rather
than a need for legislative reform.
Responses addressed elsewhere in this Report
• the need for education, advice and support for representatives. This
matter is addressed in Part
• the need for people to be able to be spontaneous, and to have access
to financial resources outside of business hours (particularly
where a public
representative is appointed). This issue is addressed throughout this Report;
• providing greater choice or rights for a represented person to decide
how funds are spent, a matter also addressed throughout
this Report.
10.5.3 In addressing this question, the OPG suggested that reform could be
made to require an administrator to be monitored or supervised
by the Public
Trustee or another professional trustee. This suggestion is considered in Part
12 as part of examination of safeguards
for representative
decision-making.
Statutory protections for representatives
acting as a litigation guardian
10.5.4 The Public Trustee submitted that ‘[s]tatutory protections when
acting as litigation guardian continue to be an issue
both in the State Courts
and Federal Court (Family Law Court).’ One respondent observed that the
need for adequate protection
arises particularly in the context of acting as a
person’s litigation guardian in appealing a Board decision to the Supreme
10.5.5 This is an important matter that must be appropriately addressed given
that conducting litigation on behalf of a represented
person falls within the
scope of both a guardian and administrator’s power. To promote
representatives performing their role
in the interests of a represented person,
it is appropriate to ensure adequate protections for representatives who
participate in
legal proceedings on behalf of, and in the interests of, a
represented person. There ought to be appropriate protections for
representatives
who participate in that process in good faith and without
personal gain so that they not be subject to adverse personal costs orders
unsuccessful. This involves reform to the respective Court rules rather than
reform to the Act. It is recommended that this issue
is the subject of a
separate review.
Recommendation 10.5
That protections for representatives who enter into or participate in court
proceedings on behalf of a represented person be reviewed.
Decision-Making Process
Introduction
11.1.1 Part 3 considered reform to the Act’s guiding principles.
Presently, when making decisions for a person,
decision-makers
must consider
not only the Act’s guiding principles, but also other matters outlined
within separate sections. Different considerations
apply depending on who is
making the decision and the subject
11.1.2 This Part deals collectively with how all representative
decision-makers ought to make decisions. It reviews the current provisions
the Act and makes proposals about how reform to the Act might provide greater
clarity as well as more closely align with the Convention
to reflect the rights
and interests of people requiring decision-making support.
current position
11.2.1 When performing a function or exercising a power, the Board and
representatives must apply the Act’s general principles.
Presently, this
requires all functions and powers to be performed so that:
• the means which is the least restrictive of a person’s freedom
of decision and action as is possible in the circumstances
is adopted;
• the best interests of a person are promoted; and
• the wishes of a person with a disability, or in respect of whom an
application is made under the Act, are, if possible, carried
11.2.2 There are then separate lists of relevant factors to consider for
financial matters, personal matters and medical treatment
decisions. There is,
to a large degree, substantial overlap between these sections.
proposed ‘Decision-Making Process’
11.3.1 It is suggested that there be a single reference point in the Act for
all representative decision-makers to refer to when making
decisions, called
‘the Decision-Making Process’. A single reference point provides
ease of reference, ensures consistency
and avoids unnecessary duplication. Some
attendees at a meeting facilitated by COTA and Dementia Australia (Tasmania)
endorsed the
Act outlining a simple, structured decision-making process for
representatives to follow.
11.3.2 The proposal outlines a clear process to assist decision-makers to
understand and uphold their duties. The process assists
decision-makers to
understand when it is appropriate for decisions to be made and when a decision
ought to be deferred. It outlines
a logical step-by-step approach to facilitate
decisions being made in accordance with an individual’s will, preferences
rights. It serves as a tool to support representatives acting in the role.
Recommendation 11.1
That the Act contain a separate section headed ‘the Decision-Making
Process’ that outlines when and how representatives
and the Board are to
make decisions for a person.
Decision-Making Process
11.4.1 The ALRC suggested the following approach to give effect to a
person’s will, preferences and rights in accordance with
Convention:
ALRC Rights, Will and Preference Guidelines
Where a representative is appointed to make decisions for a person who
require decision-making support:
(a) The person’s will and preferences must be given effect.
(b) Where the person’s current will and preferences cannot be
determined, the representative must give effect to what the person
would likely
want, based on all the information available, including by consulting with
family members, carers, and other significant
people in their life.
(c) If it is not possible to determine what the person would likely want, the
representative must act to promote and uphold the person’s
human rights
and act in the way least restrictive of those rights.
(d) A representative may override the person’s will and preferences
only where necessary to prevent
This approach broadly aligns with the approach
recently proposed in Victoria under the
Guardianship and Administration Bill
11.4.2 The Issues Paper sought to ascertain the degree of community support
that exists to adopt the ALRC’s Guidelines as a
means of advancing a
‘will, preferences and rights’ approach to decision-making.
Should the Act adopt the ALRC’s approach to giving effect to a
person’s rights, will and preferences?
The ALRC provides:
Where a representative is appointed to make decisions for a person who
requires decision-making support:
· The person’s will and preferences must be given effect
· Where the person’s current will and preferences cannot be
determined, the representative must give effect to what the
person would likely
want, based on all the information available, including by consulting with
family members, carers and other significant
people in their life
· If it is not possible to determine what the person would likely want,
the representative must act to promote and uphold the
person’s human
rights and act in the way least restrictive of those rights
· A representative may override the person’s will and preferences
only where necessary to prevent
11.4.3 There were 14 written submissions to this question, in addition to
comments made during public consultation meetings that implicitly
addressed this
matter. There was broad support for the Guidelines, with 11 written responses
expressing approval of the approach
(some with minor variation, as discussed
11.4.4 Speak Out stated that its members and people from peer support
networks that it consulted with all expressed support for decisions
being based
on a person’s rights and wishes. This was supported ‘[s]o
you’ve got more control of your life and
feel like you have some
control.’ Speak Out submitted that ‘[p]eople should still think
they need to listen to you.’ They suggested
that the decision-making process should be as follows:
• Decision.
11.4.5 As this was considered a matter of policy, the Board did not express a
view. The Board acknowledged, however, that there is
increasing support for a
will, preferences and rights approach, with both the ACTLRAC and NSWLRC having
recently expressed support
for the model. Similarly, it observed that
legislation in Victoria also adopts a ‘right, will, and preferences’
11.4.6 Two written submissions did not expressly reject the ALRC’s
Guidelines, but indicated some concern with this approach,
or preference for an
alternate model. National Seniors Australia, Tasmanian Policy Advisory Group,
for example, suggested that the
approach should be a combination of adopting a
person’s wishes and their best interests. Effectively, this suggests
for continuation of the existing model. Associate Professor Wallace
similarly commented about the importance of ensuring that a person’s
rights are promoted and did not support decisions being made consistently with a
person’s wishes without exception. For example,
it was observed that a
person’s diet ought not be solely guided by their wishes without regard to
their right to a healthy
11.4.7 A number of submissions highlighted the importance of considering
safety, harm or damage before adopting a person’s will
and preference. The
OPG, for example, commented that a person’s will and preference ought to
be adopted unless it would result
in harm or detriment to the person. It
reinforced, however, that the right of a person with a disability to make risky
decisions must be respected. For this reason, it supported inclusion
of a principle recognising this ‘dignity of risk’.
Conversely, it
was because of the importance of ensuring that people can make risky decisions
that Advocacy Tasmania did not support
a threshold of ‘preventing
harm’ enabling decisions that are inconsistent with a person’s will
and preference.
Other submissions commented that assessment of harm is
subjective, and that there needs to be consideration of the extent or level
The Institute’s view
11.4.8 The ALRC’s Guidelines enable a representative to override a
person’s will and preferences where it is necessary
to prevent harm. This
is part of the ‘rights’ limb of the Convention paradigm as it
enables decisions that are not in
accordance with a person’s will and
preferences where it might negatively impact their other human rights. The
Institute considers
that the Guidelines therefore adequately balance the issue
of harm with a person’s right to have decisions about their life
based on their will and preference.
11.4.9 Noting the broad support for the ALRC’s Guidelines, the
Institute recommends that the proposed Decision-Making Process
adopt, to a
substantial degree, the ALRC’s Guidelines for giving effect to a
person’s will, preferences and rights. In
light of submissions received,
however, the Institute proposes some subtle but important variations. These are
discussed below.
The threshold question – does a decision need to be made?
11.4.10 The proposed Decision-Making Process requires decision-makers to
first determine whether a representative decision needs to
be made. This
involves consideration of whether an immediate decision is required, or whether
a decision could be deferred to a future
time when the person would likely be
able to make their own decision (including with support). This is consistent
with adopting a
least restrictive alternative and ensures that representatives
only make decisions as a last resort, if there is no suitable alternative.
Deferring a decision to a later time when a person could make their own decision
may provide a suitable alternative.
11.4.11 A second step would require decision-makers to consider whether there
is likely to be any detriment to a person if a decision
were deferred. If there
were the likelihood of detriment or harm, then it may not be a
alternative. This proposal aligns with the existing requirement in the Act that,
before the Board may give substitute consent to
medical treatment, it must
consider whether the treatment is able to be postponed on the basis that the
person might become able
to consent to the
There appears to
be no reason to not extend this requirement to other decision-makers and other
is consistent with the
Mental Capacity
in the UK and provisions in
The phrase ‘will and preference’
11.4.12 The Board commented that the words ‘will’ and
‘preference’ are open to interpretation, and that it
would be useful
for the Act to provide appropriate clarity if these terms are adopted.
11.4.13 The phrase ‘will and preference’ derives from the
Convention. The Convention does not define or further explain
those terms. The
Convention Committee has similarly not provided specific guidance about what the
terms are intended to mean.
11.4.14 Some jurisdictions, including the Irish Republic and Victoria, adopt
the terms ‘will and preference’ within guardianship
legislation.
Neither the Irish Republic nor the Victorian Act define the terms. Other
but use similar words. For example,
the terms ‘views’ and ‘wishes’ are used in the Northern
Queensland Bill adopts the phrase ‘views, wishes, and
preferences.’
UK, a decision-maker must consider a person’s ‘wishes and feelings
and their beliefs and
‘wishes’ and ‘values and beliefs’ are used in Alberta,
The Act already uses
the term ‘wishes’.
11.4.15 For consistency, it might be argued that the Act should adopt
identical language to the Convention and use the phrase ‘will
preference’. Nevertheless, the Institute suggests that the phrase
‘views, wishes, and preferences’ be used
instead, consistent with
recent amendments proposed in Queensland. The phrase ‘views, wishes, and
preferences’ is advocated
for use in the Act on the basis that:
• one of the Institute’s fundamental objectives is for the law to
be as clear, unambiguous and accessible as possible;
• the words ‘views’, ‘wishes’ and
‘preferences’ are more commonly used and therefore more
likely to be
understood by the broader community;
• aside from the Board, the Public Guardian, and Public Trustee, the
largest group of stakeholders that will be called upon
to apply the Act are
members of the community — whether it is a person requiring
decision-making support, or their family,
carers or others close to the person.
Adopting terms that these stakeholders are more likely to understand maximises
the potential
for a person’s will and preference to be promoted;
• the Board has itself raised issues about the meaning of the phrase
‘will and preference’ and sought clarity;
• one alternative to achieving clarity would be to define the terms
within the Act’s definition section. It is considered
unnecessarily
cumbersome to define the term within the definition section given that is so
commonly used, and fundamental, to the
operation of the Act. A far easier
approach is to adopt plain language in the first instance;
• the dictionary meaning of the term ‘will’ includes a
Revising the term used does not, therefore, depart from the rights recorded in
the Convention; and
• the proposal continues to adopt language used in the current Act
(‘wishes’) which individuals are already familiar
Giving ‘all practical and appropriate’ effect to a
person’s will and preferences
11.4.16 The Institute recommends that a person’s will and preference be
given ‘all practical and appropriate’
The Board’s
submission noted, in relation to the Victorian Act, that providing for
decision-makers only needing to give effect
to a person’s will and
preference ‘whenever possible’, and similar phrases such as
‘as much as possible’
are open ended and subject to
interpretation.
In this way,
it stated that they effectively allow ‘best interests’ principles to
11.4.17 It is acknowledged that, in the absence of any further guidance,
providing decision-makers with discretion could result in
decisions continuing
to adopt a default ‘best interests’ approach. To address this issue,
it is proposed that the Act
outline defined circumstances where a person’s
will and preferences may be departed
These circumstances
include decisions that would be unlawful or result in unacceptable harm to the
person or another person. This
approach is consistent with laws in the Northern
Territory and Irish Republic.
Importantly, the approach does not
decisions that depart
from a person’s will and preferences in these circumstances. Instead, it
confirms that decision-makers
then adopt a different course. This
permits decision-makers continuing to adopt decisions consistent with a
person’s will and
preference even where it could or would result in
Confirming how a person’s will and preference can be communicated
11.4.18 Some submissions raised the issue of how a person’s will and
preference is ascertained. Advocacy Tasmania commented
For many who are used to substitute and best interest decision making, their
will and preferences may appear incapable of being determined
at first. Lacking
decision-making confidence and experiencing communication barriers are very
different from not having a will or
preferences.
11.4.19 The ALRC recommends that a person be entitled to communicate their
will and preferences by any means that enables them to
be understood. It also
notes that cultural and linguistic circumstances must be recognised and
Many guardianship
laws confirm the right of people to communicate their wishes by any
The Institute proposes
that the Decision-Making Process confirm that a person can communicate their
views, wishes and preferences
by any means. In effect, this is not a variation
of the ALRC’s Rights, Will and Preferences Guidelines, the only difference
is incorporating this as part of the Decision-Making Process.
Not restricting the relevance of a person’s prior communicated will
and preference
11.4.20 The ALRC’s Guidelines require that decisions give effect to a
person’s will and preferences. The Guidelines do
not refer to whether this
requires decisions in accordance with a person’s
preference, or their previously communicated will and preference. The Guidelines
do, however, go on to explain what should
occur when a person’s
will and preference cannot be determined (emphasis added). This
would suggest, although it is not explicit, that it is a person’s
will and preference that must be given effect to.
11.4.21 Some submissions challenged whether it is appropriate to base
decisions solely upon a person’s current will and preference.
This concern
was raised particularly in relation to situations where a person’s current
will and preference may conflict with
their prior will and preference, and where
that change has occurred because of a decision-making disability. The OPMHS, for
observed that:
dementia presents a very different scenario to intellectual disability. In
many cases of dementia, there can be alterations in personality
and behaviour,
and the reputation and relationships of a person with a disability can be
jeopardised if the will and preferences,
driven by dementia, are followed.
Sufficient safeguards in the decision making are needed to protect such people
from damage to their
dignity, reputation, and relationships.
11.4.22 Other respondents made similar
11.4.23 In light of these submissions, the proposed Decision-Making Process
does not refer to a person’s ‘current’
will and preference.
This provides scope for decision-makers to balance relevant considerations. A
possible criticism is that this
continues to provide decision-makers with a
degree of discretion to decide the point in time that a person’s will and
should be ascertained. The Institute considers that it is appropriate
to provide some flexibility as the approach may itself depend
individual’s values or the decision in question and the Act should not be
overly prescriptive. Legislation in the
Irish Republic and UK adopts a similar
approach. Both Acts require consideration of a person’s ‘past and
will and preference (however
described).
11.4.24 It is noted that the
Powers of Attorney Act
limits the time in
which a person’s wishes must be ascertained. It requires consideration of
what a person would likely have
if he or she were not subject
to a mental incapacity
’ (in other words, their prior will and
preference).
Default ‘substituted judgment’ approach to be subjective
11.4.25 The ALRC’s Guidelines provide that ‘[w]here the
person’s current will and preferences cannot be determined,
representative must give effect to
what the person would likely want
...’ (emphasis added). The Institute recommends a minor revision to
provide that decisions should be based upon ‘what
the decision-maker
reasonably believes
the represented person would likely want’
(emphasis added).
of these additional words confirms that this is a matter for the decision-maker
to determine. It is intended to provide
decision-makers with some degree of
protection from criticism if they adopt an approach that they believe is
consistent with a represented
person’s likely will and preferences, even
though their assessment might differ from another person’s interpretation
or understanding. This approach is consistent with the law in
11.4.26 The
Powers of Attorney Act
already adopts a ‘substituted
judgment’ approach to
decision-making.
It requires
attorneys to take into account what would be reasonably likely to be the wishes
of the donor, if he or she were not subject
to a mental
incapacity.
It goes on to
confirm that an attorney complies with their duties in acting in the
donor’s best interests if they exercise
their powers in a way the donor
would have been likely to if he or she were not subject to a mental
incapacity.
Decision-Making Process also adopts a ‘substituted judgment’
approach, where a person’s will and preference
ascertained.
variation is
decision-makers to make a decision that is
consistent with the person’s wishes (unless one of the permitted
exceptions applies),
rather than their wishes being a factor
Adopt a ‘personal and social wellbeing’ approach where a
person’s actual or likely will and preference cannot be
ascertained
11.4.27 The ALRC’s Guidelines provide that: ‘If it is not
possible to determine what the person would likely want, the
representative must
act to promote and uphold the person’s human rights and act in a way least
restrictive of their human rights.’
Step 6 of the Institute’s
proposed Decision-Making Process replaces the first reference to a
person’s ‘human rights’
with the phrase ‘personal and
social wellbeing’.
11.4.28 This variation is not intended to result in any significant departure
from the ALRC’s Guidelines. Instead, it is intended
as a means of
providing clarity. Some members of the community may not understand what is
meant by a person’s ‘human
rights’. Requiring consideration of
a person’s ‘personal and social wellbeing’ adopts more
commonly used
language that may be more easily understood. This phrase promotes
a rights-based approach, is used in Victoria and is endorsed by
Considering ‘unacceptable’ harm
11.4.29 The ALRC’s Guidelines do not set a threshold at which harm may
justify decisions contrary to a person’s will and
preference. Consistent
with responses received, it is suggested that only ‘unacceptable’
harm permit decisions that are
inconsistent with a person’s will and
preference. Addition of the term ‘unacceptable’ is aimed at ensuring
decision-makers are not too risk averse.
11.4.30 In Victoria, it is proposed that only ‘serious’ harm may
justify departure from a person’s will and
preference.
The National
Standards of Public Guardianship similarly provide that a person’s will
and preference should only be overridden
where it is necessary to protect them
from ‘significant’
This proposal is
consistent with the NSWLRC’s
recommendation.
Considering harm to others
11.4.31 Some submissions commented about the extent to which harm to another
person should be a relevant consideration when making
representative decisions.
The OPMHS commented that:
Mental Health Act
, the GAA does not have provisions for the
management of risk, to others, from the represented person (RP). Avoiding harm
may not clearly be in the RP’s best interests, as it may require
restriction of their autonomy. Risk to others is hence often
managed by using
the avoidance of legal ramifications toward the represented person as being in
their best interest. For example
a man with dementia assaulting his wife might
lead to police charges which would not be in his best interest. This is not only
but is not necessarily valid as they would be unlikely to be held
responsible. It would be preferable to simply and honestly recognise
to others is unacceptable and when it can be considered in decision making.
11.4.32 The Board made a similar observation in the context of giving
approval to the use of restrictive practices:
a separate issue ... which has arisen in practice is if the person’s
behaviour is likely to cause harm to another person and
whether this can be
taken into account when making orders, particularly when detaining a person with
impaired decision making disability.
By way of example, a person is detained but
not for treatment at a secure mental health facility and not within the ambit of
Mental Health Act 2013
, but serious concern is held by a treating
medical practitioner that the release of the person may result in serious harm
person. It is noted in the Queensland
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
in Chapter 5B Restrictive Practices, the Tribunal is
to consider whether the ‘adult’s behaviour has previously resulted
in harm to the adult or others; and there is reasonable likelihood that the
adult’s behaviour will cause harm to the adult
or others.’
Consideration of this issue would be of
11.4.33 The ALRC’s Guidelines do not specify whether harm to another
person is an appropriate consideration that would permit
departure from a
person’s will and preference. It only speaks to the possibility of
considering ‘harm’. Arguably
this contemplates harm to another
person as being a relevant consideration. To avoid uncertainty or ambiguity, it
is suggested that
‘harm’ include harm to the person, or to another
person. This provides consistency with the approach under the
Mental Health
, which also permits consideration of harm to
What if a person’s will and preference are in conflict?
11.4.34 The Board’s submission raised the issue of how decision-makers
should resolve situations where a person’s will
and preference are in
conflict. It commented that:
the Issues Paper identifies some of the difficulties that may arise when
attempting to ascertain a person’s will and preferences,
including when a
person’s will and preferences may conflict with each other and when there
is very little evidence to determine
what a person’s will and preferences
are. In practice, the meaning of these terms ‘rights, will and
preferences’
will be open to interpretation by a tribunal, as will the
question of how they should be weighted when there is a conflict with each
11.4.35 The Institute agrees that there may be times when a person’s
will and preference are in conflict and considers that
Guidelines provide appropriate guidance in these circumstances. For similar
reasons to those articulated above,
the Institute does not consider that
legislation should be overly prescriptive. It would seem inappropriate to
provide a default
position that it is either a person’s wishes, or their
preference that should take precedence. The appropriate resolution would
depend on the matter in question and how strong a person’s respective
wishes and preferences were. Decision-makers should
be guided by the person
themselves to assist them to formulate a view about which way to proceed. Where
this is unable to be done,
then Step 4 of the Decision-Making Process requires
decision-makers to proceed in accordance with what they consider the person
likely want. This necessitates decision-makers forming a view about
whether a person would want their will or their preference upheld
(where they
conflict) in relation to any particular matter.
Upholding a person’s will and preference as much as possible
11.4.36 Whilst the proposed Decision-Making Process permits departure from a
person’s will and preference in exceptional
circumstances,
proposed that the process confirm that decision-makers must in any event
continue to give as much effect as possible to
a person’s will and
preference. This ensures that any departure from a person’s will and
preferences is limited to the
greatest extent possible, and that decision-makers
continue to attempt to find ways to give effect to a person’s will and
preferences
in these circumstances. Smith and Rigby characterise this approach
as consistent with the concept of making ‘reasonable adjustments’,
adopting the language of anti-discrimination
They propose that
representatives powers ‘be limited to that required to make a reasonable
adjustment for the represented person’s
disability.’ They endorse
appointed representatives then only exercising substitute decision-making to the
extent necessary
to make ‘reasonable adjustment’:
if the agent is able to make and enforce appropriate decisions merely through
‘assisted decision making’ then that is
the level of adjustment
required. However if ‘substituted decision making’ is required then
it ought to be used only
to the extent required to make a reasonable adjustment
for the represented person’s
disability.
Recommendation 11.2
That the Decision-Making Process require the Board and representatives (the
decision-maker) to adopt the following process when making
any decision on
behalf of a person who does not have decision-making ability to make their own
decision about the matter:
1. First, the decision-maker must consider whether there is a need for a
decision. There is no need for them to make a decision where
the person has made
a binding direction in advance that applies to the circumstances, including in a
valid advance care directive.
2. Second, the decision-maker must consider whether the person is likely to
become able to make their own decision, and if so, when.
If the decision-maker
considers that a decision can be delayed until the person gains the ability to
make the decision, without that
delay causing harm, then the decision should be
3. If the decision-maker considers that a decision needs to be made, then the
person’s views, wishes and preferences must be
given all practical and
appropriate effect. A person may communicate their views, wishes and preferences
by any means.
4. Where the person’s views, wishes, and preferences cannot be
determined, the decision-maker must give all practical and appropriate
what the decision-maker reasonably believes the person’s likely views,
wishes and preferences are, based on all the
information available, including by
consulting with family, carers and other significant people in the
person’s life that the
decision-maker reasonably believes the person would
want to be consulted.
5. A decision-maker may not give all practical and appropriate effect to the
person’s views, wishes and preferences only where:
(a) it is necessary to prevent unacceptable harm to the person or another
(b) it would be unlawful.
In any of these cases, a representative must adopt Step 6 whilst continuing
to give as much effect as possible to the person’s
views, wishes and
preference.
6. If it is not possible to determine or apply the person’s views,
wishes and preferences, a decision-maker must act to promote
and uphold the
person’s personal and social wellbeing and act in a way least restrictive
of their human rights.
Figure 11.1 illustrates the proposed Decision-Making Process:
Safeguards for
Representative
Decision-Making
Introduction
12.1.1 Safeguards promote the rights and
interests of individuals. Safeguards within guardianship legislation primarily
address the
need to protect the interests of people requiring support with
decision-making by preventing abuse, neglect or exploitation and adequately
responding where it occurs. However, making laws easy to understand, accessible
and responsive are other ways that the law can protect
and promote the interests
of individuals, as well as serving a broader community benefit. These strategies
are considered later in
this Report at
The Board and Public Guardian
are themselves safeguarding bodies. Their powers and functions are considered
separately in
12.1.2 The Convention confirms the rights of people with disability to be
free from exploitation, violence and
Recommendation 3.1 of
this Report endorsed reform to the Act being guided by the ALRC’s National
Decision-Making Principles.
Principle 4 provides that ‘laws and legal
frameworks must contain appropriate and effective safeguards in relation to
interventions
for people who may require decision-making support, including to
prevent abuse and undue influence’. This Part evaluates and
recommendations for reform to strengthen the safeguarding components of the Act.
Part 14 deals specifically with safeguards
for consent to medical treatment.
Consideration of the merits of reform to the safeguarding provisions of the Act
involves a balancing
of the following:
• the need to not cause detriment to the substantial majority of
families and friends who perform their support role appropriately
interests of the person they are supporting. These people are an essential
component to the provision of decision-making
support and are often strong
advocates for the rights of individuals they are supporting;
• the need to encourage and support suitable people from within an
individual’s existing network of support to accept
and perform the more
formal role of representative if required; and
• the need to prevent, detect and respond to abuse and other conduct
that is contrary to the interests of people requiring decision-making
The ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines
12.2.1 The Convention requires State parties to ‘ensure that all
measures that relate to the exercise of legal capacity provide
for appropriate
and effective safeguards to prevent
It goes on to
provide that:
safeguards shall ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal
capacity ... are free of conflict of interest and undue influence,
proportional and tailored to the person’s circumstances, apply for the
shortest time possible and are subject to regular
review by a competent,
independent and impartial authority or judicial
12.2.2 The ALRC developed the following Safeguards Guidelines to complement
and develop its National Decision-Making Principles, reflecting
the principles
of the Convention:
ALRC Safeguards Guidelines
Safeguards should ensure that interventions for persons who require
decision-making support are:
(a) the least restrictive of a person’s human rights;
(b) subject to appeal; and
(c) subject to regular, independent and impartial monitoring and review.
Support in decision-making
(a) Support in decision–making must be free of conflict of interests
and undue influence.
(b) Any appointment of a representative decision-maker should be:
(i) a last resort and not an alternative to appropriate support;
(ii) limited in scope, proportionate, and apply for the shortest time
possible; and
(iii) subject to review.
12.2.3 This Part
evaluates current safeguarding provisions against the ALRC’s Safeguards
Guidelines.
restrictive interventions
12.3.1 The first of the ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines provides that
safeguards should ensure that interventions for people who
decision-making support are the least restrictive of a person’s human
rights. The need to adopt the least restrictive
intervention has been considered
throughout this Report, including Part 3 (Guiding Principles of the Act), Part 6
(Decision-Making
Ability), and Part 8 (Representative Decision-Making).
12.4.1 The second of the ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines provides that
safeguards must ensure that interventions for people who
require decision-making
support are subject to appeal. The Act’s appeal provisions are considered
in the following paragraphs.
Appeals against the Board’s
12.4.2 The Act provides the ability to appeal Board decisions. Appeals are
lodged at the Supreme Court of
A person who
appeared before the Board, or who was entitled to
may appeal the
Board’s decision. If the appeal relates to a question of law, then that
appeal can be lodged as of right. If
it relates to any other question, then it
may only be appealed with leave of the
An appeal must be
lodged within 28 days after the
determination,
or within 28
days after receipt of a statement of
The Court can extend
these time periods.
time of writing, the filing fee on filing a notice of appeal of a decision of
the Board is $916.40.
application can be made to the Supreme Court Registrar for the reduction or
waiver of fees in cases of undue
12.4.3 Statistics published in the Board’s annual reports demonstrate
the rarity of people appealing decisions to the Supreme
Number of Appeals Lodged
12.4.4 The last reported Supreme Court decision was in
12.4.5 It is unclear why there are so few appeals lodged. Anecdotally, the
Institute understands that at least part of the reason
may be because of the
need to appeal to the Supreme Court. Proceedings in the Supreme Court are more
expensive, complex and formal
than hearings before the Board. There is also the
risk of adverse costs orders if
unsuccessful.
Some attendees
of facilitated consultation meetings convened by Carers Tasmania raised these
factors as reasons why individuals are
deterred from lodging appeals. Carers
Tasmania also noted in its submission that ‘Carers Tasmania members have
expressed appealing
via the Supreme Court is not an option for them, and both
they and the person they represent would benefit from a more accessible
option.’ Another submission commented that:
It is too expensive for people to go to Court to appeal and the average
person has no understanding of the Act and the procedure that
give the Board so
much power. ...
It’s not in anyone’s interest to go to court, especially where
there is elder abuse.
12.4.6 Another response submitted that:
Some sort of review should be able to be done without it having to be
reviewed by the Supreme Court. This is too expensive. ...
There should be a way of reviewing their decisions which doesn’t cost
thousands of dollars. The board has a large amount of
power over people’s
lives and it should have more
12.4.7 The OPG submitted:
The number of appeals that are made to the Supreme Court is very low,
particularly when we know many people feel aggrieved by decisions.
This suggests
that the process of lodging an appeal to the supreme Court is probably too
onerous for people with decision-making
impairments and their families, who may
already be feeling disempowered.
12.4.8 One of the reasons the Board was established was to provide a more
informal and cost-effective forum to facilitate the inclusion
of people with
disability.
12.4.9 The ALRC’s Guidelines provide that the ability to appeal is an
essential safeguarding component of guardianship legislation.
It is concerning
that actual or perceived complexities involved in appealing to the Supreme Court
might create a barrier to people
lodging an appeal, especially a represented
person who the Board has determined has a need for decision-making support.
Given these
issues, the Issues Paper raised this as an area for potential
reform. One option identified was the establishment of an internal
Internal reviews of decisions
12.4.10 An internal review process enables the Board to review its decision
internally in the first instance, avoiding the need to
apply to the Supreme
Court. Currently, the Act provides the ability for an applicant to request an
internal review in relation to
a decision of the Board rejecting an
application.
12.4.11 The ability to apply for an internal review of a tribunal’s
decision is a common feature of civil and administrative
tribunal governing
legislation in other
Guardianship and Administration Act
applicant, person in respect of whom a hearing relates, the Public Guardian, any
person who presented evidence or material
before, or made submissions to the
Board, or any other person that the Board considers has a proper interest in the
matter, to apply
for an internal review of a
It provides that,
except in the case of a decision for or affirming the detention of a person or
relating to the giving of consent
to a sterilisation or a termination of
pregnancy, an application for internal review may only be made with the
permission of the
Board can make a costs order against a party (other than the person in respect
of whom a proceeding relates) if satisfied that
the institution of the
proceedings, or the party’s conduct in relation to the proceedings was
frivolous, vexatious or calculated
12.4.12 The use of internal rights of appeal was considered as part of a
separate review by the State Government into the establishment
of a Civil and
Administrative Tribunal for Tasmania (‘TASCAT’), amalgamating a
number of tribunals (including the Board)
within the Department of
The 2015 Discussion Paper noted the potential benefits of an internal appeal
An internal right of appeal affords parties to a dispute a cost effective
option of review of a decision; it can enable the Tribunal
to correct any
defects in the original decision making without the expense and time of
requiring Supreme Court review, and ensures
consistency in its own decision
making; and its provisions can be drafted to prevent unnecessary or
unmeritorious litigation and
ensuring appropriate finality in decision
12.4.13 The Discussion Paper proposed that the envisaged TASCAT single
tribunal structure should provide for an internal right of
appeal, with leave to
appeal needing to be obtained from the President. Under this mooted approach,
the President would also retain
as to the manner
in which an appeal is heard and
determined.
The Institute
understands that, at the time of writing, final recommendations of this review
are not publicly
12.4.14 The Institute’s Issues Paper asked whether it would be
beneficial to enable an aggrieved person to seek an internal
review of the
Board’s decision, prior to, or as an alternative to, appealing to the
Supreme Court.
Should the Act enable internal reviews of the Board’s
12.4.15 There were 12 responses to this question. All respondents except for
COTA indicated some level of support for providing an
internal review process.
COTA commented that it ‘believes it should be possible to devise a
workable and efficient mechanism
for external review, such as an
ombudsman.’
12.4.16 In response to this question, the Board submitted:
The Board acknowledges that an internal review of a Board’s decision
would be less expensive, complex and formal than appeal
proceedings in the
Supreme Court.
If the Act enabled internal reviews, it is considered that internal reviews
should be allowed only on a question of law or only about
the merits of a
decision if the Appeal Panel grants leave.
From a practical perspective, the formation of an internal review panel would
currently have implications for the sizing of the membership
of the Board, its
workload and on resources. The Board’s current composition of membership
does not delineate between senior
members and members and all members except the
President are casual appointments. The formation of an Internal Appeal Panel
be best facilitated if and when the Board is part of a single tribunal and
can utilise part time or permanent senior members and
heads of divisions from
the guardianship division and other divisions within a civil and administrative
12.4.17 PCT commented that resourcing considerations should not impact upon
the provision of accountability mechanisms including appeals
Increased workload is not an appropriate excuse for not providing
accountability mechanisms ... In terms of accountability, there
allowances for internal reviews and audits. Benchmarking should also occur.
12.4.18 Similar to the Board’s submission above, two responses
suggested that there needs to be discretion to disallow an appeal
circumstances. Members of the Elder Law Committee commented, for example, that
‘the tribunal must always have discretion
not to re-list in circumstances
e.g. vexatious litigant.’ The Registrar currently has the ability, under s
69A of the Act,
to apply to the Supreme Court for a vexatious proceedings order
Vexatious Proceedings Act 2011
12.4.19 The Institute considers that the existing appeal provisions are a key
area in which reform is required. The right of appeal
is a fundamental safeguard
to protect the rights and interests of people who are the subject of orders of
the Board. It is therefore
important that appeal mechanisms are appropriate,
effective and accessible. Accountability also assists to instil public
in the jurisdiction. It is unsatisfactory for legislation which
impacts the rights of individuals to contain appeal provisions that
perceived as inaccessible. This is particularly when, pursuant to ss
11(4)–(5) of the Act, the Board is not bound by the
rules of evidence.
Parties are often unrepresented and may not appreciate the implications of Board
decisions until after those decisions
are made or implemented. Based upon
respondents’ support for this reform, the Institute proposes revision to
the Act to provide
for internal reviews of Board determinations. The Institute
agrees with respondents who commented that it is important to minimise
potential abuse of internal appeal mechanisms by vexatious litigants. It is
therefore appropriate that there be some discretion
to disallow an application
for an internal review in exceptional and limited circumstances.
12.4.20 The Board’s comments about the practical impacts of reform upon
its resourcing and structure are noted. The Institute
considers this reform of
critical importance to progressing obligations under the Convention and that the
Board must be adequately
resourced to implement the change. If it were
considered not feasible to implement this reform in the absence of amalgamation
a single tribunal structure, then this reform ought to be prioritised if or
when that project advances.
External review of decisions
12.4.21 The following two matters lead the Institute to conclude that the
right of an internal appeal is insufficient, of itself,
to resolve present
concerns about the appeal provisions of the Act:
• the need to ensure that the Board is properly equipped to facilitate
internal reviews of decisions; and
• the importance of providing an independent mechanism to appeal
decisions to instil public trust and confidence in the jurisdiction.
advantage of the existing approach is that the Supreme Court is independent of
the Board, providing accountability and reducing
perception of bias.
12.4.22 The Board commented that an effective internal review procedure could
be achieved through the establishment of the proposed
TASCAT, with this
structure enabling the tribunal to draw upon senior members from other divisions
to provide independence. The Institute
agrees that this would appear to provide
an accessible but independent appeal mechanism. Noting that the Board’s
does not clarify if or when it may be part of a newly proposed
TASCAT, and that at the time of writing, this matter remains unclear,
Institute has framed its recommendation to propose that the Act provide a
simple, free and independent appeal process irrespective
of if and when the
proposed TASCAT is established.
12.4.23 The perceived limitations of the Supreme Court, as discussed earlier
in this Part, relate to the associated formalities and
cost. Enabling internal
appeals of decisions alleviates these issues but does not provide the degree of
independence that the Supreme
Court provides. The Institute therefore recommends
• the existing legislative framework, along with the Court’s
practices and procedure be reviewed to provide accessible
appeal pathways to
appeal Board decisions to the Supreme Court;
• there be publicly available, accessible information produced and
disseminated to explain to members of the community the appeal
process; and
• consistent with the approach in South Australia, that the Act provide
that no order for costs may be made against an applicant
in an appeal if he or
she is the person to whom the decision appealed against
12.4.24 The effect of these proposals would be to provide dual appeal
pathways, enabling both internal and external reviews of decisions.
recommendations respond both to any actual difficulties with the Supreme Court
rules and procedures, as well as reducing any
issues relating to community
perception.
Recommendation 12.1
(1) That the Act provide the ability to apply to the Board for an internal
review of its original decisions by a division of the Board
not comprising
members who were involved in the original decision.
(2) That the Supreme Court of Tasmania rules, practices and procedures be
reviewed to facilitate accessible pathways to appeal Board
decisions to the
Supreme Court.
(3) That there be publicly available, accessible information produced
explaining the appeal process and which is provided to parties
following a
determination of the Board.
(4) That legislation provide that no order for costs may be made against an
applicant in an appeal if he or she is the person in respect
of whom the
decision appealed against relates.
Statements of
12.4.25 A statement setting out reasons for the Board’s decision is not
prepared or distributed to parties as a matter of course.
A person who is
aggrieved by a decision may request a written statement setting out the
Board’s reasons for its
determination.
A request must
be made within 21 days after a
determination.
The statement
of reasons must be provided within 21 days of the Board receiving the
Board’s practice to publish de-identified statements of reasons
Its practice direction states its rationale for doing so being that:
Publication of de-identified statement of reasons is generally in the public
interest as it contributes to the community’s understanding
relevant areas of law and the operations of the
12.4.26 The Issues Paper commented that to promote and preserve the privacy
of people who are subject to applications before the Board,
appropriate to limit those who are entitled to receive a statement of reasons.
It was noted that this could be limited
to people who appeared before the Board
or who were entitled to appear before the
The Institute asked
for comment about who ought to be able to request and obtain a statement of
Who should be eligible to obtain a statement of reasons from the
12.4.27 There were a range of responses to this question. The Board agreed
that, in the interests of privacy, those classes of individuals
entitled to
request and obtain a statement of reasons should be limited. It commented:
Whatever terminology is used the Board is supportive of the Act clearly
defining a limited class of individuals who is entitled to
request a statement
of reasons.
One option for reform flagged in the Issues Paper is to limit the class of
individuals to people who ‘appeared before the Board
or who were entitled
to appear before the Board.’ The dictionary meaning of appear is
‘come into sight; become visible
or noticeable, especially without
apparent cause; present oneself formally in a court or tribunal.’ All
people present at a
Board hearing therefore appear ‘before the
Board’. As the Board’s hearings are open to the public, concerns
as to whether this is opening up eligibility of persons requesting a
statement of reasons too widely. If only the term ‘entitled
before the Board’ is adopted this could be construed in a number of
different ways including parties only, or those
individuals who receive notice
of hearing, and so further clarity would be required. Eligibility could be
limited to parties and
their legal representatives, depending on whether
‘parties’ is defined in the Act and if so, how it is defined.
12.4.28 Two other submissions suggested that statements of reasons should be
available to limited groups, including the Board, the
person in respect of whom
a hearing relates, their ‘next of kin’, and representatives. The OPG
considered the current
arrangements to be fair and reasonable but stated that it
would not object if the class was narrowed to those who attended or were
entitled to attend the hearing. Members of the Elder Law Committee submitted
that the present requirement of needing to be a ‘person
is appropriate and that there is no need for further limitation. The Public
Trustee submitted that administrators
ought to be entitled to a statement of
12.4.29 Three submissions supported statements of reasons being made publicly
available. Reasons provided included the need for transparency,
accountability
and for educational and jurisprudential purposes. Speak Out submitted that
represented people ‘want to know
why a guardian or administrator was
appointed.’ They also endorsed advocates and support people being given
reasons, if the
represented person wants them to have that information.
12.4.30 It is agreed that it is important that that there is both
accountability and transparency in Board proceedings. It is also
important that
members of the public have trust in the Board’s accountability as part of
building public confidence. These
considerations must be balanced with the need
to preserve individuals’ right to privacy, particularly those in respect
a hearing relates, noting that guardianship matters often involve
personal and at times sensitive matters. It is recommended, to
individuals’ right to privacy, that the class of eligible individuals able
to request a statement of reasons be limited
to those with a proper interest in
the matter.
12.4.31 Presently, statements of reasons are not produced for all matters.
Two responses submitted that statements of reasons should
be produced and
provided to all parties in all cases, rather than only provided upon request.
Some members who attended Carers Tasmania
meetings explained the rationale being
that written reasons ensure that people affected by a decision know the reasons
why the Board
decided as it did, so that they know what they are appealing.
12.4.32 The Institute acknowledges that it may be difficult for individuals
to understand the reasons for Board decisions without
those reasons being
provided in writing. This is particularly so as hearings may be brief and
potentially stressful or emotional
for those involved. In the absence of
advisors, advocates or other supports, it might be difficult for some
individuals to understand
the reasons for a decision. The Institute considers
that these issues may be addressed as part of a broader strategy of making
supports for those involved in Board hearings. This could incorporate
information being provided verbally, which has the advantage
of assisting
individuals with low literacy levels. Further, providing information in this way
would be more informal, enabling people
to ask questions. Information could be
provided faster, rather than needing to await a written statement. These options
are considered
further in Part
12.4.33 The Board’s workload and resourcing implications is a further
reason that reform requiring statements of reasons for
all matters has not been
recommended. It is likely to be unworkable for the Board to provide written
statements of reasons for every
decision, noting that there are multiple
hearings scheduled in each session. One of the Board’s performance
indicators measured
by the State Government is the number of hearings per
sitting, with a target of five hearings per sitting in the 2018–2019
It recorded an
average of 4.4 hearings per sitting in the 2016–2017 financial
Reform requiring
statements of reasons to be supplied for all matters would have the effect of
• reducing the number of matters that could be heard each day,
impacting the productivity of the
• requiring the Board to reduce the length of hearings, which may
impact the quality of decision-making; or
• necessitating an increased need for additional resources and funding
or reallocation of existing resources.
12.4.34 It is suggested that the classes of individuals entitled to request a
statement of reasons be consistent with the list of
those eligible to appeal a
determination,
considered appropriate as assessed by the Board. This proposal is not intended
to alter the Board’s ability to publish
de-identified decisions at its
discretion.
Recommendation 12.2
That the Act limit those who are eligible to request a statement of reasons
of the Board’s determination to:
(a) those classes of individuals who are entitled to appeal a determination
of the Board; and
(b) any other person that the Board considers has a proper interest in the
Appeals against
representatives’ decisions
12.4.35 There are no specific provisions in the Act that enable a person to
appeal or object to the decision of a representative
In practice, if a
person is aggrieved by a representative’s decision, or lack of decision,
then they could apply to have the
representative removed. This may not, however,
resolve the situation where a decision has already been implemented.
12.4.36 The Issues Paper noted that a potential advantage of providing a
specific means or process for individuals to object to a
representative’s
decision (or lack of decision) may be to achieve greater accountability.
Potential problems with this approach
were also identified, including delay, and
that it removes decision-making from individuals deemed suitable to act in the
could reduce public confidence if all decisions of representatives
could be disputed. Further issues could include the risk of vexatious
unmeritorious objections. One alternative identified was inclusion of provisions
within the Act dealing with the use of alternative
dispute resolution to better
facilitate the informal resolution of disputes about representative’s
12.4.37 Alternative dispute resolution (ADR) describes situations where an
independent person (for example, a mediator) helps parties
in dispute to try to
resolve issues between them.
Alternative Dispute Resolution Act 2001
’) describes mediation as ‘a structured negotiation process
in which the mediator, as a neutral and independent party,
assists the parties
to a dispute to achieve their own resolution of the
12.4.38 The Act does not provide for the use of mediation to resolve
disputes. In practice, the Board may give informal advice and
recommendations to
parties to consider ADR, or could direct representatives to do so. The Board
also has flexibility to conduct its
hearings in an informal style to attempt to
resolve conflict amongst parties in a style more akin to a mediation than a
court environment.
The Board’s submission commented that: ‘A number
of Board members have qualifications, training and experience in mediation
use these skills within the hearing process to assist the person, parties and
the decision making process.’
12.4.39 Some jurisdictions have enacted legislative provisions providing for
the use of ADR as a method to seek to resolve disputes
within the guardianship
As commented in the Issues Paper, it
is common for statute to incorporate ADR processes prior to a formal court
ADR has been broadly
supported in other reviews as a method to resolve conflict in less formal ways
than a tribunal.
12.4.40 The Issues Paper asked whether the Act should provide for the use of
Should the Act provide for alternative dispute resolution, for example
mediation, before a
12.4.41 There was unanimous support for incorporation of ADR processes within
The Board noted that
it is not a prescribed tribunal under the
. It commented that:
‘While amending the Alternative Dispute Resolution Regulations appears
appropriate, the Board believes
it would also be appropriate to have clear
powers for ADR in the Act.’
12.4.42 EOT commented:
EOT has considerable expertise in alternative dispute resolution processes
and at an operational level would welcome further discussion
regarding the
capacity of EOT to provide services to assist either the Board or the Public
Guardian in fulfilling this function.
12.4.43 PCT submitted that:
For issues relating to ‘bad death’ experiences it should be
mandatory for treating professionals to explain issues to
family members prior
to any formal conflict resolution process.
12.4.44 Two submissions commented that ADR may not always be appropriate or
feasible. Members of the Elder Law Committee commented
‘this should always
be considered. The problem is that if a person lacks capacity, how can they
negotiate?’ Several respondents
also commented that ADR should be
available, but that it should not be mandatory.
12.4.45 The Issues Paper included a separate question about whether use of
ADR should be mandatory before a matter is listed for hearing.
Should the Act require compulsory alternative dispute resolution prior to a
12.4.46 There were nine responses to this question, with seven stating that
ADR should not be compulsory. Consistent with some of
the earlier responses, it
was commented that there may at times be reasons why mediation would be
inappropriate. COTA also commented
that ‘alternative forms of dispute
resolution are unlikely to be effective if they are not entered into
voluntarily.’
12.4.47 The Institute considers that enshrining the use of ADR is a critical
reform to improve operation of the Act. ADR serves several
functions, including
‘outcomes related to speed, efficiency, usability and
accessibility.’
lead to more flexible and tailored solutions, greater satisfaction for the
parties, a reduction in the number of Board hearings,
and may ultimately
eliminate the need for a representative appointment. It may also limit or reduce
conflicts within families which
may arise due to a perceived lack of
communication or trust amongst members. A specific provision within the Act
providing for the
use of ADR signals the importance of trying to resolve matters
informally and without the Board’s involvement. Use of ADR is
consistent with the principle of adopting the least restrictive alternative to
meet a person’s needs.
12.4.48 It is important that the Board retain discretion to decide when
referral to ADR processes may be appropriate. There may be
occasions when the
use of ADR is inappropriate. This might occur where there is power imbalance,
allegations of abuse or neglect,
history of family violence, or issues requiring
the Board’s
involvement.
It would also be
important to consider the decision-making abilities of the person in respect of
whom a dispute relates and their
need for support.
Recommendation 12.3
(1) That the Act give the Board power to refer a matter for mediation.
(2) That the Board have mediation services available.
(3) That the use of mediation not be compulsory.
(4) That the Board be added as a prescribed tribunal under the
Alternative
Dispute Resolution Act 2001
An increased role for the Public Guardian?
12.4.49 One of the Public Guardian’s functions is to give advice on the
powers that may be exercised under the Act. This includes
advice about the
Act’s operation and appropriate alternatives to taking action under the
The Issues Paper
commented that one option for reform could be an increased role for the Public
Guardian to mediate to attempt to
resolve disputes. One potential benefit
suggested was reduction in the number of applications to the Board. However, the
is also cognisant that any reforms providing for an additional role
for the Public Guardian would require adequate resourcing noting
the already
stretched resources of the OPG.
12.4.50 Powers to this effect are conferred upon the Public Advocates in
South Australia and
Queensland.
Australia, eligible persons
may apply to the Public Advocate to provide preliminary assistance to resolve a
range of matters relating to advance care
directives.
This includes:
• ensuring that the parties to the matter are fully aware of their
rights and obligations;
• identifying the issues (if any) that are in dispute between the
• canvassing options that may obviate the need for further proceedings;
• where appropriate, facilitating full and open communication between
the parties.
It also has power to mediate a matter, to make declarations in relation to
matters falling within the scope of its authority as outlined
in the Act and to
give advice.
Advocate may refuse to determine an application if in their opinion it is more
appropriate that the matter be dealt with
12.4.51 The Institute requested submissions about whether the Public Guardian
should have any direct or increased role to try to resolve
Should the Public Guardian have increased powers in relation to resolving
12.4.52 There were eight submissions addressing this question, five of which
supported an increased role for the Public Guardian to
mediate disputes. In
supporting this reform, MIGA stated that it had observed performance of this
mediation role by the South Australian
Public Advocate as playing ‘an
important and valuable role around resolving and mediating disputes, including
amongst persons
responsible.’
12.4.53 The OPG submitted:
Improved investigation and education powers for the OPG, in addition to our
current function of providing information on the operation
of the Act, would
certainly place the OPG in a better position to provide informal dispute
resolution assistance.
The OPG is not opposed to taking on a more formal conciliation role where
there is a dispute or grievance about the decision of a
formally appointed
representative. Such a role fits well with the Public Guardian’s other
functions and is conferred on Public
Guardians and Public Advocates in other
12.4.54 Members of the Elder Law Committee expressed the view that this
reform was ‘probably not necessary except perhaps to
take on an advocacy
role and assist with ADR.’ It went on to comment that ‘[t]his could
save a lot of time and cost.’
The Board did not lodge a submission to this
question, and the Public Trustee stated that it held no view.
12.4.55 As noted, one of the existing functions of the Public Guardian is to
give advice about appropriate alternatives to taking
action under the
Implicitly, this
includes advising disputing parties to consider ADR. It is suggested that the
Public Guardian have a more direct
power to herself conduct mediations and make
certain declarations, with the South Australian Act providing a useful guide for
legislative reform. This broader reform is consistent with earlier
recommendations made in Part 5 proposing a role for the Public
Guardian to
attempt to resolve disputes in relation to advance care
directives.
This proposal is
recommended for the following reasons:
• it provides another means to utilise ADR to attempt to resolve
disputes. The benefits of ADR were discussed in the previous
• it provides a free and accessible means of utilising ADR rather than
commercial ADR providers which might involve a fee;
• attempts could be made to resolve disputes quickly and
informally;
• it provides representatives access to information and guidance,
functioning as support for supporters, and aiding good decision-making;
• it complements the Public Guardian’s educative function and
aligns with the Public Guardian’s expertise given
existing roles under the
12.4.56 It is noted that the OPG states that its present caseload acting as
guardian for individuals precludes it from performing
its systemic advocacy
function assigned under the Act. It will be important to ensure that the OPG is
adequately resourced to undertake
this proposed new function. The reform may,
however, have a positive effect upon resourcing of the jurisdiction as a whole
aim that it will reduce Board applications and hearings.
Recommendation 12.4
That the Public Guardian have power to attempt to resolve disputes involving
representatives, consistent with Recommendation 5.7.
between representatives
12.4.57 The Issues Paper raised the importance of avoiding and limiting
disputes between representatives. Disputes may arise where
decisions about a
person’s life have both personal and financial components. For example, a
decision about a represented person’s
potential move to alternative
accommodation involves a personal matter (ie where they live) and financial
matter (ie the funding
of that accommodation). Conflict between representatives
could impede or delay decision-making and potentially compromise the interests
of a represented person.
12.4.58 There are no specific provisions in the Act that address how
conflicts between representatives are resolved. The Board has
the power to give
representatives advice and directions and has power to remove representatives if
the test for their removal is
The Victorian
Powers of Attorney Act
enables attorneys to apply to VCAT for
orders in relation to disagreements between representatives. That legislation
provides a default
position that it is an enduring guardian’s decision
that prevails over that of an
The Victorian Act
requires an attorney to implement a decision of an enduring guardian unless the
result would be a serious depletion
of the donor’s financial
The Institute
sought comment about whether a provision of this type would be of any benefit in
reforming legislation.
Should there be a default priority given to the decisions of a guardian, or
administrator/attorney?
12.4.59 There was little support for legislative reform to provide a default
priority to the decision of any particular representative.
Only the OPG endorsed
this reform, commenting:
The OPG believes a guardian’s decision should prevail over that of a
financial administrator/attorney, presuming it is within
the means of the
represented person and would not result in a serious or detrimental depletion of
their finances.
12.4.60 The Public Trustee submitted:
The Public Trustee takes the view that the issue of priority should not be a
factor in decision-making but rather restricted to the
powers and duties of the
representative. If there is a conflict or discrepancy as to the application
these powers and duties it is
appropriate that tribunal of fact (the board)
12.4.61 The Board did not endorse a default priority for representatives but
raised another alternative that has been adopted and
recommended in other
The Board notes the Northern Territory guardianship legislation provides that
where there is a dispute that multiple decision makers
cannot resolve by
themselves, the tribunal can make orders to facilitate the resolution of their
differences. NSWLRC in its ‘Draft
Proposals’ in its review of the
Guardianship Act 1987
has recommended that ‘The new Act should
provide that, if there are 2 or more representatives and the representatives
agree on one or more decisions that need to be made, after attempting to
resolve the disagreement (whether informally or through
mediation) the
representatives may apply to the Tribunal for direction to resolve any such
disagreement.
This type of approach appears to be more flexible and adaptable to individual
circumstances, than the legislation directing which
decision maker’s
decision will take priority.
12.4.62 Members of the Elder Law Committee observed that disputes between
representatives are uncommon and that many individuals have
administrator or guardian acting for them.
12.4.63 Reflecting the submissions received, reform providing a default
priority to one representative is not proposed. Existing provisions
address the
potential for disputes, including via the Board’s ability to give
representatives advice and directions, and the
ability to remove representatives
if appropriate.
envisaged that Recommendations 12.3 and 12.4 proposing an increased role of ADR
to resolve disputes will also have a positive
impact upon disputes that may
Disputes in relation to decisions of the
Public Guardian or Public Trustee
12.4.64 There are no special provisions in the Act in relation to appealing a
decision of the Public Trustee or Public Guardian. Both
have internal review
procedures, and more formal complaints may be made to the Ombudsman. The Board
also has power to supervise their
actions as representatives in the same way
that it does private representatives. The Issues Paper did not ask whether there
be any special provisions dealing with a person’s ability to object
to a decision of the Public Guardian or Public Trustee.
Nevertheless, the OPG
submitted that:
The OPG believes consideration should be given to the Act providing some
limited mechanism for the Board to review a decision made
by the Public Guardian
or The Public Trustee after internal review mechanisms have been pursued.
However this requires very careful
consideration. Such a mechanism should not
simply provide an alternative forum for someone to seek a different decision
transfer of authority for decision-making from the Public Guardian
or The Public Trustee back to the Board should be avoided. The
President of the
Board should probably have the discretion to accept or reject an application for
review of a decision; if accepted,
a panel of the Board could have the power to
affirm the decision or send it back to the Public Guardian or The Public Trustee
reconsideration. This would put the focus on the process of decision-making
and avoid the pursuit of a different decision on the
ground that a represented
person or interested party simply disagrees with the decision made.
12.4.65 As this was the only submission raising this issue, the Institute has
not considered the matter further.
Other options?
12.4.66 The Institute asked more broadly whether there were other ways that
the Act might better facilitate the resolution of disputes
or disagreements
amongst representatives.
How else could the Act better resolve disputes or disagreements between
representatives?
12.4.67 Responses to this question primarily raised ADR or informal
approaches to resolve disputes. One respondent raised the benefits
of ensuring
that representatives are educated about their role and responsibilities. These
strategies are considered elsewhere in
this Report.
or altering the appointment of a representative
12.5.1 This next section reviews when and how representatives may be removed
if they are acting improperly or become inappropriate
for the role. The
following parts of this Part review when Board orders appointing representatives
ought to be terminated due to
lack of need.
12.5.2 Removing an inappropriate representative is one way to protect the
interests of a represented person and thus serves as a safeguard.
upon two of the ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines:
• Safeguards should ensure that interventions for persons who require
decision-making support are ... (c) subject to regular,
independent and
impartial monitoring and review; and
• Support in decision–making must be free of conflict of
interests and undue
12.5.3 It is appropriate and desirable that the Act provide broadly
consistent tests to remove both enduring guardians and Board-appointed
representatives where it is inappropriate for them to continue in the role. The
following paragraphs explain the current tests to
remove enduring guardians and
Board-appointed representatives. Options for reform are then evaluated and
Revoking or altering an instrument
12.5.4 The Board has power to revoke or amend an
instrument.
Guardian, the enduring guardian, the donor, their administrator or any person
the Board considers has ‘a proper
interest in the matter’ may apply
to the Board for the review of an
instrument.
The drafting of the section does not enable the
Board to review an instrument ‘of its own motion’, meaning that it
instigate its own
The Board may
instigate the review of an enduring power of attorney under the
Attorney Act
also review orders appointing administrators and guardians of its own
This can, and has,
created issues where the Board has considered it appropriate to instigate a
review of an instrument, but has not
had the power to do so under the Act. The
Board’s submission expressed its concern in this regard. The OPG also
proposed this
as a matter requiring legislative reform. The Institute agrees
that it is appropriate to provide consistency with other provisions
the Board to conduct a review of an instrument of its own motion.
Recommendation 12.5
That the Board have power to review an instrument of its own motion.
Issues with the document itself
12.5.5 The Board has power to declare an instrument invalid if satisfied that
the donor did not have the capacity to make the instrument,
it is contrary to
the Act, or the donor was induced to make it by reason of dishonesty or undue
12.5.6 The Act only deals with revocation of instruments. It does not deal
with the revocation of
revocations
of instruments, unlike the
of Attorney Act
appropriate for the Board to have equivalent powers to review Revocations as it
does for instruments. The OPG’s submission
supported this reform.
Recommendation 12.6
That the Act confirm that the Board’s powers to revoke instruments
extend equally to
revocations
of instruments.
Issues with the enduring guardian
12.5.7 To revoke the appointment of an enduring guardian, the Board must be
satisfied that the enduring guardian:
• is not willing or able to act in that capacity; or
• has not, in that capacity, acted in the best interests of the donor;
• has acted in an incompetent or negligent manner or contrary to the
12.5.8 It is not explicit that the Board can only revoke an instrument where
the donor does not have the ability to do so themselves.
It is appropriate that
this is confirmed as it would be inappropriate to revoke the appointment of an
enduring guardian where the
donor retains the ability to do so themselves. This
is consistent with the test to revoke the appointment of an enduring guardian
12.5.9 There are differences between the Act and the equivalent powers to
revoke an enduring power of attorney under the
Powers of Attorney Act
These include:
• after revoking an enduring power of an attorney, the Board may
appoint a substitute
There is no express
power under the Act to appoint a substitute enduring
• the Board can suspend an enduring power of
There is no
equivalent power to suspend an instrument within the Act. The Board’s
submission raised this as a matter for reform.
The Institute recommends consistency with the
Powers of Attorney
Recommendation 12.7
(1) That the wording of s 34(1)(b) of the Act be revised to confirm that the
Board may only revoke or amend an instrument where the
donor does not have
decision-making ability to revoke or amend the instrument.
(2) That the Board have power to appoint a substitute enduring guardian after
revoking an enduring guardian’s appointment where
the instrument does not
already provide a substitute.
(3) That the Board have power to suspend an instrument.
Revocation or
alteration of appointment as guardian and administrator
12.5.10 The Board can review an order appointing an administrator or
It may do so of its
own motion or after receiving an application by, or on behalf of, a represented
person or any other person.
After conducting a review, the Board may vary or continue a guardianship or
administration order, subject to any conditions or requirements
it considers
necessary, or it can revoke the
12.5.11 The Act does not set out any test that the Board must apply when
deciding whether to revoke, vary or continue an order. The
Issues Paper listed
examples of tests that apply to revoke the appointment of a representative
elsewhere, including where:
• they are no longer
• they are no longer
• someone else is more appropriate to be the
representative;
• they request to be
• it would be in the represented person’s best
• they have failed to exercise their functions or
• they have contravened the
The Issues Paper asked for views about what test(s) should apply to remove a
representative.
What test should apply to revoke the appointment of a
representative?
12.5.12 There were 11 responses to this question. Many referred to removal of
a representative where there is evidence of abuse, maltreatment
maladministration of a person’s financial affairs. More broadly, it was
submitted that a representative ought to be removed
where they are not
performing the role adequately or breaching the Act. On the other hand, it was
commented that there should be
a substantive reason to remove a representative
rather than conduct perceived as
12.5.13 The Public Trustee submitted:
The PT takes the view that if the person has regained capacity then the
representative’s appointment will be revoked. Further,
if a representative
is in substantial breach or a conflict arises in respect of their capacity to
undertake their duties and exercise
their powers under the Act, then the Board
should have the power to revoke the appointment.
12.5.14 It is proposed that the Act outline a test for the Board to apply to
remove a representative from the role (as distinct from
terminating its order
appointing a representative). As noted above, there is presently no test that
the Board must apply. There is,
however, a test to apply to remove an enduring
guardian. It provides appropriate guidance and equality of treatment for the
to be consistent where possible.
12.5.15 It is suggested that the following tests that currently apply to the
removal of enduring guardians remain and that they be
extended to also apply to
Board-appointed representatives:
• where the representative is not willing or able to act in that
capacity; or
• where the representative has acted in an incompetent or negligent
manner or contrary to the Act.
Both of these remain appropriate grounds to remove a representative, and no
submissions proposed reform to these elements of the test.
12.5.16 The Issues Paper noted that the Act does not currently contemplate
the Board revoking or altering the appointment of a representative
because of a
change in circumstances, for example, if the relationship between a donor and
representative ends and it becomes inappropriate
for them to continue in the
role. Currently, to remove an enduring guardian in these circumstances, the
Board would need to consider
that, because of the breakdown in a relationship,
the enduring guardian is not ‘able’ to act as enduring guardian. The
OPG submitted:
the OPG believes consideration should be given to empowering the Board to
consider the appropriateness of the representative continuing
in the role
subsequent to a significant change in the relationship between the donor and the
representative such as separation or
divorce. This could potentially be by way
of a test about the suitability of the representative or changes in
circumstances such
that someone else is more appropriate.
The Board also endorsed this reform as did PCT.
12.5.17 The Issues Paper noted that in Queensland and the Northern Territory,
the tribunal may revoke an instrument where it is satisfied
that, because of a
change in the donor’s circumstances, or other circumstances, the document
is inappropriate.
Northern Territory Act provides:
61 Tribunal may amend or revoke advance personal plan
(2) There are grounds for amending the advance personal plan if one or more
of the following applies:
(h) there has been a major change in circumstances since the plan was
Example for subsection (2)(h)
Major changes in circumstances might include the following:
(a) a person appointed as decision maker losing decision-making
(b) the adult getting divorced or becoming estranged from other family
(c) a decision maker being convicted of an offence that makes it
unsuitable for him or her to continue to be a decision maker.
(3) The Tribunal may amend the advance personal plan if satisfied that:
(a) there are grounds for amending the plan; and
(b) the amendment is reasonably necessary to address those grounds; and
(c) if the adult had planning capacity, he or she would agree to the
(4) However, the Tribunal may amend the advance personal plan so as to
terminate the appointment of a person as a decision maker only
if satisfied that
doing so is the only practicable way to address the grounds for
12.5.18 The Institute endorses the Northern Territory approach and proposes
that this form the basis for reform in Tasmania. This
approach is reflective of
the importance of ensuring that the Act gives priority to an individual’s
will and preference by
providing that the tribunal may only alter the
appointment of a representative where it considers that the person would agree
the amendment. The appointment of an enduring guardian is one expression of a
person’s will and preference. Their choice of
enduring guardian might not
necessarily reflect what is considered by others to be in their ‘best
interests’. Consistent
with the overriding principle of the Convention,
and as reinforced and interpreted by the ALRC’s recommendations, a
will and preference should only be overridden to prevent harm and
to preserve and promote the individual’s rights.
12.5.19 In relation to Board-appointed representatives, it is proposed that
the test require the Board to evaluate the suitability
of the representative
against the eligibility requirements to be appointed to the
This is consistent with
submissions received, and the equivalent section in the Northern
Recommendation 12.8
That, to revoke the appointment of a representative, the Board need to be
satisfied that:
(a) in relation to all representatives (enduring guardians and
Board-appointed representatives):
· the representative is not willing or able to act in that capacity;
· the representative has acted in an incompetent or negligent manner
or contrary to the Act; or
(b) in relation to enduring guardians only, that there has been a major
change in circumstances since the appointment was made and:
· the amendment is the only practicable way to address this
circumstance; and
· if the donor had decision-making ability, he or she would agree to
the amendment; and
(c) in relation to Board-appointed representatives only, that the
representative no longer meets the eligibility requirements that
apply to be
appointed as a representative.
12.5.20 The appointment of a representative is not automatically revoked in
any circumstances, for example, upon the ending of a
relationship.
Paper noted that in Queensland, the appointment of a representatives is
automatically revoked upon the ending of the relationship
between the
represented person and the
representative.
It was asked
whether members of the public considered it appropriate to provide for the
automatic revocation of representatives upon
the happening of certain events.
This issue was also addressed separately in relation to the appointments of
enduring guardians,
discussed in Part
Should the appointment of a representative be automatically revoked in
certain circumstances? If so,
12.5.21 There were eight responses to this question with mixed responses
received. Half of respondents endorsed automatic revocation
of the appointment
of a representative in certain circumstances. These included:
• upon the death of the donor or
representative;
• incapacity of the representative;
• where the representative no longer wishes to continue in the
• where the representative cannot be contacted and therefore cannot
fulfil the role;
• where there is significant concern about or harm to the represented
person, or they have acted unlawfully;
• there is a conflict of interest; and
• in circumstances similar to those contained in the ACT legislation,
including revocation upon marriage or divorce (unless
the enduring document
states a contrary
intention).
12.5.22 Other responses indicated a preference for the revocation of an
appointment to be a matter for the Board’s discretion.
12.5.23 This matter was also considered in Part 4 in relation to any
automatic revocation of the appointment of an enduring
Recommendation 4.13
proposes that the Act confirm that the appointment of an enduring guardian is
revoked upon the death of the donor,
and that it provide that an enduring
guardian’s appointment be suspended if the enduring guardian does not have
decision-making
ability to act in that capacity. The Act already confirms that
an order appointing an administrator ceases to have effect (except
in relation
to payment of funeral expenses) upon the death of the represented
Recommendation 12.8
proposes that the Board be able to remove a representative if the representative
is not willing or able to act
in that capacity.
12.5.24 With this context, and reflecting the submissions received, the
Institute concludes that the further matters to be resolved
are the suspension
of the appointment of an order appointing a representative where the represented
person does not have decision-making
ability to act in that capacity, and, in
relation to administrators, upon an administrator becoming bankrupt or
insolvent. This later
recommendation is consistent with the approach in
Queensland,
and the approach
that applies under the Tasmanian
Powers of Attorney Act
in relation to
In circumstances
where an order is suspended due to an administrator becoming bankrupt or
insolvent, then it is appropriate to require
that administrator to advise the
Board so that it can review its order and make any subsequent orders as
required. This is required
Queensland.
12.5.25 The Board would retain discretion to remove a representative in other
circumstances, including where there was a major change
in circumstances
including the nature of the relationship between the representative and the
represented person, as outlined in Recommendation
Recommendation 12.9
(1) That the Act provide that an order of the Board appointing a
representative is suspended if the representative does not have decision-making
ability to act in that capacity.
(2) That an order appointing an administrator be suspended upon the
administrator becoming bankrupt or insolvent.
(3) That if the appointment of an administrator is suspended because of
bankruptcy or insolvency, that administrator be required to
advise the Board of
that circumstance.
Steps after an appointment is
12.5.26 The Act does not impose any requirements upon former representatives
to do anything to conclude their role, including the
handover of documents and
assets to a newly appointed representative or the person themselves. Members of
the Elder Law Committee
commented upon this issue, stating ‘[o]nce a
representative is no longer acting the Tribunal has no power.’
12.5.27 In New South Wales and the Northern Territory, legislation provides
that former administrators are required to take all reasonable
steps to provide
for the transfer of control of the estate of a represented person to either the
person if they have gained capacity,
to their administrator, or the executor or
administrator of their estate (as
It is an offence
to intentionally engage in conduct that contravenes these provisions and the
person is reckless in relation to the
12.5.28 The Institute asked whether individuals considered that the Act
should contain provisions requiring former representatives
to do anything upon
their appointment being revoked.
Should the Act impose requirements upon former representatives to facilitate
the transfer of their role and assets upon their powers
12.5.29 There were five responses to this question with four supporting
reform to confirm the duty of a former representative to facilitate
the handover
of control and assets upon ceasing in the role. The fifth submission suggested
that instead, the Act could confirm that
the former representative ‘not
unreasonably obstruct’ this process.
12.5.30 Based on support for this approach, and to support the represented or
former represented person’s interests being promoted,
it is proposed that
the Act confirm that former representatives must facilitate the transfer of
their role upon their appointment
Recommendation 12.10
That the Act require former representatives to facilitate the handover of
authority upon termination of their appointment. Handover
should occur as
(a) if a new representative is appointed, then to the new representative;
(b) if an order appointing a representative is terminated, then to the person
who was formerly a represented person; and
(c) if terminated because of the death of the represented person, then to
their legal personal representative.
of representatives
12.6.1 The ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines provide that interventions for
people who require decision-making support must be subject
monitoring. This section considers how the Act deals with monitoring of
representatives. Different provisions apply to
Board-appointed representatives
and enduring guardians. These are discussed in turn below.
Monitoring of Board-appointed
representatives
12.6.2 The Board oversees the activities of
representatives.
Guardian has power to investigate complaints and allegations against
representatives or any other matter that the Board
The Board also has
discretion to delegate its powers and functions in relation to receiving reports
from administrators.
The Issues Paper noted that in most jurisdictions, representatives report to
the respective state Public Trustees rather than to the
It was observed
that the Public Trustee has appropriate expertise to conduct this function and
that it would reduce the Board’s
workload (but increase the Public
Trustee’s workload).
12.6.3 The Issues Paper asked who ought to be responsible for receiving and
interrogating representative’s reports.
Who should representatives report
12.6.4 There were eight responses addressing this question, with six
supporting retention of existing arrangements of representatives
reporting to
the Board. The Board submitted:
The Board sees benefit in following the lead of other guardianship
their own financial and legal department and personnel with appropriate skill
and expertise.
12.6.5 The OPG commented that ‘the Board should be able to outsource
the monitoring and audit of complex financial matters/estates’,
that the Public Trustee could perform this function. The Public Trustee
submitted that there be no change to the existing
arrangements.
12.6.6 The Institute considers that there is merit in this potential reform
being the subject of further investigation and reflection,
for the reasons
articulated in the Board’s submission. Recommendations have not been made
as part of this review given the
desirability of further consultation with key
stakeholders impacted by the potential reform, notably the Public Trustee.
considerations include resourcing implications and how to address
conflicting interests where the Public Trustee is acting as administrator.
also noted that the Public Trustee is a Government Business Enterprise (GBE) and
any transfer of the auditing function should
not result in any increase in cost
to the represented person.
this reform were to proceed, it would also need to be decided whether accounts
would also need to be provided to the Board or
only the Public Trustee.
12.6.7 Members of the Elder Law Committee submitted that there may be merit
to reform making provision for reports to be provided
to family members or
others close to a represented person:
Whilst it is important not to make representative’s job too burdensome,
could there be some provision for reporting to other
family with a legitimate
interest (e.g. spouse or child) upon that family member’s request? It is
one reason people will apply
to the GAB to be appointed as the new guardian -
only because they are being shut out.
There could be a list as to basic reporting requirements (e.g. location of
person). This requirement could be imposed on an ‘unless
directed by the
Board’ basis. There would need to be an ability for the guardian to apply
for an exception to reporting requirements
where there is a good reason (e.g.
there might be reasons where it would not be safe for a spouse or child to know
of the represented
person’s whereabouts, such as where there is a history
of domestic violence).
12.6.8 Recommendation 3.3 proposes that one of the revised guiding principles
of the Act be that ‘the role of families, carers
and other significant
persons in an adult’s life to support the adult to make decisions must be
acknowledged and respected.’
Given the need to balance the desirability of
carers and other informal supporters being kept informed of relevant
information, with
the right of a represented person to privacy, the Institute
has not proposed mandatory (or opt out) reporting requirements to families
other carers. It is considered that this is a matter for the Board to consider
in its discretion in each individual case. This
would include reflection upon
the guiding principles of the Act, including the fundamental requirement of
promoting an individual’s
views, wishes and preferences.
Frequency of reports
12.6.9 There are different reporting requirements for guardians and
administrators within the Act. Administrators must provide the
Board with a
statement of the estate accounts at times that the Board
determines.
The Act does not
state how frequently accounts must be supplied and it is a matter for the Board,
although the Institute understands
it is the Board’s usual procedure to
require annual accounting. Failure to provide a statement of accounts without
excuse is an offence with a penalty able to be
12.6.10 At least once every 12 months, the Board must obtain and consider a
written report from a representative on the circumstances
of a represented
There is otherwise no
prescribed reporting requirement for guardians, although the Board can make
orders requiring guardians to provide
reports or records.
12.6.11 If the Board requests a representative to provide a written report,
this must be provided within 14 days of that request (or
the Board may allow a
further period).
provide the report as requested is an offence and a fine may be
12.6.12 The Issues Paper asked about the regularity of reporting requirements
placed upon representatives.
How frequently should reports be
12.6.13 Nine responses addressed the matter of representative’s
reporting requirements. Four
submitted that
there is no need to change the existing reporting requirements. The Public
Trustee submitted that this should be a
matter that the Board determines in its
discretion on a case-by-case basis. In addressing a later question in the Issues
Public Trustee also submitted that:
Safeguards of representative persons could be improved with increased
reporting and accounting responsibilities for representatives.
However, this
would come at a cost that should be pragmatically balanced.
12.6.14 The Institute has concluded that the existing provisions governing
the frequency in which Board-appointed representatives
must report to the
are appropriate.
12.6.15 Speak Out advocates commented upon the content of
representative’s reports. They suggested that representatives should
required to set out within their report what they consider to be desirable
future steps to enable the represented person to make
their own decisions,
including articulating opportunities to progress and develop their
decision-making skills. They also submitted
that the Board should be required to
speak with the represented person themselves and not rely solely upon a written
report from
a representative.
12.6.16 The Institute endorses these suggestions, and notes that they align
with or complement other recommendations made in this
Report including:
• Recommendation 7.3, which proposes that the Board’s standard
application forms require applicants to describe what supports
provided to a person prior to making an application for the appointment of a
representative. If applicants must describe
informal supports provided prior to
the making of an application, then it is appropriate for there to be an
equivalent ongoing requirement
to articulate what supports have been offered or
are available to build a represented person’s decision-making skills;
• Recommendation 8.3, which proposes that representatives have an
express duty to offer decision-making support to a represented
person and to
develop their decision-making abilities. Requiring representatives to report
against this duty assists to promote compliance.
12.6.17 For these reasons, the Institute proposes that the Board’s
forms and procedures require representatives to report against
their efforts to
support a represented person to make their own decisions and to consider and
articulate future opportunities to
build their decision-making skills.
12.6.18 It is also proposed that, to the greatest extent possible, the Board
be required to give a represented person the opportunity
to speak directly with
the Board to convey their views about the arrangements and their appointed
representative. This serves the
following functions:
• it promotes the importance of a represented person’s views,
wishes, and preferences. To reflect this approach, it is
proposed that a
represented person be given the opportunity to speak with the Board, rather than
this being a mandatory requirement
— as a represented person should have
the right to decline an invitation consistent with their wishes;
• it aligns with the importance of including a represented person in
Board proceedings as much as possible, a matter discussed
further in Part 15;
• it acts as a safeguard by providing an opportunity for a represented
person to raise any concerns that they hold, and for
there to be an independent
assessment of the person’s circumstances.
Recommendation 12.11
(1) That reports from representatives require representatives to:
(a) describe attempts to encourage and support the represented person to
develop their decision-making skills; and
(b) articulate any future opportunities identified to build the represented
person’s decision- making skills.
(2) That the Board’s processes when receiving reports from
representatives provide opportunity for a represented person to speak
with the Board’s registry staff as part of the reporting process wherever
Oversight of enduring guardians
12.6.19 As noted above, there are different oversight and reporting
requirements for enduring representatives (attorneys, under the
Attorney Act
, and enduring guardians under the Act). This review is limited
to a review of the oversight provisions governing enduring guardians
included within the Act.
Notification of commencing to act
12.6.20 Subject to the terms of an instrument, an enduring guardian is not
required to notify the Board or any other person that their
powers have been
triggered or that they have commenced acting as a person’s enduring
guardian. An enduring guardian does not
necessarily need any particular evidence
to trigger their powers having
The same approach is
taken in relation to attorneys under the
Powers of Attorney Act
12.6.21 The Issues Paper commented that, without the need to give notice, it
can be difficult to ascertain who has an enduring guardian
acting on their
behalf. This information could assist to provide greater oversight over the
activities of enduring guardians and
provide a check to ensure that enduring
guardians are only acting when the donor does not have decision-making ability.
Paper also noted that requiring enduring guardians to give notice
that they have commenced acting might create issues, including:
• the likely cost and complexity of resourcing
• that a person’s loss of decision-making ability is typically
not an ‘event’, but a process that occurs over
person’s ability might also fluctuate. This can make it difficult to
determine the point at which an enduring guardian’s
powers are activated;
• an enduring guardian might start assuming roles over only certain,
limited aspects of a donor’s life, given the relative
decision-making ability and that it depends on the nature of each decision to be
made. Notification that an enduring guardian
has commenced acting might create
an inaccurate perception that the scope of an enduring guardian’s
authority extends beyond
those matters for which the donor does not have
decision-making ability. This may have unintended, adverse consequences for the
exercising their legal capacity.
12.6.22 The Institute notes the following options:
• to make no reform to the Act;
• to mandate reporting to the Board or another individual or body upon
an enduring guardian commencing to act in the role.
An example of this approach was recommended by the ACTLRAC. It recommended
that, for an enduring guardian to commence acting, an application
tribunal should be required. Its rationale is that the tribunal can then confirm
that attempts to provide the person with
support have been
The ACTLRAC
recommended that an enduring guardian be permitted to act in an emergency where
a donor has lost decision-making capacity,
but if the donor did not recover
within the short term, then an application be made to the
The NSWLRC’s
recent final report on its review of guardianship legislation in New South
Wales, on the other hand, did not advocate
• to provide an option for donors of instruments to nominate that their
enduring guardian must notify the Board or another individual
or body upon them
commencing in the role.
An example of this approach is the Victorian Act which provides that a donor
can nominate a person who the enduring guardian must
take reasonable steps to
notify when they commence
The QLRC also
recommended that the standard form instrument make it clear that a donor can
nominate a person who must be notified
when the enduring guardian’s powers
are activated.
12.6.23 The Institute sought to understand whether there was support for
reform to the Act to require that an enduring guardian give
notice upon them
considering that their powers have been invoked.
Should an enduring guardian have to notify the Board or the Public Guardian
that their appointment has become operative, or to have
their powers
12.6.24 There were eight responses to this question. Four supported reform
requiring an enduring guardian to notify the Board upon
them commencing to act
in the role. In supporting this reform, the Board commented:
There is merit in an enduring guardian being required to notify the Board
that their appointment has become operative. In practice,
this question is not
infrequently contentious on applications to review an instrument that seeks the
removal of a particular guardian.
It is also an opportunity to put guardians on
notice of their obligations to the appointor. It would also be helpful if such
notification
were accompanied by a medical certificate verifying incapacity to
make relevant decisions, thereby ensuring that the instrument is
not abrogating
a person’s rights.
12.6.25 The OPMHS also commented:
Yes – it would be very helpful to have a record of whether someone is
actually acting as an enduring guardian and it might be
worthwhile to ask for an
independent capacity assessment to ensure that people do not just take over when
in fact they shouldn’t.
12.6.26 The OPG reserved its position, stating:
The OPG believes there is some merit in this proposal however there are also
some difficulties, as outlined in the Issues Paper. Aside
from the costs and
practicalities from an administrative point of view, we are concerned that
formal notification that the appointee
has commenced acting might lead to a
presumption or perception that the represented person has a global loss of
capacity, rather
than a domain or decision-specific or a temporary loss of
capacity. The OPG is very much in favour of nationally consistent legislation
for enduring guardianship; as policy work is underway at a national level in
this area, we reserve our view.
12.6.27 The Public Trustee stated that it held no view.
12.6.28 Members of the Elder Law Committee did not support reform to the
existing arrangements. It commented that ‘[t]he operative
point is often a
gradual process. Family representatives may not know an exact date.’
12.6.29 The Institute considers that oversight over the activities of
enduring guardians is desirable. Rationales include:
• as discussed in Part 6, the assessment of a person’s ability to
make decisions is fundamental to the operation of the
Act. It is therefore
critical that this assessment is conducted accurately. A representative may not
be properly trained to conduct
that assessment and may also have conflicting
interests. Requiring the enduring guardian to have to notify a person or body
it is their view that their powers have been triggered enables that
conclusion to be challenged;
• it provides greater transparency and accountability. The ability to
better supervise enduring guardians might be particularly
donor is socially isolated and does not have others within their existing social
networks to observe their enduring
guardian’s conduct;
• periodic oversight is a safeguard that already exists for those with
a Board-appointed representative;
• the ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines advocate the need for regular
monitoring; and
• a number of respondents expressed a view that there should be reform
to the Act dealing with the reporting requirements of
enduring guardians.
12.6.30 Whilst it is agreed that there is merit to providing an independent
and specialist assessment of the need for a representative
decision, the
Institute has not made an equivalent recommendation to that proposed by the
ACTLRAC. This is due to the issues outlined
above, including:
• that a person’s loss of ability is typically not an
‘event,’ but a process that occurs over time. Alternatively,
person’s decision-making ability might fluctuate;
• a person’s ability to make decisions is domain-specific. It is
foreseeable that a provision to this effect would necessitate
an application to
the Board on each occasion a decision needed to be made, so that an assessment
could be made of the individual’s
ability to make decisions at that time,
and in relation to that matter specifically. This would jeopardise the
functioning of the
• an order or declaration confirming whether the powers of an enduring
guardian have been activated might create misunderstanding
guardian’s actual authority. It might be incorrectly understood that the
enduring guardian has power to
act over multiple areas of a person’s life,
rather than their power being limited to perhaps a small number of areas of a
12.6.31 A further rationale for not proposing reform at this time is the
appropriateness of consistent approaches applying to enduring
guardians and
attorneys under the
Powers of Attorney Act
. If reform were made to the
Act to require enduring guardians to seek an order of the Board to trigger
commencement of their powers,
then it would be appropriate for an equivalent
position to apply in relation to attorneys. The Institute’s Terms of
for this project did not extend to review or consideration of the need
for reform to the
Powers of Attorney Act
and broader consultation is
appropriate in order to determine the desirability of reform to the legislative
framework governing enduring
appointments collectively. It is noted that
Recommendation 17.4 proposes that there be a separate review of the
Attorney Act
in light of the matters raised in this Report, including the
discussion in this Part.
12.6.32 It is noted that, not uncommonly, third parties are involved when
enduring guardians make decisions on behalf of a donor.
This could include, for
example, the staff of a residential care facility, or a health professional.
Those third parties are already
able to apply to the Board where they hold
concerns about the enduring guardian’s exercise of powers. An effective
use of resources
would be to ensure that professionals commonly dealing with
representatives are educated about the principles of the Act, including
to ensure that representatives are only acting whilst a person does not have
decision-making ability, and that support is
first provided to a person to
ensure that there is maximum opportunity for a person to make a decision
themselves. Similarly, there
needs to be understanding of the role of the Public
Guardian and Board in receiving complaints or concerns from the community where
individuals or organisations are concerned about the purported exercise of a
representative’s authority. Education should also
reinforce that
representatives have the ability to apply to the Board for advice and
directions, including in relation to the limits
of their role or extent of their
powers. Recommendations in relation to education are addressed in Part
12.6.33 The Institute endorses the Victorian approach where legislation
confirms a donor’s ability to direct their enduring
guardian to notify a
person or organisation that they have commenced acting in the
It is recommended that
the Act adopt this approach because it reflects and promotes the individual will
and preference of the donor
by enabling them to choose whether they want to
adopt this approach. It avoids an automatic, substantially increased workload
the Board or OPG, whilst still providing independent oversight of the
activities of enduring guardians as a safeguard.
12.6.34 The Act already implicitly enables a donor to include as a direction
to their enduring guardian a requirement to notify a
person or organisation upon
them commencing to act in the
The standard form
and template
available via the Board, however, do not specifically reference the ability to
nominate a person who must be informed
upon the enduring guardian commencing
It is recommended that these be revised to draw a donor’s attention to
this option.
Recommendation 12.12
(1) That the Act confirm a donor’s ability to nominate in their
instrument a person or body that their enduring guardian must
take reasonable
steps to notify upon them commencing to act in the role for the first time.
(2) That the standard form instrument provide a space for a donor to nominate
a person or body that their enduring guardian must take
reasonable steps to
notify upon them commencing to act in the role for the first time.
Reporting requirements
12.6.35 Subject to the terms of an instrument, there is no periodic review of
an enduring guardian’s activities. The Board and
the Public Guardian
oversee the activities of enduring guardians if and when matters are brought to
their attention. The same approach
applies to attorneys under the
Attorney Act
. This is a significant difference in approach between the
monitoring of Board-appointed guardians and administrators. It is noted
that suitability criteria must be satisfied to be appointed as a representative
by the Board, whilst an enduring guardian’s
suitability is a subjective
matter that the donor determines.
12.6.36 Given these issues, the Institute sought to understand whether the
community expects that enduring guardians should need to
periodically report to
the Board once their powers have been invoked.
Should enduring guardians need to periodically report to the
12.6.37 There were eight responses to this question with most responses
either explicitly or implicitly endorsing this reform. The
OPG submitted:
the OPG believes careful consideration needs to be given to the establishment
of effective but not overly burdensome safeguarding
measures. Our tentative view
is that a regime of periodic reporting is not currently feasible (even if
desirable), and that strengthened
investigation powers for the Public Guardian
in addition to the Board’s ability to review enduring instruments would go
way to providing effective oversight and monitoring.
12.6.38 The Institute observes that instituting the need for enduring
guardians to periodically report to the Board involves similar
considerations to
the matters discussed above in relation to the question of enduring guardians
giving notice upon them commencing
to act. As discussed above, one of the
concerns of having to give notice, or seek a Board declaration that an enduring
powers have commenced, is that it might give an incorrect
perception of an enduring guardian’s ability to make decisions —
given that a person’s ability to make decisions is time dependent and
domain specific. Board-appointed representatives are,
however, required to
provide reports irrespective of whether they have in fact made decisions. One
complexity is determining the
point at which an enduring guardian should need to
commence furnishing reports, given that the term of their appointment is not as
clearly defined as is the case for Board-appointed representatives.
12.6.39 There is merit to further investigating this alternative.
Recommendation 3.1 endorses the ALRC’s Decision-Making Principles
the review of the Act. Principle 4 of the Decision-Making Principles provides
for the need for legal frameworks to have appropriate
and effective safeguards.
The need for regular monitoring is one of the ALRC’s Safeguards
Guidelines. These Principles and
supporting Guidelines are intended to support
the overarching requirements of the Convention of ensuring that interventions
requiring decision-making support are subject to appropriate and
effective safeguards to protect abuse and are subject to regular
It is accepted that
periodic reporting by Board-appointed representatives serves as a safeguard to
protect represented people. It
would seem appropriate for similar safeguarding
mechanisms to apply to enduring guardians. Further consideration of this complex
question should include consultation with stakeholders impacted by the
of Attorney Act
, noting the desirability of consistency between reporting
requirements for both enduring guardians and attorneys.
12.6.40 As highlighted above, donors can already give direction to their
enduring guardians that require them to report to someone
when they are
The Board’s
factsheet about making an instrument advises donors that they are able to direct
their enduring guardian to report
to someone when
Its standard form
does not refer specifically to this option, although it refers more broadly to
the ability to make an enduring
guardian’s appointment subject to
conditions. It is suggested that the standard form instrument provide a separate
for donors to elect a person to whom their enduring guardian is to
report. This makes this option explicit and allows donors to reflect
wishes in relation to reporting requirements when making an instrument.
Recommendation 12.13
That the standard form instrument provide a space for a donor to nominate a
person or body who their enduring guardian must report
to whilst acting in the
12.6.41 The Issues Paper noted that one alternative instead of mandatory
reporting requirements could be to provide for the random
auditing of enduring
appointments. The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs suggested
that random auditing of enduring appointments
might be beneficial to prevent abuse, but noted that funding would need to be
considered,
along with who and how it would be implemented and on what
The committee also
noted the need to ensure that a program did not deter people from acting or be
too onerous on
representatives.
The ALRC did
not, however, make recommendations about the random auditing of enduring
appointments in relation to financial matters
in its recent
Report on Elder
, although this was raised in its Discussion
It suggested that a scheme would have merit, but considered that this should be
reviewed once there was a national registration scheme
for enduring
The Institute
notes that the desirability of a registration scheme to carry out the random
auditing of instruments is not a barrier
in Tasmania, given that the Act already
provides for the compulsory registration of
instruments.
submission stated that ‘[o]ur tentative view is that the idea of random
auditing of enduring powers of attorney has
some merit.’
12.6.42 The Institute understands that further work is advancing nationally
in relation to investigating the merits of this reform.
The Institute endorses
this being the subject of further analysis and consideration.
12.6.43 Requiring representatives to maintain records assists to monitor
their activities and is aimed at preventing abuse or a misuse
of powers. The
ALRC supports obligations requiring representatives to maintain
12.6.44 Enduring guardians must keep accurate records of all dealings and
transactions that they make as an enduring guardian. Records
must be retained
for at least seven years after they cease to act, or, alternatively, they may
deposit their records with the Board.
Failure to do so may result in a
An equivalent provision
is not included in relation to Board-appointed representatives. This may merely
be due to oversight given
that this reform was enacted to mirror equivalent
amendments made to the
Powers of Attorney Act
in relation to attorneys.
It is appropriate that consistent requirements apply to both.
Recommendation 12.14
That an equivalent provision to s 32D(1) of the Act be included in relation
to Board-appointed administrators and guardians, confirming
that administrators
and guardians must keep accurate records of all dealings and transactions that
they make as representatives.
Steps after the death of a represented
12.6.45 An administrator must advise the Board of a represented
person’s death within seven days after being notified of the
represented
person’s death.
equivalent provision applies to attorneys to notify the Recorder of Titles,
although there is no time period within which to do
Within 28 days of
notifying the Board, administrators must provide the Board with a statement of
estate accounts.
comply with these requirements, without reasonable excuse, amounts to an
offence. A fine may be
12.6.46 The Issues Paper queried whether these timeframes were overly
burdensome and asked for public comment about whether these
timeframes require
Does there need to be any change to the time periods in which administrators
must report to the Board after the death of a represented
12.6.47 There were five responses to this question, with none indicating a
need for any revision to the current provisions.
Reform is therefore not
Regular review
12.7.1 The Convention requires safeguards for decision-making to apply for
the shortest time possible.
This section considers how the Act provides for the review of the appointment of
representatives.
Reviews of appointments of enduring
12.7.2 The review of appointments of enduring guardians is considered at
[12.6.19]–[12.6.42] above.
Reviews of Board orders appointing
administrators and guardians
Length of orders
12.7.3 The Board has discretion to nominate the period in which an order
appointing an administrator or guardian operates. Section
24 provides that
‘a guardianship order lapses on the expiration of 3 years after the date
on which it is made unless continued
under section 68.’ Section 52 is
equivalent for administrators. The Board’s submission clarified that the
current wording
of s 68 enables the Board to vary or continue an order following
a review and does not limit the period in which an order can be
continued. It
commented that ‘[i]n practice, the Board has made orders up to 5 years in
length in some limited circumstances
where a person’s disability and
incapacity are highly unlikely to change and where need is also unlikely to
12.7.4 Other jurisdictions have a range of periods in which orders appointing
representatives may last. Some provide a shorter period
(for example, one year)
in which an initial order may last, with longer periods permitted (for example,
five years) if extended upon
review. The Issues Paper commented that providing a
shorter time period in which an order can last results in more regular review
the activities of representatives, enabling the Board to more quickly respond
where a representative is acting contrary to the
Act. On the other hand,
mandating a more regular review would increase the workload of both the Board
and representatives. The Issues
Paper asked what duration was considered
appropriate for orders appointing representatives.
How long should orders appointing representatives be able to
12.7.5 There were 12 responses to this question. The Board submitted that:
it is appropriate to have clear time limits for Orders that are not too long.
When setting the length of order, consideration should
be given to the UN
Convention to ensure that:
‘Safeguards shall ensure that measures relating to the exercise of
legal capacity are proportional and tailored to the person’s
circumstances, apply for the shortest time possible and are subject to regular
review by a competent, independent and impartial authority
or judicial
12.7.6 The OPG made similar comments:
The Act does not currently specify a maximum period of appointment for an
order continued upon review — the OPG believes that
the Act should specify
this period to be three years in most circumstances.
However, there is a very small cohort of persons with profound disabilities
for whom there is no prospect of any improvement in capacity,
and for whom there
are clear ongoing need/s for an administrator or (less frequently) a guardian.
The OPG believes consideration
should be given to longer orders in these cases
where The Public Trustee or the Public Guardian has been appointed. The OPG is
certain about more lengthy orders for people with a private guardian
administrator and would not recommend more than three years
for a private
administrator.
It also commented that:
The OPG believes the current maximum period of three years for an initial
appointment is appropriate, with a specific requirement
that the Board considers
the least restrictive option in the circumstances. In the context of the
duration of an order, consideration
of the least restrictive option should
include the likelihood of improvements to the represented person’s
capacity with supports;
the prospect that likely changes to circumstances (such
as stable accommodation) will result in the alleviation of a need for substitute
decision-making; and the possibility that short term intervention to establish
supported arrangements (such as direct debits for
bill payment and negotiation
of debt repayments) will mitigate the need for administration.
12.7.7 Four submissions suggested that there is no need to change existing
provisions. Two supported the Board having discretion to
determine the
appropriate length of an order on a case-by-case basis. Three submissions
commented that three years is a long time,
or too long a time for orders
appointing representatives.
12.7.8 On balance, the Institute does not propose any change to the existing
arrangements, except for two matters:
• to outline factors that the Board must consider when deciding the
length of orders, consistent with the OPG’s recommendations.
proposed on the basis that it promotes orders being of as short a duration as
possible; and
• to limit the length of orders that may made upon review of an initial
order. As the Board noted, limiting the length of orders
is consistent with the
Convention which requires interventions to apply for the shortest time possible.
Recommendation 12.15
(1) That the Board be required to consider the following matters when
determining the duration of an order appointing a representative:
· the likelihood of improvements to the represented person’s
decision-making ability;
· the prospect that likely changes to circumstances including short
term interventions to establish supported arrangements
will mitigate the need
for a representative; and
· that the order is the least restrictive of the person’s
freedom of decision and action as is possible in the circumstances.
(2) That any continuation of an order appointing a representative be
permitted to last for a maximum of three years, after which time
lapses unless it is continued in accordance with the Act.
Test to review orders appointing a representative
12.7.9 Reviews of orders appointing representatives can be conducted at other
On review, the Board
may vary or continue an order, make the order subject to conditions or
requirements that it considers necessary,
or it can revoke an
A hearing must be held
for the Board to renew an
In the 2016–2017
financial year, the Board conducted 989 reviews of orders, representing 56 per
cent of the total applications
12.7.10 The Act does not set out a test that the Board must apply when
reviewing an order appointing a representative. The Issues
Paper commented that
it may be appropriate for the Act to require the same test to be applied when
an order as the Board applies when
appointing a representative.
This test was discussed in Part 8.
12.7.11 The Issues Paper asked whether the Act should provide a test that the
Board must apply when reviewing orders appointing representatives.
Should the Act provide a test to apply when reviewing an order appointing a
representative? If so, what test should
12.7.12 The Board submitted that ‘[i]t
appears appropriate that the same test used to make the initial order be used
when reviewing
an order’, noting that this is the approach it presently
Members of the Elder
Law Committee also proposed that the test to review an order appointing a
representative be consistent with
the test to appoint a representative. The OPG
expressed a similar view, commenting that it also provides an opportunity to
upon the suitability of the appointed representative.
12.7.13 The Institute agrees with these responses. Whilst it may be implicit
that the Board should apply the same test as it does
to appoint a representative
as it does when reviewing the appointment, it is an appropriate that this be
Recommendation 12.16
That, to continue an order appointing a representative, the Board need to be
satisfied that the test for the appointment of a representative
continues to be
Conflicts of interest
12.8.1 The Convention provides that safeguards for decision-making must be
free of conflict of interest and undue
This section
considers how the Act addresses conflicts of interest, or potential conflicts of
interest and puts forward proposals
for reform.
Enduring guardians
12.8.2 The Act sets out when an enduring guardian can enter into a conflict
of interest transaction.
‘Conflict of interest’ is defined in relation to enduring guardians
as meaning a conflict between the duties of the enduring
guardian in relation to
the donor and the interests of the enduring guardian or their relative, business
associate or close friend.
enduring guardian may enter into conflict transactions where the donor has
specifically approved of the particular conflict transaction,
or class of
transactions, or all conflict transactions in the appointing
instrument.
Conflicts are not
presently dealt with in the standard form
instrument.
has recommended that instruments include guidance on what conflicts are and how
they can be managed.
Institute endorses this proposal, and recommends this as a matter for reform.
This serves an educative function, with the goal
being to minimise enduring
guardians either intentionally or inadvertently acting in a position of
conflict. It would also provide
opportunity for a donor to consider, when making
an instrument, any particular conflict transaction or class of transactions of
they approve, consistent with their right to do so under the
Recommendation 12.17
That the standard form instrument explain what conflicts of interest are how
they may be managed.
Board-appointed representatives
12.8.3 To be appointed, Board-appointed representatives must satisfy the
Board that they are not in a position where their interests
conflict, or may
conflict, with the interests of the proposed represented
The Issues Paper
commented that this appears to be a broad test, and raised concern about the
potential for a protectionist approach
resulting in the appointment of the
Public Trustee or Public Guardian in favour of private individuals with an
existing relationship
with the proposed represented person. In New South Wales,
instead of assessing whether a proposed guardian has interests that conflict,
may conflict, with the proposed represented person’s interests,
consideration is only given to ‘undue
in the Northern Territory and Queensland, it is the ‘extent’ of a
conflict of interest that is assessed, rather
than the existence of a conflict
In Alberta, Canada, a
conflict of interest will only prevent an applicant being appointed as a
representative where the conflict
of interest leads to a substantial risk that
the proposed representative will not act in the represented person’s best
Act also confirms that being a relative or beneficiary of the person’s
Will does not in itself amount to a
conflict of
recommended that legislation clarify that just because an applicant is in
conflict with another family member does not,
of itself, mean that the applicant
is not appropriate to act as a
representative.
A provision
to this effect is included in the South Australian
12.8.4 The Act does not impose any continuing obligation upon representatives
to monitor or report conflicts of interests, or potential
conflicts of
interests, that may arise following their appointment. A conflict may not be
identified until the Board reviews its
order, which might be some time after the
conflict arose. The VLRC recommended that representatives be given a duty to
monitor the
potential for conflicts of interest and to seek advice if
Representatives in
Queensland have a continuing obligation to notify the tribunal about conflicts,
or likely conflicts of interest.
A fine may be imposed in cases of a
12.8.5 The Act does not define ‘conflict of interest’ for the
purposes of ss 21 and 34 which deal with Board-appointed
representatives. The
term is defined only in relation to enduring guardians. The Issues Paper asked
whether the term ‘conflict
of interest’ should be defined or
explained in relation to Board-appointed representatives.
(ii) Should the term ‘conflict of interest’ be defined or
12.8.6 The Public Trustee submitted:
There should be education around this issue for non-professional
representatives. ... a statutory definition should be avoided to
save potential
legal argument with a preference for explanation in the form of education.
12.8.7 Another submission also noted difficulties with defining
‘conflicts of interest’ and the importance of instead
representatives about conflicts. A further respondent endorsed the Act providing
an explanation, rather than a definition,
of what is meant by conflict of
interest. Members of the Elder Law Committee supported a statutory definition,
but also encouraged
the use of guidebooks to provide further explanation and
examples of conflicts of interest. Social Work Services RHH commented that
Handbook for Private Guardians provides a useful explanation of what conflicts
of interest are, including providing
Another submission
supported inclusion of a statutory definition of the term.
12.8.8 The Institute supports inclusion of a broad statutory definition
explaining what is meant by ‘conflicts of interest’
in relation to
Board-appointed representatives. It is suggested that the existing definition
used to explain conflicts of interest
in relation to enduring guardians be
adopted. Submissions calling for education for representatives about what are
conflicts of interest,
including through the use of handbooks and other
educational material, are also endorsed.
12.8.9 The Issues Paper also asked for feedback about whether there needs to
be any reform to the provisions of the Act dealing with
conflicts of
(i) When should conflicts or potential conflicts of interest prevent a
person from acting as a
representative?
12.8.10 In response to this question, the Public Trustee commented that:
Conflict of interests should be avoided where they have a tangible impact on
the representative acting in the ‘best interests’
of the represented
12.8.11 The OPG commented: ‘The OPG is of the view that the extent and
effect of conflicts of interest is of relevance and the
legislation should
reflect this.’ The Board similarly submitted that:
In practice the Board has leaned towards interpreting this [existing
provisions] in a practical way, given it is almost inevitable
that certain
representatives, for example spouses or parents, will have personal interests in
Amending the Act so that the Board can assess the extent of the conflict
rather than the existence of a conflict itself, is appropriate.
12.8.12 Members of the Elder Law Committee submitted:
Representatives should not be ruled out simply because they are a
beneficiary. Relevant factors for consideration might however include,
example, where there is unequal distribution in an estate and the family is not
in agreement and/or where there is a disabled
child. There should be a duty to
report conflicts of interest arising after the appointment is made.
12.8.13 Another submission also supported Board-appointed representatives
reporting conflicts of interest arising after their appointment.
12.8.14 Attendees of consultation meetings facilitated by Carers Tasmania
commented that they perceived that at times the requirement
that there be no
actual or potential conflicts of interest is interpreted too strictly. One
example provided was a proposed representative
being rejected on the basis that
they were a beneficiary of the proposed represented person’s estate
despite being a close
family member and the proposed represented person’s
carer for several years. These views are balanced with Social Work Services
RHH’s observation that in some instances perpetrators of abuse against a
represented person had been appointed as their representative.
It commented that
‘[w]hilst there should be consideration of preservation of existing
relationships, consideration should also
be given to those extreme cases where
either party is either a perpetrator or victim of abuse.’
12.8.15 To address issues raised in this Part, and reflecting submissions
received, the Institute proposes the following revisions
to how the Act deals
with conflicts of interest:
Considering the extent and likelihood of conflict
12.8.16 In response to submissions received, it is proposed that rather than
the test requiring the Board to be satisfied that the
proposed representative is
not in a position where their interests conflict, or may conflict, with the
interests of the proposed
represented
the Board be required
to consider:
• the extent to which the represented person’s and the
person’s interests are likely to conflict; and
• whether the person is likely to comply with the Act.
12.8.17 This is consistent with existing provisions in Queensland and the
Northern Territory.
provides appropriate flexibility by requiring consideration not only of the
existence of a conflict, but the extent of that conflict.
The critical factor is
whether the existence of a conflict is likely to affect the proposed
representative’s ability to comply
with their duties imposed by the Act.
The relevance of being a beneficiary of the represented person’s
12.8.18 It is proposed that the Act confirm that being a relative or
beneficiary of a person’s Will does not, of itself, mean
that the person
is in a conflict of interest and is inappropriate to act as their
representative. This is consistent with an equivalent
provision in Alberta,
The intention is to
ensure that a person who might be best placed to fulfil the role of
representative is not eliminated only because
they may benefit from the
represented person’s estate upon their death. There are likely many
situations where this may arise,
where a person closest to the proposed
represented person nominates to be their representative but may also be a
beneficiary under
their Will. As noted above, the focus should instead be upon
whether that circumstance impacts the proposed representative’s
perform the role and uphold their duties.
Conflict amongst family members
12.8.19 It is also recommended that the Act confirm that, just because an
applicant is in conflict with another family member does
not, in itself, mean
that they are inappropriate to act as a representative. This is consistent with
recommendations of the QLRC
and the Act in South
New legislation
proposed in Victoria also provides that the tribunal must not assume without any
evidence that a proposed represented
person’s relative who is proposed as
the guardian or administrator is not suitable to be appointed as the guardian or
administrator
merely because that relative disagrees with another relative of
the proposed represented person about a matter pertaining to the
represented person.
12.8.20 In addressing a later question in the Issues Paper, the OPG
it should be open to the Board to appoint the Public Guardian or The Public
Trustee in situations of high family conflict, even where
there might be one or
more family members who would otherwise be suitable for appointment, absent the
family conflict.
12.8.21 This proposed reform would not preclude the Board from determining
that an applicant is unsuitable to act in the role because
of conflict within
family. Instead, as noted above, assessment should be based upon whether the
individual is suitable and likely
to comply with the Act.
Ongoing duty to report conflicts
12.8.22 It is proposed that representatives have an ongoing duty to report
conflicts, or potential conflicts of interest. This enables
the Board to
independently assess the situation and determine whether this change in
circumstance impacts the representative’s
suitability. This is consistent
with the VLRC’s
recommendations,
legislation in
Queensland.
Recommendation 12.18
That the Act deal with conflicts of interests involving guardians and
administrators as follows:
(a) that the existing definition of ‘conflict of interest’ in s
32C(2) of the Act be moved to the definition section (s
3) so that it applies to
all uses of that term throughout the Act;
(b) that the test for appointment as a representative require the Board to
(i) the extent to which the interests of the proposed represented person and
proposed representative are likely to conflict; and
(ii) whether the proposed representative is likely to comply with the Act;
(c) that the Act state that being a relative or beneficiary of a represented
person’s Will does not of itself amount to a conflict
of interest;
(d) that the Act state that, just because the proposed representative is in
conflict with a close relative of the proposed represented
person, does not, of
itself, mean that they are not suitable to act as a representative; and
(e) that representatives have a duty to report conflicts of interest, or
potential conflicts of interest, that arise during the course
appointment to the Board.
12.8.23 The Board has power to authorise an administrator to make gifts from
a represented person’s property. Gifts may be to
family or other people
for whom the represented person might be expected to
of Attorney Act
, there are some gifts that an attorney can make without
Board approval. These include gifts to relations or close friends of a seasonal
nature (for example, Christmas presents), or for a special event (for example, a
Similar provisions
apply in the Northern Territory and Queensland, enabling administrators to make
some gifts.
Reforms proposed
in Victoria provide for an administrator being able to make certain gifts and
administrators having to include within their annual accounts details of any
gifts over $100 that were made to the administrator,
their relative or close
friend, or connected
organisation.
12.8.24 In Tasmania, attorneys can make reasonable charitable donations of
the nature that the donor made when they had capacity,
or donations that the
donor might be reasonably expected to make, without Board
This includes
reasonable gifts to the attorney themselves or an associated
12.8.25 The Issues Paper asked whether administrators ought to be permitted
to make certain gifts in the absence of the prior approval
of the Board.
(i) Should administrators be able to make gifts without the Board’s
prior approval?
(ii) If so, what gifts ought to be
authorised?
12.8.26 Seven submissions addressed this matter, five of which either
supported, or did not oppose, providing consistency with equivalent
granted to attorneys under the
Powers of Attorney Act
. Those who did not
support amendment either commented that existing arrangements are not
problematic, or that the ability to make
gifts risks the potential for abuse or
exploitation. The Board noted that:
There are many individual considerations to gifting, including the
person’s wishes if ascertainable regarding gifting, whether
person’s usual practice to gift and if so in what circumstances; whether
the person can afford to gift and if so
how much should be gifted.
12.8.27 In endorsing consistency with the
Powers of Attorney Act
Public Trustee commented that ‘[i]t is not unreasonable for an
administrator to keep an account of gifts paid’ and
that ‘[a]nnual
submission of accounts should be made to the Guardianship and Administration
12.8.28 Presumably one of the reasons that the
Powers of Attorney Act
authorises attorneys to make certain gifts without Board approval is because
performance of their role does not require them to routinely
report to the
Board. An administrator’s appointment, on the other hand, only becomes
effective because of Board orders which
are made following a hearing. As the OPG
observed, ‘[t]he Board is able to approve token seasonal gifts on the
initial appointment
or reappointment of an administrator.’ The
Board’s hearing thus provides it with the opportunity to consider the
circumstances
and make orders approving certain gifts where it deems
appropriate. These different contexts raise the question of whether there
utility to reform to the existing position for administrators.
12.8.29 The potential for the misuse of these powers is also noted. It is
observed, however, that the Victorian approach proposes
to mitigate the risk of
abuse by requiring administrators to detail in their annual accounts gifts over
$100 made to them or an associated
individual or organisation. The Victorian
Bill also provides that the gifting powers do not apply if VCAT orders
This enables the
tribunal to disallow an administrator to make some or all gifts that would
otherwise be permissible, thereby enabling
it to reverse the default
12.8.30 A further consideration is that enabling administrators to make
certain gifts that reflect a represented person’s wishes
wishes) promotes their will and preference. It also provides a less restrictive
alternative. These considerations have
been endorsed as principles which should
govern reform to the Act.
12.8.31 If government were not persuaded to enact provisions enabling
administrators to make certain gifts consistent to the powers
attorneys, then it is the Institute’s view that consideration be given to
revising the existing section in the
Powers of Attorney Act
. As already
commented, if concerns relate to the potential for administrators to abuse their
power, then this risk is greater for
attorneys due to the lack of reporting
requirements and Board oversight.
Recommendation 12.19
(1) That administrators be authorised to make certain gifts and donations
without Board approval equivalent to
Powers of Attorney Act
(Tas), subject to any contrary orders of the Board.
(2) That administrators be required to include an account of any gifts made
when submitting accounts to the Board, subject to any
contrary orders of the
Eligibility to act as a
representative
12.8.32 The Act provides tests that the Board must apply when deciding who to
appoint as a representative. To be appointed as a guardian,
an adult must
satisfy the Board that:
• they will act in the best interests of the proposed represented
• they are not in a position where their interests conflict, or may
conflict, with the interests of the proposed represented
person. This test was
considered above;
• they are suitable to act as the
Whether a proposed guardian is suitable is assessed taking into account:
• the wishes of the proposed represented person so far as they can be
ascertained;
• the desirability of preserving existing family relationships;
• the compatibility of the person with the proposed represented person
and any administrator of their estate; and
• whether the person will be available and accessible to fulfil the
requirements of the role.
12.8.33 To be appointed as an administrator, an adult must satisfy the Board
• will act in the best interests of the proposed represented
• are not in a position where their interests conflict, or may
conflict, with the interests of the proposed represented person;
• are suitable to act as administrator; and
• have sufficient expertise to administer the
Suitability is assessed taking into account:
• the wishes of the proposed represented person so far as they can be
ascertained; and
• the compatibility of the person with the proposed represented person
and their guardian (if
12.8.34 ‘Sufficient expertise’ is not part of the test that
applies to guardians. The desirability of preserving family
relationships and
being available and accessible are factors that must be taken into account when
appointing guardians but are not
part of the test to assess whether an
administrator is
12.8.35 The Issues Paper asked for feedback about the tests that a proposed
representative should need to satisfy to be appointed
as a representative.
What test should a person need to meet to be appointed as a
What test should a person need to meet to be appointed as an
administrator?
12.8.36 There were 12 submissions addressing the first question, and 10
addressing the second. Members of the Elder Law Committee
submitted that they
did not consider any change was needed. Other responses stated that the proposed
representative should need to
satisfy the Board that:
• they have common sense;
• they are responsible;
• they are competent. In addressing this consideration, the Public
Trustee commented that the proposed represented person should
need to have the
requisite skills, or have access to appropriate support to competently perform
• they are not in a position of conflict;
• they genuinely understand the views, values and wishes of the
proposed represented person; and
• they are able to act in the proposed represented person’s best
interests (including demonstrating this by working through
hypothetical
scenarios).
12.8.37 Speak Out advocates noted the need to have as a primary consideration
the wishes of the proposed represented person. Another
response commented on the
importance of consulting with carers to ascertain their views.
12.8.38 Two submissions commented that, instead of providing the Board with a
National Police Records Check, a Working with Vulnerable
People check should be
submitted. Presently the
Registration to Work with Vulnerable People Act
(Tas) applies only to children, although will ultimately have extended
application to certain regulated activities involving
12.8.39 Suggestions were also made in relation to the Board’s processes
when hearing applications for the appointment of representatives.
Social Work
Services RHH commented that it would be beneficial for proposed representatives
to be provided with a copy of the Handbook
for Guardians/Handbook for
Administrators upon lodging their application, prior to the Board’s
hearing. It stated this would
provide a proposed representative the opportunity
to gain further information about the role and duties of a representative, so
they can consider their suitability and understand more fully what it
entails. It would also better enable an applicant to speak
to their suitability
and that, if appointed, they would act in accordance with the Act. Whilst the
Institute’s Terms of Reference
asked only about legislative reform, the
Institute acknowledges this is a useful suggestion.
12.8.40 Based on submissions received, and recommendations made elsewhere in
this Report, the Institute recommends the following revisions
to the existing
A single test to assess the eligibility and suitability of all
Board-appointed representatives
12.8.41 The first recommendation is that, for simplicity, the Act provide a
single test to assess the suitability of a proposed representative.
test within one section rather than two would eliminate unnecessary duplication
and reduce the size of the Act. It also
has the benefit of ensuring that the
tests that assess suitability are consistent. As noted above, the tests
currently differ, requiring
the Board to consider the desirability of preserving
family relationships and whether a proposed guardian is available and
accessible,
but not a proposed administrator. It is considered that these
factors should be equally relevant for proposed administrators as they
That the proposed representative will comply with the Act
12.8.42 Currently, proposed representatives must satisfy the Board that they
will act in the represented person’s best
It is observed
that acting in accordance with a represented person’s best interests is
only one of the existing duties of representatives.
Requiring assessment of
whether the proposed representative would likely comply ‘with the
Act’ instead is broad enough
to ensure that all relevant matters are
assessed — including their likely compliance with the Act’s guiding
principles,
and duties of representatives.
Taking into account ‘the views, wishes and preferences’ of the
proposed represented person
12.8.43 The third recommendation is that the language used reflect the shift
in focus to promote a person’s ‘views, wishes
preferences’, consistent with recommendations made elsewhere in this
Assessment of existing relationships that are important to the
12.8.44 The fourth recommendation is that the focus be upon considering
relationships that are important to the proposed represented
irrespective of whether those groups or individuals are connected through
family. It might, for example, be their neighbour
or carer that has the closest,
ongoing relationship with the person. It is these key relationships that should
be preserved and promoted.
This approach reflects comments made during
consultation meetings and is also the approach taken under the recently debated
to the Victorian
legislation.
That the proposed representative has the requisite skills or access to
appropriate support to competently perform the role
12.8.45 This recommendation is based on the Public Trustee’s
submission. It suggested that the test assess whether a proposed
representative
has the requisite skills, or access to appropriate support, to competently
perform the role. Currently the ‘expertise’
of a proponent is only
assessed in relation to administrators. The Institute agrees that assessment of
an applicant’s skills
to perform the role is a relevant consideration for
both guardians and administrators.
12.8.46 The Institute is further persuaded by this suggestion because of its
focus upon the proposed representative’s skills
and expertise to perform
with support
. Representatives can and should (where appropriate)
seek out, consider and rely upon quality advice. There are many occasions where
individuals retain advisors to assist them, including accountants, financial
advisors, lawyers or other professional advisors. It
should not be necessary for
representatives to themselves possess skills in each of these areas to perform
the role. The focus should
instead be upon whether, firstly, the proposed
representative has access to advice or support to perform the role, and
whether they are likely to identify circumstances in which external
support or advice may be beneficial, and then seek out that advice.
Working with Vulnerable Adults Check
12.8.47 The final recommendation is based on two submissions received where
it was observed that a Working with Vulnerable Adults
check may be a more
appropriate and relevant search to confirm the suitability of an individual to
act as representative than the
existing National Police Records Check. The
Institute proposes that this matter be reviewed separately as part of the
expansion of
the jurisdiction of the
Registration to Work with Vulnerable
People Act 2013
(Tas) to regulated activities involving adults.
Other suggestions
12.8.48 Other suggestions that were made in submissions included:
• that proposed representatives undergo psychological testing.
Whilst the Institute notes that this might be beneficial in detecting any
particular mental health conditions that might be relevant
to performance of the
role, the Institute does not accept this suggestion. It would create a practical
barrier to individuals wishing
to apply to be someone’s representative.
The associated cost and delay would likely jeopardise the efficiency of the
Further, the Board is able to request evidence that it considers
appropriate; and
• that the views of carers be considered.
The proposed test would take into account the importance of preserving
existing close relationships of a proposed represented person.
This, along with
reform to the guiding principles of the Act to acknowledge the important role of
carers and others close to a represented
person, would promote the views of
carers being considered as part of deciding upon the suitability of a
representative.
The age of representatives
12.8.49 Carers Tasmania submitted that a person under the age of 18 years
should be able to be appointed as a guardian in exceptional
circumstances. In
proposing this reform, Carers Tasmania commented that there are occasions where
a child performs the role of primary
carer, for example, for their parent,
grandparent, or sibling. It was observed that they play a critical function in
supporting and
caring for the person, but experience situations where they feel
excluded from important decisions, and which naturally impact the
child as their
12.8.50 This issue was also raised in Part 4 dealing with the appointment of
enduring guardians.
PCT’s submission to a question in that part supported a child being
eligible to be appointed as an enduring guardian in exceptional
circumstances.
Members of the Elder Law Committee also commented that it is not unreasonable
for a person under the age of 18 years
to be an enduring guardian. The
Institute’s conclusion in responding to this issue in Part 3 was that a
person under the age
of 18 years be eligible for appointment as an enduring
guardian, but that their appointment not be effective (in other words, that
not be able to act) until they have attained the age of 18
The rationale for this
reform was to address circumstances where a donor might have declining abilities
and may not have the ability
to appoint an enduring guardian if they were to
await their preferred nominee reaching adulthood. This rationale does not apply
the present discussion where it is the Board that is appointing the
representative in circumstances where a represented person is
unable to do so
themselves. The Institute has not, on this basis, made recommendations for
reform in this area.
Recommendation 12.20
That the assessment of the eligibility of administrators and guardians under
the Act be revised as follows:
(a) to provide a single section in the Act setting out what factors the Board
must consider when assessing the suitability of proposed
representatives (both
administrators and guardians);
(b) to require the Board to be satisfied that the proposed representative
understands their obligations and duties and will act in
accordance with those
obligations and duties;
(c) to take into account ‘the views, wishes and preferences’ of
the proposed represented person, instead of ‘wishes’;
(d) instead of considering the importance of preserving ‘existing
family relationships’, the assessment be of ‘existing
relationships
that are important to the person’;
(e) instead of there being an assessment of the ‘sufficient
expertise’ of a proposed representative, the Board evaluate
whether the
proposed representative has the requisite skills or access to appropriate
support to competently perform the role; and
(f) that whether a representative be required obtain a Registration to Work
with Vulnerable Adults Check be considered as part of
future reform to the
Registration to Work with Vulnerable People Act 2013
Priority given to professional or private
administrators?
12.8.51 The Public Trustee has statutory advantage over private individuals
wishing to be an administrator as it does not need to
satisfy any test of
suitability or eligibility.
In 2016–2017, the Board appointed private administrators in 30 per cent of
administration orders made.
It appointed private guardians in 39 per cent of guardianship orders
12.8.52 The VLRC recommended that legislation state that a tribunal must
consider the desirability of appointing a representative
who has an existing
personal relationship with the proposed represented person, rather than a
professional representative.
Recent reforms proposed in Victoria have adopted this
recommendation.
They provide
that, in assessing a person’s suitability to be appointed as a
representative, the tribunal must consider ‘the
desirability of appointing
a person who is a relative of the proposed represented person, or who has a
personal relationship with
the proposed represented person, rather than
appointing a person with no such relationship.’
12.8.53 In New South Wales, the tribunal cannot appoint the Public Guardian
as guardian if some other person can be
provision exists in the Northern
In the ACT, where
the Public Trustee and Guardian is appointed as representative of last resort,
they must make endeavours to find
a suitable person to act as the representative
and if they do so, they must apply to the
The Issues Paper
commented that this approach may be beneficial in relation to the choice of
guardian due to the personal nature
of the role. On the other hand, there may be
reasons why in an individual case it might be inappropriate to appoint family or
and the Board should not be unduly constrained. It was asked whether
private representatives ought to be given any statutory priority
to professional
representatives.
Should the Act require the Board to give priority to family or close friends
representatives?
12.8.54 There were 14 responses to this question, with seven supporting the
Act stating that private representatives be given priority
over professional
representatives. The Public Trustee submitted:
All things being equal priority should be given to family. However, there
are, in Public Trustee’s view, a multitude of factors
bearing on an
appropriate determination to the appointment of a representative including but
not limited to the nature of the estate,
family dynamics, financial
circumstances et cetera.
12.8.55 The OPG made similar observations, stating that the Act should state
a priority for family members but that the Board should
not be overly
constrained particularly in situations of family conflict. Members of the Elder
Law Committee expressed a similar
as did other
respondents.
12.8.56 The Board submitted:
Discretion as who to appoint, when considering the criteria in the Act is
useful. For example, in applications involving complex family
dynamics, it is
sometime appropriate and indeed needed on the evidence to appoint an independent
administrator/guardian while on
other occasions, despite the family dynamics it
is appropriate on the evidence, to appoint a family member. The Board does not
any need to change the Act in this respect.
12.8.57 Other responses also noted that there are some circumstances where
private representatives may be inappropriate. Speak Out
submitted that each
situation is different and that some people it consulted with thought it was
better to have someone who knows
the represented person. Others commented that
they would prefer to have people other than families appointed as their
representative.
They submitted that there should be a choice.
12.8.58 The Institute considers that the draft Victorian approach provides an
appropriate balance between the need to promote private
representatives acting
as a representative where suitable, and the need for the Board to retain a level
of discretion. For the same
reasons as articulated earlier in this Part, a minor
revision is proposed, to remove reference to the desirability of a person having
a family relationship with the proposed represented person. Instead, it is
considered that the focus be upon personal relationships
that the proposed
represented person has, irrespective of whether those relationships are through
Recommendation 12.21
That when deciding upon who to appoint as a representative, the Board be
required to consider the desirability of appointing a person
who has a personal
relationship with the proposed represented person, rather than a person without
a personal relationship.
Ineligibility to be a
representative
12.8.59 There are no classes of individuals who are automatically prohibited
from acting as a representative. A person declared bankrupt,
or who has been
convicted of an offence of dishonesty or fraud may be appointed as an
administrator if they satisfy the Board that
they are ‘suitable.’
The ALRC supports there being no blanket prohibition on who can act as a
representative.
recommend that an applicant’s suitability is a matter for the relevant
tribunal in its
discretion.
12.8.60 Two submissions commented that a proposed represented person should
not have any relevant prior criminal convictions, for
example for fraud, theft
or violent crimes. Similar comments were made that the proposed represented
person not be bankrupt or a
discharged bankrupt.
12.8.61 The Institute agrees that these factors may be relevant to the
suitability of a proposed representative. Nevertheless, the
Institute agrees
with the ALRC’s recommendation that there not be a blanket prohibition and
instead, that this be a factor
that the Board considers and assesses at its
discretion on a case-by-case basis.
12.9.1 Respect for a person’s right to
Convention.
1. No person with disabilities, regardless of place of residence or living
arrangements, shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful
interference with his
or her privacy ... Persons with disabilities have the right to the protection of
the law against such interference
or attacks.
2. States Parties shall protect the privacy of personal, health and
rehabilitation information of persons with disabilities on an
equal basis with
12.9.2 Recommendation 8.3(2) proposes that one of the revised duties of
representatives be to respect a represented person’s
right to privacy.
Other aspects of preserving a person’s right to privacy are considered in
the following paragraphs.
Disclosing information to the
12.9.3 People who make a report or provide information to the Board or the
Public Guardian are not liable for doing so if they acted
in good faith and had
reasonable and probable grounds for believing the report or information to be
Medical practitioners
may divulge information about a person without their
A person who makes a
malicious or false report or information is guilty of an offence. A fine may be
12.9.4 There is no positive obligation imposed to report potential breaches
of the Act, or abuse or neglect by representatives. This
can be contrasted with
the approach taken under the
Children, Young Persons and their Families Act
(Tas) in relation to children where that Act creates a positive duty
for people to take steps to prevent abuse and
This includes
requiring mandatory reporting for certain
professionals.
Paper commented that imposing mandatory reporting requirements could assist to
prevent, better detect and respond to abuse
of represented people. On the other
hand, the reporting of abuse may be contrary to the wishes of a represented
person and infringes
their autonomy and freedom of choice. It was noted that the
Queensland Act includes whistle-blower protections that protect a person
civil and criminal liability if they disclose information about a person’s
conduct that breaches the
12.9.5 The Issues Paper asked whether there needs to be any changes to the
way in which information is provided to the Board.
Does there need to be any changes to:
· when and how information can be provided to the
12.9.6 There were eight submissions addressing this matter. Three submitted
that the existing provisions are appropriate. Both the
Board and Social Work
Services RHH proposed reforms to the relevant sections of the Act. The Board
[Section 11(11)] is an important provision of the Act regularly used by the
Board to obtain information it needs for hearing. In practice
Board’s Registrar who requests information or documentation prior to
hearing, and accordingly it would be appropriate
for this section to be amended
to read that. Section 11(11) of the Act could also be clarified to include
report, document or information.
It would also be useful for the group or entity
it relates to, to be widened to include financial institutions, and private
practitioners and for the term ‘service provider’ to be
defined perhaps by way of a non-exhaustive list. This section
could also be
clarified to indicate that information can be obtained by the Board at no cost
The Institute accepts these suggestions, proposing that, for the avoidance of
doubt, the term ‘document’ be defined in
accordance with the
Supreme Court Rules 2000
(Tas), which provides that:
includes the following:
(a) any book, map, plan, graph
or drawing;
(b) any photograph;
(c) any label, marking or
writing which identifies or describes anything of which it forms a part or to
which it is attached;
(d) any disk, tape, soundtrack,
film, negative or other device in which sounds, data or visual images are
embodied so as to be capable
of being reproduced, with or without the aid of
(e) anything on which is marked
a word, figure, letter or symbol which is capable of carrying a definite meaning
to a person conversant
12.9.7 In response to the Institute’s question, Social Work Services
RHH commented:
The collection, use and disclosure of information needs clear guidance in the
Any party collecting, using or disclosing information should consider the
This should also extend to any person asked to provide information for the
purposes of a Guardianship or Administration matter —
for example
families, interested parties and health professionals needs to be advised why
information is being collected, how it
will be used and why/when it would be
disclosed and to whom.
The Institute considers these matters as requiring education rather than
legislative reform.
12.9.8 Some attendees of a Carers Tasmania facilitated consultation session
expressed support for mandatory reporting of conduct amounting
to abuse or
maltreatment. This matter is considered later in this Part as part of a broader
strategy to respond to issues of abuse.
12.9.9 In responding to a separate question in the Issues Paper, dealing with
reform to the Public Guardian’s investigative
powers, MIGA submitted that,
if powers of investigation were extended to compel health practitioners to
provide information, then
there ought to be scope for non-compliance with a
request based on a reasonable excuse, including where provision of the
information
or document might tend to incriminate the person. This exception
applies in Queensland with the exception of witnesses answering
Practitioner Regulation National Law adopts an equivalent
It is appropriate
that the same approach apply under the Act.
Recommendation 12.22
That s 11(11) of the Act be revised as follows:
(a) to confirm that the powers in this section extend to the Registrar;
(b) to require provision of a document in addition to a report or
information, with ‘document’ being defined in accordance
Supreme Court Rules 2000
(c) to extend the group or entity this section relates to, to include health
practitioners and for the term ‘service provider’
to be better
articulated including providing examples;
(d) to provide that the cost of providing a document, report or information
is to be borne by the person, group or entity providing
the document, report or
information; and
(e) to require individuals to comply with a request for a document, report or
information unless the person has a reasonable excuse,
with a reasonable excuse
including that compliance with the request may tend to incriminate the
Disclosure of information that the Board
12.9.10 The Act provides that a person’s personal history or records
that the Board or Public Guardian obtain must not be disclosed
apart from at a
hearing or where it is the Board or Public Guardian’s opinion that
disclosure is in a represented person’s
best interests or disclosure has
been authorised.
Contravention is an offence with a fine or imprisonment, or both, able to be
Section 11(7)
provides that: ‘Evidence given before the Board is not to be used in any
civil or criminal proceedings other
than proceedings for an offence against this
Act or an offence committed at, or arising out of, a hearing before the
12.9.11 The Issues Paper asked whether there should be any changes in
relation to when and how information obtained about a person
Does there need to be any changes to:
· when and how information obtained by the Board or representatives is
12.9.12 There were six written submissions addressing this question.
indicated that there
was no need for reform. A fourth respondent asserted that there should be the
ability to subpoena evidence held
by the Board for the purpose of other
proceedings on the basis that ‘[p]arties need to get all the evidence and
there shouldn’t
be secret evidence.’ In addressing this matter, the
Board commented that:
the flexibility and discretion afforded to the Board and President in section
86 of the Act is appropriate. It is the practice of
the Board and President of
the Board to exercise the discretion provided in section 86 in a manner that
promotes the purposes and
proper functioning of the Act. The Board gives weight
to the fact that people freely disclose relevant information to the Board,
may be generally promoted by people feeling confident that the information they
give to the Board will be held confidentially.
The Board is also cautious of
being used as an alternative forum for obtaining discovery of documents for what
is effectively estate
litigation. In practice, the Board receives requests for
the release of financial, medical or other information in the nature of
‘discovery’ which is intended to be used in other court proceedings
and which is clearly not in the best interests of
the proposed represented
person or represented person to be released.
12.9.13 One submission endorsed revision to the wording of s 86(2) to confirm
that it is permissible to disclose information where
required or permitted under
another law.
12.9.14 Social Work Services RHH submitted that there should be amendment to
when and how information obtained by the Board may be
disclosed. It submitted:
A lot of sensitive information is given to the board which is then
disseminated to parties who may not require that level of information.
example social workers may be given extensive information on financial matters
prior to a hearing or some interested parties
may receive reports including
information from other parties.
The proposed represented person has a right to privacy and all information
should not be routinely disclosed. There should also be
scrutiny of
dissemination of information provided by someone (eg a close family member or
friend) to the board, where that information
could result in harm (eg where the
proposed represented person has been a perpetrator of abuse to the family member
giving supporting
information to the board, especially where there is a risk of
ongoing or increased abuse to that family member as a consequence of
information).
12.9.15 The relevant section provides the Board with discretion to release
information in circumstances other than the hearing setting
but does not limit
the circumstances in which the Board may release information during a hearing.
It is proposed that the Act enable
a person providing information to the Board
to apply for an order providing that the information not be disclosed to other
The relevant Victorian legislation, for example, provides that:
(1) A person may make an application to the principal registrar that any
documents lodged in relation to a proceeding under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2018
not be disclosed to a specified person or class of
(2) The principal registrar must determine an application under subclause (1)
fairly and according to the merits of the
application.
Recommendation 12.23
(a) That the Act enable a person to apply to the Board for an order that any
document, information or report lodged with the Board
not be disclosed to
specified person or class of persons.
(b) That s 86(2) of the Act be revised to provide that sub-s (1) ‘does
not prevent the disclosure of information as required
or permitted by any law
] if, in the case of information relating to the personal affairs of
another person, that other person has given consent in writing.’
Conduct of hearings
12.9.16 Hearings are open to the
A person with a
direct interest may request that the Board hold part or all of a hearing closed
to the public.
Enabling the
public to attend Board hearings provides transparency. On the other hand,
matters raised are often private and sensitive
in nature. The Issues Paper
queried whether, to maintain a person’s privacy, it may be appropriate to
hold hearings in private,
noting that proceedings are held in private in the
Northern Territory.
Does there need to be any changes to:
· whether hearings are conducted in public or in
12.9.17 Four submissions addressed this question. Three considered the
current provisions adequate. The Public Trustee considered
that hearings should
be held in private ‘to preserve confidentiality and give respect to the
represented person and family.’
The Board’s submission did not
address this question.
12.9.18 The Institute notes that a number of verbal submissions received
raised the importance of the Board’s conduct and proceedings
transparent in order to provide accountability. As the Act already provides the
Board with discretion to hold some or all of
a hearing closed to the public, and
that most submissions considered this approach adequate, the Institute has not
proposed reform
to this section.
12.9.19 The register of instruments is available for public search. The VLRC
recommended that only those people with a legitimate
interest be able to search
the register and that it be an offence to search the register without legitimate
The Institute
asked whether stakeholders considered there ought to be any changes to the
existing approach in Tasmania.
Does there need to be any changes to:
· who is able to search the register of
instruments?
12.9.20 There were six written submissions lodged in response to this
question. The Board and one other respondent supported the VLRC’s
of limiting those who can search the register of instruments to those with a
legitimate interest. Whilst the OPG did not
hold a strong view, it was inclined
to support limiting access to the register in this way. Another verbal
submission suggested that
access to the register should probably be limited.
Members of the Elder Law Committee, however, submitted that there is good reason
for public access but did not elaborate further.
12.9.21 Instruments often contain private and sensitive information. It is
important that donor’s privacy is respected and maintained.
Donors should
not be reluctant to make and register an instrument or fully convey their views,
wishes and preferences worried that
the information contained in their
instrument may be publicly accessible. Two matters must be appropriately
balanced: 1) the need
to protect individuals’ privacy; and 2) the need to
ensure that those that need to obtain a copy of an instrument are able
easily and quickly. This latter can be achieved without necessitating public
access. The former, however, cannot. It is
therefore proposed that the Act be
revised to provide that only those with a legitimate interest are entitled to
Recommendation 12.24
That only those with a legitimate interest be able to search the register(s)
of instruments and advance care directives and that it
be an offence to search
the register(s) without a legitimate interest.
Disclosure of a represented person’s
12.9.22 The Act gives certain entitlements to some representatives and the
Board to obtain copies of a represented person’s
There is presently
no consistency between these provisions.
12.9.23 Some submissions raised these parts of the Act as requiring reform.
In relation to the Board’s powers, the Board submitted:
Section 88 of the Act gives the Board the power to require the production of
a person’s Will but does not give the Board the
power to require a copy be
provided to it. To facilitate exercising the power in section 88(3) of the Act,
which applies where the
Board will open and read the Will for the purposes of a
hearing, the Board may exercise its general power under section 11(8) of
to direct the registrar to serve on any person a summons to appear before the
Board to produce a document (the Will) specified
in the summons.
In practice, the Board’s Registrar requests a copy of the
person’s Will, for the purpose of hearing. A copy of a Will
if received is
only disclosed to the Board for the purposes of the hearing. In some matters,
the Will is relevant evidence of a person’s
wishes. The Board notes it has
no power of delegation and so it would be beneficial for this section to be
amended to include the
Registrar of the Board and to require a copy of the
person’s Will to be produced and provided to the Board, when
12.9.24 The Elder Law Committee advised that its members held mixed views
to be entitled to
see a copy of a represented person’s Will. In addressing a question in
Part 15, it also proposed reform in
relation to the Board’s power to
request and view a copy of a person’s Will:
The Committee considers that it is appropriate for the Board to have the
power to make orders to deliver up testamentary documents
to the Board upon
notice to interested parties and after a hearing*. Access to testamentary
documents obtained by the Board should
only be granted to third parties by order
of the Board noting the potential for abuse and pressure to be placed on a
person around
testamentary intentions.
The Committee was undecided on the question whether administrators and
guardians should have the power to access wills without an
order of the
There is also concern about investigator’s powers to require production
of testamentary wills without an order of the Board.
This is a serious intrusion
on the private intents and wishes of a person. Requirements to produce should
not be a part of the initial
investigatory process.
*There is also concern about investigator’s powers to require
production of testamentary wills without an order of the Board.
serious intrusion on the private intents and wishes of a person. Requirements to
produce should not be a part of the initial
investigatory process.
12.9.25 Wills can contain information of a sensitive nature, including who is
named (or excluded) as a beneficiary. Typically, a person’s
Will is not
required to be disclosed to anyone prior to their death. An individual’s
right to privacy is a fundamental right
reinforced in the Convention
specifically in relation to people with disability. It is important that the Act
reflects and supports
this right, including in relation to access to a
represented person’s Will. It might not be consistent with a represented
wishes for the contents of their Will to be disclosed prior to
their death.
12.9.26 There might be occasions where a representative requires a copy of a
represented person’s Will as part of carrying out
their role. It might be
useful to reveal a represented person’s wishes, or those close to the
person who should be consulted
and who might have information relevant to a
represented person’s likely will and preferences. In the case of
administrators,
reading the Will might be important to understand the potential
implications of altering investments or selling assets. Whilst the
Act provides
‘anti-ademption’ provisions to deal with situations where the
actions of an administrator would otherwise
cause a specific gift in a Will to
appropriate that the preferred course of action be to ensure that administrators
have this information available if proposing
to change the nature of a
person’s assets. The terms of a person’s Will could also be useful
to identify a represented
person’s assets where unclear. It might also be
appropriate for a representative to see the contents of a represented
Will where they consider that there could be a need for a
statutory Will.
other hand, there are likely to be many situations where a represented
person’s Will is not required when considering
the exercise of a
representative’s powers.
12.9.27 It is the Institute’s view that the relevance of a represented
person’s Will to performance of a representative’s
assessment appropriate for the Board to make on a case-by-case basis. The
Institute therefore recommends that representatives
be able to apply to the
Board for approval to obtain a copy of a represented person’s Will. This
is already the position for
administrators
proposed that it be extended to Board-appointed guardians, and for the same
approach to apply to enduring guardians. This
approach appropriately balances
the need to preserve an individuals’ right to privacy whilst ensuring that
a representative
has the information that they require to best discharge their
role and duties.
Recommendation 12.25
(1) That s 88 of the Act be revised to confirm that the powers granted to the
Board may be exercised by the Registrar.
(2) That representatives only have a power to obtain, read and copy a
represented person’s Will with an order from the Board.
(3) That the Act define ‘Will’ to include a Will, alleged Will,
part of a Will, or a revoked Will or other testamentary
document, including
Other safeguarding options
12.10.1 Some jurisdictions have other legislative safeguards aimed at
advancing the interests of people subject to guardianship laws.
Criminal or
civil penalties for representatives
12.10.2 The Act does not create any specific penalties or offences for
representative who breach their duties, or who abuse, exploit
or neglects a
represented person. Ultimately, their actions may amount to a criminal offence
under other legislation.
12.10.3 In the Northern Territory, decision-makers who intentionally engage
in conduct that fails to comply with the duties of decision-makers,
or is not in
accordance with the guiding principles of their Act, and who are reckless in
relation to the adult, are guilty of an
A higher penalty
is imposed where the decision-maker does so with the intention of obtaining a
benefit for themselves or another
Offences are also
created for people who induce a decision-maker to contravene their duties or
other provisions of the
It is also an offence
in Victoria and the Northern Territory to purport to be a
representative.
12.10.4 The ALRC has stated that it does not support guardianship laws
duplicating offences that are set out in other
legislation.
however, supported guardianship legislation including civil penalties for
representatives who abuse, exploit or neglect
a represented
This may be
beneficial where a person is reluctant to pursue a matter more formally, for
example involving the police and the courts.
12.10.5 Currently, the Act only imposes penalties against individuals. In
Victoria, offences are created for bodies corporate and
officers of a body
corporate who breach the Act or fail to avoid an employee breaching the Act in
certain circumstances.
12.10.6 The Issues Paper asked whether there is utility in the Act containing
specific offences and penalties where representatives
breach the Act.
(i) Should the Act provide offences for representatives who breach the
(ii) If so, what consequences should be
12.10.7 Four submissions addressed this question, with two supporting the
creation of offences and two expressing concerns about this
alternative. The OPG
The OPG would certainly not like to see penalties applied to representatives
(enduring or Board-appointed) acting in good faith, and
is loath to implement
disincentives for people to undertake important roles in supporting and acting
for their close family members
and friends, often in very complex and difficult
circumstances.
Our view is that support, guidance and education should be the focus ... The
OPG would like the legislation to strengthen our role
in supporting, guiding and
educating private representatives. Together with stronger and broader powers for
investigation, this would
provide better safeguarding mechanisms.
There is work afoot, nationally, by the Working Group on Protecting the
Rights of Older Australians for the Council of Attorneys-General
with projects
being undertaken by AGAC. This work is looking at the development of a model law
for enduring appointments, as well
as approaches to education and support for
newly appointed private guardians and administrations, and approaches to
penalties for
failing to meet their obligations. The OPG would like to see the
results of this work before forming any firm view.
12.10.8 Members of the Elder Law Committee commented that the Criminal Code
appears to adequately deal with representatives who breach
the Act. The Public
Trustee on the other hand submitted that:
Yes there should be offences.
It goes without saying that the consequences need to be proportional to the
offence. For example, in cases of misappropriation there
should be an offence
under the Act that would facilitate institution of criminal charges. Offences
should also ground statutory remedies,
for example, breach of statutory
12.10.9 The Institute acknowledges the
OPG’s submission and agrees that this option be further considered
following separate
reviews being coordinated and conducted nationally following
the ALRC’s recommendations in its
Elder Abuse
Compensation
12.10.10 The ALRC proposed that Tribunals have the same powers as the
Supreme Court to award remedies where a represented person
suffers financial
loss because of the actions of
representatives.
explained its rationale as follows:
In many instances of financial abuse (or abuse by a guardian which causes
loss), there are limited options for an older person to
seek redress, and few
consequences for the representative who has misused their power. An abused
person may want their money or assets
returned, but may not want police
involvement, preferring to retain relationships and not see the person
prosecuted. They also may
not be willing or able to afford to commence a civil
action in the Supreme
12.10.11 The ALRC suggested that enabling tribunals to deal with these
matters would be a practical way to redress loss and enable
a just, quick and
economical resolution in a more flexible and informal
environment.
recommendation was supported by a number of
stakeholders.
compensation.
submissions to this review endorsed this as a potential option for reform. EOT,
for example, submitted:
We are also supportive of the introduction of appropriate mechanisms for
providing redress in circumstances where substitute decision
makers have misused
or abused their powers, noting that this issue will need to be considered as
part of the establishment of a single
Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
12.10.12 The Institute endorses the ALRC’s reasoning and agrees with
EOT that this option be further developed upon the creation
of the Tasmanian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
Recommendation 12.26
That providing the Board with the ability to award remedies where a
represented person suffers financial loss because of the actions
representative be considered as part of instituting the Tasmanian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
Undertakings
12.10.13 Representatives are not required to give any undertaking that they
will uphold their duties and act within their powers.
It is the practice of the
Board to have administrators sign an acknowledgment to acknowledge their
understanding and acceptance of
key aspects of their
12.10.14 To signify the seriousness of the role of a representative, it has
been recommended that board-appointed representatives
should need to give an
undertaking that they will fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities.
required in the Irish
recommends, however, that sanctions not be imposed where a representative fails
to comply with an
undertaking.
12.10.15 In its submission, the OPG commented:
Whilst the legislation does not require it, the Board’s processes when
appointing a private guardian or administrator include
providing the new
appointee a copy of the relevant handbook (see 7.16) and asking that they sign
an acknowledgement that their duties
and obligations have been explained. We
believe this is good practice and would not oppose the legislation requiring the
representative
to give such an undertaking.
12.10.16 Recommendation 4.10 of this Report proposes that enduring guardians
be required to undertake that they will act in accordance
with the Act and that
they have read and understood any advance care directive of the donor.
Consistent with this recommendation,
it is proposed that the current practice of
the Board be enshrined within the legislation, requiring representatives to
acknowledge
certain matters and undertake to do certain things upon their
appointment.
Recommendation 12.27
That upon appointment, Board-appointed representatives be required to declare
• understand their obligations;
• understand the consequences of failing to comply with their
obligations; and
• undertake to act in accordance with the Act.
suggestions
12.11.1 As a concluding question for this Part, the Issues Paper asked for
any other suggestions to improve the safeguarding provisions
of the Act.
How else could the Act be improved in relation to safeguards for
representative
decision-making?
12.11.2 Most suggestions have been captured elsewhere in this Report. The
following four suggestions are not addressed elsewhere and
are thus considered
in the following paragraphs.
Capacity assessments to register
instruments
12.11.3 COTA submitted that ‘there should be independent professional
evaluation of an individual’s capacity to enact/activate
an enduring
guardianship before it is registered.’ The Institute understands this
suggestion to relate to the need to be satisfied
that a donor had the necessary
decision-making ability to make the instrument, to safeguard against the risk of
abuse or undue influence.
This matter is similar to discussion in Part 4 in
relation to whether a professional witness should be required to witness a donor
execute an instrument.
12.11.4 Recommendation 12.5 proposes that the Board be given power to review
an instrument of its own motion. The Board’s submission
commented that
this would address circumstances where it has some evidence that a donor may not
have had the decision-making ability
to make an instrument. As discussed in Part
4, the Institute has not made recommendations proposing that there be a mandated
requirement
that one of the witnesses to an instrument be a professional, for
example, a medical practitioner or lawyer. This was explained for
reasons, including that it would impose a barrier to a person expressing their
views, wishes and preference, and that involvement
of a professional witness may
not reduce circumstances where donors create instruments without the necessary
decision-making ability
to do so. For the same reasons, the Institute has not
made recommendations proposing that there be an independent professional
of a donor’s capacity to make an instrument before it can be
registered.
Clarifying the Board’s powers to give
12.11.5 Members of the Elder Law Committee submitted in response to this
question that ‘there should be greater clarification
around the role of
the Board in providing advice.’ It is considered that this issue may be
best addressed through education
rather than legislative reform. Part 18 of this
Report makes recommendations about the need for education about the Act and
Recommendation
18.1 proposes roll-out of an education campaign, including for
representatives, about the operation of the Act.
Monitoring of administrators
12.11.6 The OPG commented that:
Consideration should be given to the Board requiring an administrator (and
potentially an attorney operating under an enduring power)
to be supervised or
monitored by either The Public Trustee or another professional trustee should it
be considered necessary. In
such consideration, the Board should take into
account such matters as: the size and complexity of the represented
property; whether there are other measures to protect the
represented person; and potential conflict between represented person and
representative.
In some instances where supervision is deemed necessary, it may be
appropriate for the representative to seek authorisation with respect
specified financial decisions.
12.11.7 As this was the only submission raising this alternative, the
Institute has not made recommendations for reform but would
not object to a
reform to this effect.
Responding to elder abuse
12.11.8 The Board made a number of observations about the existence of elder
abuse in the community and the need for legislation to
effectively respond to
this emerging issue:
Elder abuse has become an issue of increasing concern across the nation.
Legislation has generally not kept pace in dealing adequately
with what often
constitutes criminal behaviour in relation to the vulnerable aged. The Board has
experienced an increase in applications
for review of both enduring guardians,
but particularly enduring power of attorneys because of concern about
questionable or potentially
criminal behaviour by attorneys against the donor,
often an elderly relative. The following is a recent example of an application
to review an enduring power of attorney before the Board:
An attorney, who was the daughter of the donor, acting under an operative
enduring power of attorney, took a sum of money from her
mother’s bank
account and divided it between herself and her sibling. Whilst the donor
confirmed that this was in accordance
with her wishes, at the time of the
withdrawal she did not have capacity to make this decision. The attorney failed
to understand
that this was unlawful — because her mother agreed to it and
the siblings would ultimately inherit the estate — and neither
nor the attorney considered the Centrelink implications of the transaction which
were significant and contrary to the donor’s
best interests. It left the
donor without any savings.
Attorneys commonly do not appreciate that their behaviour may amount to a
crime. The fact that there have been very few prosecutions
in Australia for
elder abuse points to the difficultly of applying the criminal law to this
pattern of behaviour. Legislation governing
the scope of authority of decision
makers under such instruments might better safeguard the interests of the
vulnerable by clearly
naming and defining elder abuse, stipulating types of
proscribed behaviour by appointees and imposing adequate penalties for
12.11.9 The issue of elder abuse was considered at a recent Symposium on
Elder Abuse and Neglect convened by a partnership of COTA,
EOT, the University
of Tasmania and the
Recommendations
made by over 60 stakeholders who attended the symposium included the following
legislative options to tackle the
issue of elder abuse:
• introduction of a Tasmanian Charter of Human Rights, to embed a human
rights culture within the
The Institute
has previously also made recommendations proposing introduction of a Tasmanian
Charter of Human Rights;
• adoption of adult safeguarding legislation, providing adult
safeguarding agencies power to safeguard and support at risk
This is consistent
with the recommendations of the
12.11.10 The issue of elder abuse has recently been the subject of enquiry by
Coroner McTaggart where she commented that:
Elder abuse is recognised worldwide as a serious human rights violation
requiring urgent action. It is also a major public health
problem that results
in serious health consequences for the victims, including increased risk of
morbidity, mortality, institutionalisation
and hospital admission. It has a
negative effect on families and society at
Coroner McTaggart went on to state that:
It would appear that there may well be a lack of monitoring of older persons
being cared for in the community. Whilst there are considerations
of autonomy
and freedom of choice, effective measures for the protection of older persons
from abuse are
Coroner McTaggart recommended that the State Government review legislation to
determine whether current components of legislation
effectively and efficiently
prevent or respond to abuse, neglect or exploitation of older persons and
implement legislative reform
12.11.11 The recent report into the review of the
Disability Services
also raised the issue of mandatory reporting of abuse against adults
with disability.
report summarises the issue raised by stakeholders as:
• Reporting of abuse is not mandated for people with disability
• Current national developments that support the reporting of abuse
include national worker screening, a national complaints
process and the
National Abuse and Neglect
The report concludes that:
• This will largely be addressed by national worker screening that is
currently being
implemented
12.11.12 These, and other approaches may form part of a comprehensive
strategy to respond to elder abuse in Tasmania and the Institute
endorses these,
alternatives,
being further and separately investigated. The Institute recommends that the
merits of introducing adult safeguarding legislation
for ‘at risk’
be the subject of
separate review.
Recommendation 12.28
That the merits of introducing adult safeguarding legislation in Tasmania be
Consent to Health Care and
Introduction
13.1.1 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to review the provisions of
the Act dealing with consent to medical and dental treatment,
and specifically,
how to address long term or indefinite medical treatment in institutional and
non-institutional settings.
13.1.2 Article 25 of the Convention confirms the rights of people with
disability to have access to health services on an equal basis
This Part explains
the current provisions of the Act dealing with consent to treatment and
recommends reform to ensure that the Act
is appropriate in light of developments
in policy, law and practice, and that the provisions are sustainable and
responsive to the
needs of Tasmanians.
Preliminary
Where should these laws be
13.2.1 The Act sets out how substitute consent to medical treatment is
provided. In some jurisdictions, consent to medical treatment
is dealt with in
separate Acts to guardianship
The Issues Paper
commented that separate legislation may assist to provide a single, accessible
method to locate statutory provisions
dealing with consent to
On the other
hand, there may be overlap between a person’s need for decision-making
support in relation to medical treatment,
personal matters and financial
matters, and this may support retention of these provisions within a single
13.2.2 The Institute asked for views about whether there is any utility to
separating those parts of the Act dealing with consent
to medical and dental
treatment into stand-alone legislation.
Should provisions relating to consent to medical and dental treatment be
included in the Act, or separate
legislation?
13.2.3 There were seven responses to this question with five supporting these
provisions remaining in the Act and two expressing that
they held no view.
Reasons given for retaining these provisions within the Act included:
• that the needs of people without decision-making ability requiring
medical treatment may also require decisions about personal
and financial
• that separate legislation would likely make the law more
‘unwieldy’ and
• that there is no case for separate
legislation.
13.2.4 Consistent with submissions received, the Institute has not made
recommendations proposing that Tasmania have separate legislation
dealing with
substitute consent to health care and treatment.
Who should these provisions apply to?
13.2.5 The Act deals with consent to medical and dental treatment for:
• children and adults; and
• all people, regardless of whether they have a representative
13.2.6 The result is a dual jurisdiction between
the Family Court and the Board to deal with consent to treatment for children
disability unable to provide their own
The Act does not,
however, make this explicit. The
Mental Health Act
, on the other hand,
confirms that that Act does not affect the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and
Family Court to give or refuse
13.2.7 The Board’s annual reports reveal the small number of
applications made to the Board for consent to treatment more generally,
number of applications in recent years being 11 (2011–2012), four
(2012–2013), one (2013–2014), one (2014–2015),
(2015–2016), and three
(2016–2017).
Board commented that applications relating to consent to treatment for children
are uncommon, stating that:
While the Board has expertise in the disability sphere, applications
regarding children are very uncommon. This may suggest that the
Family Court is
the forum that is being more regularly used for applications regarding medical
treatment for children with decision
making disability.
13.2.8 The Interim Children’s Commissioner also raised this matter in
his submission, commenting:
There are few reported decisions of the Guardianship and Administration Board
(‘the Board’) concerning consent to medical
treatment relating to
children. In the most recent of such reported cases,
NC (Medical Consent)
[2014] TASGAB 15
(21 July 2014), the Board clearly contemplates dual
with that of the Family
Section 38 of the Act provides that a person must not carry out medical or
dental treatment on a person to whom Part 6 applies unless
consent has been
given in accordance with that Part, or is otherwise authorised by it.
Significant penalties apply to persons who
carry out treatment in contravention
The above prompts me to query whether treatment authorised by the Family
Court for a child with a disability who lacks capacity would
nevertheless be
prohibited in Tasmania in the absence of authorisation under Part 6 of the Act.
I note, for example, the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) confirms its
provisions do not limit the jurisdiction of the Family Court or the Supreme
Court to give or refuse treatment.
I raise this as a potential issue, which may benefit from consideration, and
potentially clarification, by the Solicitor General and/or
others with relevant
legal expertise ...
The Interim Commissioner went on to comment that:
it is not entirely clear to me whether a child with a disability is brought
within the purview of Part 6 of the Act because they lack
capacity solely due to
their disability; or because of their immaturity by virtue of age and/or stage
of development (ie they lack
‘Gillick competence’) or both. It would
appear this would benefit from clarification.
If there are no changes to the G&A Act’s legislative framework
governing medical treatment (including special treatment)
for children with a
disability who lack capacity to provide informed consent, there is, as indicated
earlier in this submission,
a need for expert legal consideration of the
appropriateness of incorporating a section similar to
section 219
Mental Health Act 2013
noting section 38 of the G&A Act.
13.2.9 These submissions highlight that, if the Act continues to apply to
children with disability, there is a need for legislative
clarity around the
respective roles of the Family Court, Supreme Court and the Board.
13.2.10 In some jurisdictions, guardianship laws dealing with substitute
consent to medical treatment only cover adults, with the
Family Court having
This aligns with
the jurisdiction of the Family Court to make orders in relation to the welfare
of children.
Paper asked whether the Act should continue to deal with consent to treatment of
Should the Act deal with consent to medical treatment for
13.2.11 There were six submissions addressing this question, with three
supporting the Act continuing to apply to children with disability,
expressing no concluded position, and the Board suggesting that the Act should
probably not deal with consent to treatment for
children with disability.
13.2.12 The Board submitted:
Consistency and equity in the consent process for the treatment of children
might be better achieved through the federal jurisdiction
of the Family Court
rather than under the various state legislative systems — especially as
contradictory orders from different
The Family Court is experienced in dealing with children’s matters
generally, and
dealing with conflicting views of parties appearing before it.
The Family Court also has the ability to appoint an independent children’s
lawyer (ICL), who is a legal practitioner of 5 years post admission experience,
successfully completed the ICL training course, has
experience in conducting
defended hearings in the family court or federal circuit court and can play an
important role in providing
independent evidence to the Court ...
13.2.13 Whilst the Interim Children’s Commissioner did not express a
concluded view,
the following comments:
adoption of an ‘impaired decision-making capacity test’ would, in
my opinion, raise clear questions around the need for
and appropriateness of
including in the G&A Act any provisions describing substitute
decision-making for medical treatment for
children. This is particularly so when
one acknowledges that issues related to parental responsibility for children are
defined and
dealt with in the family law jurisdiction ...
consideration of the G&A Act provisions around consent to medical
treatment for children could more easily and appropriately occur
in the context
of debate around whether Tasmania should move to enacting separate legislation
for consent to medical treatment generally.
This would also provide an
opportunity to consider consent to treatments beyond the normal authority of a
parent or person with parental
responsibility – such as sterilisation
which is in a child’s best interests. In this respect, I note there exists
the family law jurisdiction well-established jurisprudence around
treatment decisions considered to be outside of the usual bounds
of parental
authority including, but not limited to, sterilisation. I am not entirely sure
that the G&A Act provides the appropriate
context for consideration of
issues such as this in relation to children ...
Even if the G&A Act continues to be based on a substitute decision-making
framework for which disability is a pre-condition, I
have reservations around
the appropriateness of continuing to include provisions describing parental
responsibility regards medical
treatment for children with a disability and who
do not have capacity to consent. This is particularly so when one considers
7 of the CRPD and its focus on equality before the law.
13.2.14 Both the Board and the Interim Children’s Commissioner observed
the differing outcomes that can result applying the
Act and the jurisprudence of
the Family Court in the context of substitute consent to treatment for gender
dysphoria. The Interim
Children’s Commissioner, for example, explained:
It is useful to recall that anyone under the age of 18 years is regarded as a
‘child’ for the purposes of the
Family Law Act 1975
Section 61C
Family Law Act
provides that subject to any order of
the Court, each of the parents of a child who has not turned 18 years of age has
responsibility’ for that child; an aspect of parental
responsibility is the right and obligation to make decisions around medical
dental treatment for a child.
However, some decisions around medical treatment for children are considered
to be beyond the normal authority of a parent or person
with parental
responsibility – and as such they require authorisation of the Family
Court. For example, Court authorisation
is required for surgery on a child which
will result in sterilisation and which is not for the purpose of preserving life
or treating
and preventing grave physical illness.
I note the recent decision of the Full Court of the Family Court in
regarding potential sterilisation arising from Stage 2 treatment for
gender dysphoria. The Full Court concluded that Stage 2 treatment
people with gender dysphoria ‘can no longer be considered a medical
procedure for which consent lies outside the
bounds of parental authority and
requires the imprimatur of the Court.’ The decision in
is consistent with a recommendation of the UN Human Rights Committee that
‘[c]onsider ways to expedite access to stage two hormone treatment for
gender dysphoria, including by removing the need for
court authorisation in
cases featuring uncontested agreement among parents or guardians, the child
concerned and the medical team,
provided that the treatment is provided in
accordance with the relevant medical guidelines and standards of
As is noted in the Paper at paragraph 10.8.26, Stage 2 treatment for gender
dysphoria is likely to fall within the class of special
treatment that currently
requires consent from the Board. This is because it amounts to treatment that is
reasonably likely to render
a person permanently infertile. I raise this simply
to demonstrate the potential for inconsistent overlap between the State and
13.2.15 The Interim Commissioner’s submission referred to the decision
of the Board in
The Board in that decision stated:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
was enacted after the
High Court delivered its judgment in
Secretary, Department of Health and
Community Services v. J.W.B.
Marion’s Case
[1992] HCA 15
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218.
The Court was
unanimous in that decision to the extent that:
‘the authority of parents does not, in the absence of special statutory
provisions, extend to authorizing surgery involving
the sterilization of a
profoundly intellectually disabled child for other than the conventional medical
purposes of preserving life
and treating and preventing grave physical
5. The legislature, in enacting this Act, were clearly responding to the
terms of the High Court’s decision and extended the
authority to consent
to a sterilisation procedure upon a child with a disability to the Guardianship
and Administration Board, such
that the Board holds dual jurisdiction to give
such consent with the Family Court of Australia.
6. Whereas the High Court decision allowed parents the authority to consent
to sterilisation for ‘conventional medical purposes
of ... treating and
preventing grave physical illness,’ the legislature removed that authority
in the enactment of Part 6 because
the operation of that Part does not make an
exception to section 38 or the definition in section 3 where the procedure is
for the treatment of ‘grave physical illness.’ The High
Court hesitated to use the terms ‘therapeutic’ and
‘non-therapeutic’ sterilisations
http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/tas/TASGAB/2014/15.html
because of the uncertainty and the lack of a clear ‘dividing line’
between those two concepts. It is possible that, for
the same reasons, the
legislature determined that application of a universal rule was preferable to
attempting to delineate what
was ‘therapeutic’ and
‘non-therapeutic’ in this respect.
13.2.16 The Institute also notes the decision of the High Court in
where the High Court
held that state guardianship legislation only applies to the extent that it is
not inconsistent with the
Family Law Act
13.2.17 This Report has recommended that the Act no longer require the
existence of a disability as a pre-condition to the operation
of the Act, and
that it instead apply to people who do not have the ‘decision-making
ability’ to make a decision about
a particular
In the absence of
legislative clarity, one implication of this approach could be to extend
operation of the Act to a child without
competence to consent to
anything further, this would have the potential to interfere with the
this situation could
• to maintain the status quo, with the Act continuing to apply only to
children with disability without the decision-making
ability to consent to
treatment. The effect would be continuation of the dual jurisdiction between the
Family Court and the Board
in relation to children with disability; or
• to remove the Board’s jurisdiction in relation to consent to
treatment for children with disability.
13.2.18 The first alternative results in children with disability being
treated differently to children without disability. As discussed
in Parts 2 and
6, the Convention requires non-discrimination on the basis of disability. For
the same reasons as articulated in Part
6, the Institute considers that, to
uphold the rights of children with disability, the Act should not contain laws
applying only
to children with disability. The focus should instead be upon an
assessment of whether an individual child has the decision-making
give their own consent to treatment. If they do not, then it should be
immaterial how that inability to consent arises
— whether because of
disability or because of age or maturity. To have the Act continue apply solely
to children with disability
would seem to be inconsistent with the reasoning
supporting Recommendation 6.1.
13.2.19 As the Board and the Interim Children’s Commissioner’s
submissions noted, the approach to substitute consent for
treatment for gender
dysphoria would now seem to differ between the Act and the jurisprudence of the
Family Court following the recent
decision of the Full Court of the Family Court
in the case of
involved the giving of consent to Stage 2 treatment for gender dysphoria for a
17 year old child. ‘Stage 2’
treatment describes the administration
of hormones to encourage the development of physical characteristics for
individuals with
a biological sex that does not align with their gender
identity. Effects of this treatment can be irreversible and include the
for long-term infertility. Under the Act, any treatment having the
effect of rending a person infertile is classified as ‘special
treatment’, requiring the Board’s consent.
13.2.20 The Full Court of the Family Court decided in
unless there is controversy or disagreement amongst medical professionals or
parents, substitute consent to Stage 2 treatment
can be given by a parent. It
concluded that ‘[t]he treatment can no longer be considered a medical
procedure for which consent
lies outside the bounds of parental authority and
requires the imprimatur of the
included the fact that gender dysphoria is a recognised mental disorder, and
there are risks associated with not treating
the medical
The treatment
was therefore considered to be therapeutic in nature.
13.2.21 The result would seem to be that a parent of a
with gender
without a disability
can give substitute consent to Stage 2
treatment. Conversely, applying the Act, a parent of a
does not, as the Act provides that consent needs to be obtained
in accordance with Part 6.
Under Part 6, only the Board could provide substitute consent to the treatment,
as it falls within the definition of ‘special
treatment’. The
Institute notes the High Court decision of
(referred to above)
which confirms that, applying
Constitution
, state legislation only
applies to the extent that it is not inconsistent with the
, being federal legislation. These are complex issues that require
further detailed consideration and the Institute’s observations
Report are preliminary only. The purpose of this discussion is to instead
demonstrate the complexities that arise when assessing
whether the Act should
continue to retain provisions governing consent to treatment for children with
disability.
13.2.22 One alternative to resolve the situation arising as a consequence of
the decision in
could be to revise the definition of
‘special treatment’ so that Stage 2 treatment for gender dysphoria
was excluded.
The Act could either:
• provide that treatments rendering a person infertile are only
‘special treatments’ requiring the consent of the
Board where they
are non-therapeutic. A difficulty of this approach is that it might sometimes be
difficult to distinguish between
treatment that is therapeutic and that which is
non-therapeutic;
• specifically excluding treatment for gender dysphoria from the
definition of ‘special treatments’.
13.2.23 An issue with either approach is that it does not provide a
long-lasting solution. As demonstrated by the change of position
between the
Full Court of the Family Court in
in 2013, and its
decision in
four years later, the view of the Family Court
evolves in line with advancements in medical knowledge and treatments and
community expectations. In explaining its approach, the Full Court
commented in
that ‘judicial understanding of Gender
Dysphoria and its treatment have fallen behind the advances in medical
Act to reflect the Family Court’s approach in relation to consent to
treatment for children, there would need to be
a process to consider and, if
appropriate, revise the Act to ensure consistency. A more reliable and effective
approach would seem
to be to be to provide the Family Court with exclusive
13.2.24 A further alternative could be for the Act to confirm that it does
not override the jurisdiction of the Family Court in relation
to children. The
question is whether there is then a need for provisions within the Act. As the
Board also commented, the Family
Court is a specialist jurisdiction in relation
to matters involving children. It has the ability to appoint an independent
lawyer to represent the views and interests of a child. Having
a single source of law to deal with the substitute consent to treatment
children would seem to provide clarity.
13.2.25 The Institute is unable to reach a conclusion about these matters,
noting that the preceding paragraphs demonstrate the range
and complexity of
issues to be resolved. The Institute’s Terms of Reference did not seek
specific advice about this question,
and thus the Institute has not made
recommendations as part of this Report. It is recommended that this is a matter
for separate
review and consideration.
13.2.26 If the Act continues to apply to the giving of substitute consent to
treatment for children with disability, then the Institute
proposes reform to
the wording of the Act to make clear the effect of valid consent having been
obtained via the Family Court or
Supreme Court. As observed previously, the
current wording creates confusion about whether consent that is validly obtained
Family Law Act
adequately satisfies the test for consent under
Recommendation 13.1
(1) That whether the Act should govern consent to health care and treatment
for children be the subject of separate review.
(2) That, if the Act continues to apply to the giving of substitute consent
to health care and treatment for children with disability:
(a) the Act contain a similar section to
Mental Health
(Tas), confirming that the Act does not affect the
health care and treatment; and
(b) confirming the effect of valid consent or refusal to consent under the
Court upon the operation
of the Act.
13.2.27 The Institute also asked whether stakeholders considered that the Act
should have any different provisions or considerations
for matters involving
children, if it continued to apply to children.
Should any different provisions apply to matters involving consent to
treatment for
13.2.28 One response stated that there probably should not be different
provisions in relation to consent to treatment for children.
expressing a view that there should be special considerations commented:
• that the views and opinions of parents should be ‘given
credence’; and
• that children ‘should be able to express their own wishes for
themselves if they are of an age to understand all the
circumstances around the
decision-making — eg refusing to undergo further active treatment in
terminal conditions.’ The
Institute understands this submission to confirm
the position at common law in relation to children with
competence.
13.2.29 Other responses did not indicate any firm view, although the Interim
Children’s Commissioner made the following observations:
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
CRPD’) recognises that children with disabilities should have full
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms on an equal basis with
other children and recalls the obligations of state parties under the CRC.[3]
While children with disabilities enjoy all of the rights set out in the CRPD,
Article 7 is of specific relevance for children. It
provides that:
1 States Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the full
enjoyment by children with disabilities of all human rights
and fundamental
freedoms on an equal basis with other children.
2. In all actions concerning children with disabilities, the best interests
of the child shall be a primary consideration.
3. States Parties shall ensure that children with disabilities have the
right to express their views freely on all matters affecting
them, their views
being given due weight in accordance with their age and maturity, on an equal
basis with other children, and to
be provided with disability and
age-appropriate assistance to realize that right.
13.2.30 The Interim Children’s Commissioner also made submissions into
the recent review of the
Disability Services Act
, commenting that the
guiding principles of that legislation need to be revised in order to comply
with the Convention. He submitted
that this could be achieved through alignment
with s 5 of the
as it ‘imposes a duty on child
representatives to ascertain the wishes of a child and recognises that their
ability to undertake
acts and make decisions increases as they develop.’
The report recommends that the
Disability Services Act
adopts the guiding
principles of the
to address this
13.2.31 The
Children Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
provides an overriding principle that it is the best interests of a child that
must be the paramount
consideration.
principle applies under the
13.2.32 This Report proposes reform to the guiding principles of the Act to
focus upon a person’s will, preferences and
If the Act were to
continue to apply to children insofar as consent to treatment is concerned, then
the Act needs to provide separate
guiding principles for decisions involving
children, providing for the best interests of the child as being the paramount
consideration.
Recommendation
That, if the Act continues to apply to children with disability, it provide
that the best interests of the child must be the paramount
consideration in
relation to any exercise of function or power under the Act.
When does Part 6 of the Act
13.2.33 Part 6 of the Act applies
a person with a disability
who is incapable of giving consent to the carrying out of medical or dental
treatment, whether or not
the person is a represented
It provides that a
person is incapable of giving consent to the carrying out of treatment if the
• is incapable
of understanding the general nature and effect of the proposed treatment; or
• is incapable of indicating whether or
not he or she consents or does not consent to the carrying out of the
13.2.34 This Report proposes a revised definition of ‘decision-making
ability’, consistent with the test of ‘decision-making
capacity’ in the
Mental Health
formulated would not require it to be established that a person has a
disability. It is proposed that the Act provide a
single test of decision-making
ability applying to all decisions — including personal, financial and
medical decisions.
13.2.35 Noting that the Act may continue to have application to children in
relation to consent to health care and treatment, the
Institute proposes that
the definition of decision-making ability articulate what this means in the
context of children. The
Mental Health Act
approach is endorsed, which
provides as follows:
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a child is taken to have the capacity to
make a decision about his or her own assessment or treatment
(decision-making
capacity) only if a person or body considering that capacity under this Act is
satisfied that –
(a) the child is sufficiently mature to make the decision; and
(b) notwithstanding any impairment of, or disturbance in, the functioning of
the child’s mind or brain, the child is able to
(i) understand information relevant to the decision; and
(ii) retain information relevant to the decision; and
(iii) use or weigh information relevant to the decision; and
(iv) communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other
This reverses the approach in relation to assessing an adult’s
decision-making ability, where the construction creates a presumption
adult has decision-making ability unless established otherwise.
Recommendation 13.3
(1) That Part 6 of the Act apply to any person who does not have
decision-making ability to give consent to the carrying out of health
treatment, whether or not they are a represented person.
(2) That, if the Act continues to apply to children with disability, the test
of decision-making ability provide that a child is taken
to have the ability to
make a decision about his or her own health care and treatment
(‘decision-making ability’) only
if a person or body considering
that ability under this Act is satisfied that:
(a) the child is sufficiently mature to make the decision; and
(b) the child is able to:
(i) understand information relevant to the decision; and
(ii) retain information relevant to the decision; and
(iii) use or weigh information relevant to the decision; and
(iv) communicate the decision (whether by speech, gesture or other
What ‘medical treatment’ should
Part 6 cover?
13.2.36 The Act defines medical treatment to mean treatment including any
medical or surgical procedure, operation or examination
and any prophylactic,
palliative or rehabilitative care that is normally carried out by, or under, the
supervision of a medical
practitioner.
Paper commented that this definition does not fit neatly with broader health
care that other health professionals provide,
for example, nurses, midwives,
pharmacists, optometrists and chiropractors. It also does not align well with
health care that is
not strictly ‘treatment’ but may be recommended
to treat a patient’s medical condition or health and wellbeing.
13.2.37 This restricted definition of ‘medical treatment’ impacts
upon the application of Part 6 of the Act. ‘Treatment’
decisions are
dealt with under Part 6 without necessarily requiring the formal appointment of
a guardian. Broader ‘health care’
decisions may, however, require a
guardian if they do not clearly fit within the existing definition of
‘treatment’.
The result can be a more formal approach to substitute
decision-making for ‘health care’ than ‘treatment’.
13.2.38 The Issues Paper asked whether and if so how the definition of
‘medical treatment’ should be revised.
How should ‘medical and dental treatment’ be defined, or should a
different term be
13.2.39 Answers to this question were considered in Part 9. The conclusion
reached in that part was that the current terms ‘medical
and ‘health care’ be replaced with the single term ‘health
care and treatment’.
It is proposed that this term be defined consistently with the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law. It also recommends that
the Act confirm
that the assessment and treatment of mental illness be excluded from the
definition of ‘health care and treatment’
as this is dealt with
Mental Health Act
13.2.40 The effect of this approach is to have the same regime applying to
decisions relating to treatment and health care. This gives
persons responsible
and guardians equivalent powers in relation to health care and treatment
decisions and avoids unnecessary, inappropriate
and unhelpful inconsistencies
between approaches.
where consent is not needed
13.3.1 Under the Act, certain procedures can be performed without
where the treatment is minor, where the
circumstances are urgent, and, in certain circumstances, where there is no
person responsible
able to consent.
13.3.2 The Issues Paper asked when consent to treatment should not be
When should consent to treatment not be
13.3.3 Six submissions addressed this question. All referred to either or
both the ability to provide treatment without consent in
an emergency, or where
the treatment is minor in nature, consistent with current permitted exceptions
included in the Act. These
existing provisions are considered below.
Urgent treatment
13.3.4 Consent to treatment is not required where it is considered necessary
as a matter of urgency.
The treatment must be:
• to save a person’s life;
• to prevent serious damage to the person’s health; or
• except in the case of special
to prevent the
person from suffering or continuing to suffer from significant pain or distress.
13.3.5 The Issues Paper identified some variations between the provisions of
the Act and other jurisdictions in relation to performing
treatment without
consent. These include:
• in Victoria, where urgent special treatment can be administered to
prevent the person suffering pain and
• in Queensland and Western Australia, where
to perform urgent treatment in these circumstances,
it must also not be reasonably practicable to obtain consent from the person
responsible;
• in South Australia, where treating medical practitioners must first
make reasonable inquiries to ascertain whether the patient
has an advance care
13.3.6 Four submissions referred to and endorsed treatment being able to be
given without consent in cases of an emergency. The Issues
Paper asked what
treatments ought to be able to be performed in an emergency without consent.
What treatment should be able to be given without consent in an urgent
13.3.7 Both MIGA and the OPG endorsed the current sections of the Act
governing urgent treatment. Both, however, supported legislative
clarify the effect of a valid ACD applying to the situation at hand. MIGA, for
example, commented that ‘[i]t is important
to clarify that treatment
cannot be provided without consent if there is known to be a valid ACD in place
which applies to the situation
13.3.8 Legislative provisions confirming the effect of ACDs were discussed in
Part 5. Recommendation 5.6 proposes that the Act confirm
that a direction to
refuse treatment in a valid ACD is binding and that it has the same effect as if
the person made the decision
with the decision-making ability to do so. The
Institute endorses MIGA’s suggestion that the Act explicitly confirm the
of an ACD in circumstances where the Act would otherwise permit urgent
treatment to be performed without consent. This provides clarity,
and promotes a
patient’s views, wishes and preferences being upheld. In Victoria, for
example, a health practitioner is not
permitted to administer treatment if they
are aware that the patient has refused that particular treatment or procedure,
13.3.9 MIGA submitted that provisions dealing with treatment in urgent
circumstances should not be unduly proscriptive by specifying
treatments, for example. Another respondent commented that the extent of
treatment performed without consent should be
limited to that required to
eliminate the urgency.
13.3.10 The OPMHS made the following observation:
Consideration does need to be given to treatment being given over periods of
days during which the GAB does not sit, e.g. detaining
a person and treating
them over a weekend in a hospital, against their will, is often necessary with
no consent. For example a delirious
elderly person with no person responsible,
whose illness causing the delirium, or behaviour during the delirium, places
them at significant
risk of medical or other harm. This might not be considered
an emergency by some.
13.3.11 This statement raises the following issues:
• the desirability of avoiding circumstances where a patient does not
have a person responsible able to consent to health care
and treatment. This
issue is considered
• the need for processes to be responsive. This matter is addressed
throughout this Report, including Part 14; and
• specific considerations about detention of a patient. This matter is
also considered in Part
The relevance of a patient’s objections is also considered separately
13.3.12 Aside from confirming the effect of a valid ACD providing a refusal
for health care or treatment, reflecting submissions received,
proposed that there be any revision to the current legislative provisions
governing urgent health care and treatment.
Recommendation 13.4
That the Act confirm that health care and treatment is not be able to be
performed without consent where the health practitioner is
aware that the
patient has refused that health care and treatment in a valid advance care
Minor treatment
13.3.13 Consent is not required for:
• non-intrusive examinations made for diagnostic purposes (such as
visual examination of the mouth, nasal cavity, eyes or ears);
• first-aid; and
• administration of pharmaceutical drug for which a prescription is not
required and which is normally self-administered, if
it is being used for its
recommended purpose and dosage
Whilst not described as ‘minor treatments’, these treatments
typically fall within that category.
13.3.14 Three submissions endorsed the ability to give ‘minor’
treatment without consent. The OPG and OPMHS made the following
comments about
existing provisions:
13.3.15 The OPG stated:
We believe ‘minor treatment’ should be described or defined, and
the Act should clarify that no consent is required for
such care/treatment. The
current formulation – where such interventions are excluded from the
definition of medical treatment
– is confusing (even to some medical
practitioners) as it is not immediately apparent that it follows consent is not,
13.3.16 The OPMHS submitted that these minor treatments ought to be permitted
without consent in the following circumstances:
where there is little risk, it promotes the health and wellbeing of the
person, to which the person does not object. In such cases
no harm is being done
(including no distress of objection).
13.3.17 The Institute agrees with the OPG’s statement that the current
formulation is confusing and does not clearly articulate
how minor treatment can
be performed in the absence of consent. To improve clarity, it is suggested that
the Act define these treatments
as ‘minor treatment’, and confirm
that substitute consent is not required for minor treatment where the patient is
to provide their own consent. This would not have any substantive impact
upon the law applying to substitute consent to minor treatment,
only the way
that this is expressed in the Act.
13.3.18 The Institute also endorses comments of the OPMHS which imply that
the Act should articulate circumstances in which minor
treatment can be
performed in the absence of consent. Specifically, they suggest that, to give
minor treatment without consent, the
patient should not be objecting and the
treatment should be intended to promote the person’s health and wellbeing.
with this suggestion, it is proposed that the Act confirm that minor
treatment can be performed without consent where it promotes
the person’s
health and wellbeing. This approach aligns with the existing test for a person
responsible to give consent to
treatment, which requires the person responsible
to consider that the treatment is to be carried out only to promote and maintain
the patient’s health and
consistent with the approach to urgent treatments, where treatment may be
performed without consent where it is needed
to save a person’s life,
prevent serious damage to the person’s health, or (except for special
treatment), where it is
intended to prevent the person from suffering or
continuing to suffer from significant pain or distress. It is also consistent
the existing position in relation to treatments that may be performed
without consent where there is no person responsible. Section
41 of the Act
provides that treatments (other than those excluded within the
Regulations
carried out without consent where ‘the treatment is necessary and is in
the form of treatment that will most successfully
promote that person’s
well-being.’
Inclusion of this test avoids unnecessary treatment being performed, or
treatments being performed for reasons other than promoting
the patient’s
health and wellbeing. It is appropriate that the Act provides some test before
even minor treatments may be performed
without consent, as part of safeguarding
the rights and interests of the patient.
13.3.19 The OPMHS’s submission also raised the relevance of a
patient’s objections, which is considered below.
Recommendation 13.5
(1) That the Act define the following treatments as ‘minor health care
and treatment’:
• non-intrusive examinations made for diagnostic purposes (such as
visual examination of the mouth, nasal cavity, eyes or
• first-aid; and
• administration of pharmaceutical drug for which a prescription is
not required and which is normally self-administered,
if it is being used for
its recommended purpose and dosage level.
(2) That the Act confirm that consent to minor health care and treatment is
not required where the person does not have decision-making
ability to give
consent and the minor health care and treatment is to be carried out to promote
or maintain the person’s health
and wellbeing.
Where there is no person
responsible
13.3.20 Certain medical and dental treatment can be carried out without
consent where:
• there is no person responsible;
• the treatment is necessary;
• the treatment is in the form of treatment that will most successfully
promote that person’s health and wellbeing; and
• the person does not object to the carrying out of the
13.3.21 The treatment cannot be classified as ‘special
treatment’.
the Regulations, it may also not involve treatment that:
• is continuing or ongoing and involves the administration of a
restricted substance primarily to control the conduct of the
• involves the administration of a drug of addiction other than in
association with the treatment of cancer or palliative care
of a terminally ill
• is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT); or
• involves a substantial risk to the person concerned of:
o brain damage;
o paralysis;
o permanent loss of function of any organ or limb;
o permanent and disfiguring scarring; or
o extreme pain or distress; or
• is intended, or likely, to result in the removal of all or a
substantial number of
In any these cases, if there is no person responsible, then the Board must
consent to the treatment.
13.3.22 To lawfully carry out treatment without consent in these
circumstances, the treating medical practitioner or dentist must
certify in the
patient’s clinical records that the treatment is necessary, it is in the
form that will most successfully promote
the person’s health and wellbeing
and that the patient does not
13.3.23 The Institute asked whether the Act should require medical
practitioners to enquire about the existence of an ACD or person
responsible
before performing treatment without consent. The rationale is that, if a
relevant valid ACD existed which conveyed a
patient’s advance refusal to
consent to the proposed treatment, then it would be inappropriate to perform the
treatment. Similarly,
if a person responsible or guardian were able to give
consent to the treatment, then it becomes unnecessary to rely on the default
provision enabling treatment to be performed without consent. The Issues Paper
posed the following question:
Should medical practitioners be required to make attempts to locate a person
responsible and/or advance care directive before giving
treatment without
13.3.24 There were eight responses with most endorsing a need for
‘reasonable’ or ‘realistic’ enquiries, and
specifically noting that it may not be realistic in cases of an emergency. In
relation to enquiries in an emergency, MIGA submitted:
Except in an emergency, reasonable attempts should be made to locate an ACD
or person responsible, reflecting existing practice.
In an emergency, unless an ACD is immediately accessible or a person
responsible immediately present, there should be no obligation
on medical or
other health practitioners to take additional steps to locate an ACD or person
responsible.
Guidance should be developed with input from MIGA and other professional
organisations to clarify what reasonable efforts to locate
an ACD or person
responsible should include.
13.3.25 The OPMHS commented that, in their experience:
some nursing homes are also not very mindful of checking who decision makers
are, documenting current administration and guardianship
orders and consulting
the respective person. It is currently at times necessary for health
professionals to clarify the legal situation
and contact the GAB to obtain the
relevant paperwork, and sometimes correct false assumptions of the nursing home.
There should be
an obligation of a nursing home to keep their documentation up
to date re this and ensure that appointed decision makers are appropriately
included ...
13.3.26 Associate Professor Wallace made similar observations.
13.3.27 Recommendation 5.9(1) proposes that, except in relation to urgent
health care and treatment, health practitioners must make
reasonable enquiries
in the circumstances to ascertain whether a patient who does not have
decision-making ability to give consent
has an ACD or instrument. Consistent
with this proposal, it is recommended that the Act require reasonable efforts to
be taken to
locate a person responsible before proceeding to provide health care
and treatment without consent. The rationale is that, if it
is reasonably
convenient to obtain substitute consent, then this should be sought rather than
proceeding without consent. The involvement
of a representative provides a level
of protection for the patient and advances understanding of, and promotion of,
their views,
wishes and preferences. This is consistent with the approach in
13.3.28 The Institute further recommends that, in order to provide health
care or treatment in the absence of consent, the treating
health practitioner be
required to document in a patient’s medical records their reasonable
efforts to locate an ACD and person
responsible for the patient. This is
consistent with requirements in
and was endorsed
by the Board in its submission. It also aligns with present requirements under s
41 which require medical practitioners
to certify in a patient’s clinical
records that the treatment is necessary and in the form that most successfully
the patient’s health and wellbeing, and that the patient did not
This reform would
therefore not involve a substantially increased workload for a health
practitioner in these circumstances, as the
Act already requires them to certify
two matters in a patient’s clinical records — this reform would
increase that requirement
to including information about a third matter within
the patient’s clinical records for the health care and treatment.
Recommendation 13.6
That s 41 of the Act remain but it be revised to also provide that, to
perform health care and treatment without consent:
(a) before the health practitioner administers the health care and treatment,
they must make reasonable efforts in the circumstances
to ascertain whether the
patient has a person responsible; and
(b) the health practitioner who carries out or supervises the health care and
treatment must document in the clinical records relating
to the health care and
treatment the reasonable efforts taken in the circumstances to locate an advance
care directive and person
responsible for the patient.
Relevance of a
patient’s objections
13.3.29 Section 41 of the Act provides that treatment which is not special
treatment (or any other treatment excluded under the Regulations)
may only be
performed in the absence of consent where the person does not object to the
If the person
objects, then consent must be obtained in accordance with the Act. This approach
requires a patient to express an objection.
There may be situations where a
patient does not communicate their objection, but this may not necessarily mean
that they do not
object, or that they consent. In Queensland, generally, a
patient’s objection to treatment results in any substitute consent
treatment being
ineffective.
apply where the patient has minimal or no understanding and the treatment will
cause them no distress, or that the distress
would be reasonably tolerable and
In New South
Wales, the Tribunal may authorise a guardian to consent where a patient is
In Tasmania,
Mental Health Act
, treatment can only be carried out either
with informed consent or if authorised by a treatment
The effect is to
require treatment to be authorised in all instances, irrespective of whether a
patient is objecting.
13.3.30 Noting the different approaches to this issue, the Issues Paper asked
whether treatment ought to be able to be performed where
a patient is expressing
their objection.
If a patient objects to treatment, should substitute consent still be able to
be given, and if so,
13.3.31 Ten respondents addressed this question. There were a range of views
expressed, with most commenting that there may be circumstances
where treatment
is appropriate despite a patient’s objections and that the Act should not
preclude treatment being performed
in these situations. The Board noted that the
Convention does not preclude substitute consent where a patient is objecting. It
competing considerations in these circumstances:
While Article 12 of the UN Convention lists a number of appropriate
safeguards for consent to treatment, balancing the competing right
of personal
choice with the right to equal access to necessary and appropriate medical
treatment is, in practice, a difficult exercise
for medical practitioners and
substitute decision makers when a person objects to treatment.
13.3.32 Advocacy Tasmania submitted that a patient’s clearly expressed
will and preference about treatment should never be overridden.
Both Speak Out
advocates and Advocacy Tasmania commented that people deemed capable of making
their own decisions have the right
to have their objection to treatment
respected and that the same principle should apply under the Act.
13.3.33 Most observed that this question needs to be addressed on an
individual basis, dependent upon the nature of the objection
patient’s ability to understand relevant matters relating to a decision.
The OPG commented:
Our view is that if the person is objecting to the treatment but is unable to
understand the risks and repercussions associated with
not receiving the
treatment, there needs to be a regime of substitute consent to ensure the person
is not deprived of necessary health
care resulting in unacceptable risk or
detriment to their health and well-being.
13.3.34 Speak Out advocates commented that the focus should be upon
supporting a person to understand issues relevant to the decision
and that there
needs to be time taken to try to understand the underlying reasons for a
patient’s objections. Advocacy Tasmania
also commented:
The focus needs to be on the decision support needs of the person and their
understanding of, and views around, the treatment in question.
13.3.35 The OPG submitted that treatment should not be performed where the
person has previously declined consent in an ACD or via
a direction in an
instrument. MIGA also commented that an ACD should be taken into account. This
factor is included within the Decision-Making
Process for Health Care and
Treatment outlined
13.3.36 Three
submissions
stated that a
patient’s views should be taken into consideration, including their
objections. MIGA noted that the guiding principles
of the Act already require a
person’s wishes to be carried into effect if possible. The OPG submitted
that the risks and benefits
of treatment should also be considered. In the
context of providing palliative care, PCT submitted that a patient’s
are particularly relevant:
Palliative care is about neither prolonging life, nor hastening death, but
providing the best quality of life (as defined by the person
concerned) for a
dying person. This makes the objection to treatment very relevant, particularly
if the dying person experiences
emotional distress if forced to undergo
13.3.37 Recommendation 13.14 proposes that decision-makers first consider the
need for a representative decision about health care
and treatment, before
making a decision based on what they believe is consistent with the
person’s wishes, views and preferences
(a substituted judgment test).
Recommendation 6.4(2) also provides that the Act confirm that a person may not
be considered unable
to make their own decision unless all practical steps have
been taken to provide the person with support to make and communicate
decision. This approach necessarily requires a decision-maker to take into
consideration the relevance of a patient’s expressed
objection. Consistent
with the views of respondents, and a person’s right to necessary and
appropriate treatment, it is not
proposed that the Act prohibit substitute
consent to health care or treatment where a patient is objecting. The ability to
or seek review of a person responsible’s consent to treatment is
considered in Part 14. It remains appropriate, however, that
the Act continue to
require consent in circumstances where a patient is objecting, consistent with
the existing approach.
How an objection may be communicated
13.3.38 The Act does not clarify how a patient can communicate their
objection. This raises the following issues:
• that whether a patient is objecting may be interpreted subjectively.
Different individuals might have differing views about
conduct that comprises an
objection; and
• it might sometimes be difficult for a patient to indicate their
13.3.39 Some jurisdictions confirm that objections can be indicated by
whatever means and include circumstances where a patient has
indicated in similar circumstances that they did not want the treatment and they
have not subsequently indicated to the
13.3.40 The Issues Paper asked whether it would assist if the Act provided
clarification about how a patient is able to communicate
their objection to
Should the Act confirm how a patient can indicate an
13.3.41 Three responses addressed this issue. The Board supported the Act
containing legislative guidance about how a person may communicate
objection, with the OPG’s submission implicitly endorsing this approach.
The Board submitted:
To prioritise the right of a person and to have their wishes acted upon in
the medical domain, the adoption in the Act of criteria
to identify what
constitutes an objection is important. If a person lacks the capacity to
understand or evaluate the information
necessary for the decision which is
required, then there can, it would seem, be no valid objection. The terminology
set out in the
Issues Paper at Part 11 paragraph 11.2.6 from the NSW legislation
for the identification of an objection could be adopted, with the
addition, perhaps, of any wishes expressed in an advance care directive.
13.3.42 The OPG also stated that the Act should confirm that a previously
expressed objection, for example, in an ACD, should be taken
A patient should be able to communicate their objection by any means
available to them. Previously indicated objections to similar
treatment in
similar circumstances — obviously by way of an advance care directive but
also by less formal means — should
be accepted as an objection.
13.3.43 MIGA, on the other hand, submitted that ‘[t]he Act should not
set out any requirements as to how a patient can or should
indicate an
objection.’
13.3.44 The Institute proposes that the Act confirm that a patient may
communicate their objection by any means. This promotes an
inclusive and
flexible approach and supports an individual being able to communicate their
objection by any means that best suits
them. This is not intended to be
prescriptive, but instead reinforces that a person may communicate in a variety
of ways, including
non-verbal communication. Recommendation 5.6 proposes that
the Act confirm that directions expressing a refusal to consent to treatment
a valid ACD that applies to the circumstances is binding. For the avoidance of
doubt, it is proposed that the Act confirm that,
for the purpose of determining
whether a patient is or has communicated their objection, an objection may be
validly contained and
communicated in advance, including (but not limited to) in
Recommendation 13.7
That the Act confirm that a person can indicate an objection to health care
and treatment by whatever means, including:
• having indicated on a previous but similar occasion that they did
not want the health care and treatment; or
• having previously communicated their objection to the health care
and treatment, including in an advance care directive,
and they have not subsequently indicated to the contrary.
where consent is needed
13.4.1 In all other circumstances other than those described previously, the
Act provides that substitute consent to treatment is
needed — either from
a person responsible or the Board. This section considers when and how persons
responsible can give consent.
Following paragraphs then review when and how the
Board can give consent.
care and treatment permitted with the consent of a ‘person
responsible’
13.4.2 The Act authorises certain individuals to give substitute consent to
some medical treatment on behalf of a patient who is unable
authorised is called the ‘person
responsible’.
person responsible only has authority over medical treatment decisions and does
not have power to make personal or financial
decisions. Classifications of
people eligible to be a person responsible are outlined in Part
The powers and
functions of the ‘person responsible’ are important because only a
small portion of the Tasmanian community
has a registered enduring
The majority of people will therefore have a default statutory person
responsible making decisions on their behalf.
What should a person responsible be able to
consent to?
13.4.3 A person responsible can consent to all medical and dental treatment
that is not defined as ‘special treatment’.
Only the Board can
consent to special treatment. Special treatments are explained and discussed
later in this Part.
13.4.4 The Institute asked for views about what matters a person responsible
should have power to consent to.
What should a person responsible be able to consent
13.4.5 There were eight responses to this question. Five expressed support
for persons responsible continuing to have the ability
to consent to
‘medical treatment’. Five supported persons responsible also having
power to consent to ‘health care’.
Recommendation 9.4 provides a
single definition and classification of ‘health care and treatment.’
This has the effect
of extending a person responsible’s authority to
consent to health care in addition to treatment, consistent with the views
these respondents.
13.4.6 Three submissions referred to and endorsed the existing approach of
classifying certain treatments as ‘special treatments’
beyond the scope of a person responsible’s authority. National Seniors
Australia, Tasmanian Policy Advisory Group
submitted that there was no need to
change existing
arrangements.
respondent endorsed a person responsible having the ability to consent to
‘anything and everything’, expressing concern
that there would
otherwise be delay and potential pain and suffering for a patient whilst
awaiting substitute consent from another
13.4.7 Both the Board and the OPMHS responded that a person responsible
should not be permitted to consent to detention, including
at the Roy Fagan
Centre (RFC). The OPG, on the other hand, submitted ‘that the person
responsible should be able to provide
formal consent to uncontentious decisions
responsible should
be able to consent to the admission of a patient within a
secure facility is dealt with separately
13.4.8 One respondent submitted that there is currently a lack of clarity
a person responsible.
Another respondent made a similar comment in answering a separate question in
the Issues Paper.
13.4.9 One response stated that there should be power to cease medical
treatment following specialist medical advice recommending
that approach. This
submission raises the issue of consent to the withdrawal and withholding of
treatment, which is discussed
13.4.10 In summary, responses received indicate broad support for retention
of the existing powers of a person responsible aside from
certain matters which
are addressed elsewhere in this Part.
What if there is
no eligible person responsible?
13.4.11 If there is no person responsible and consent to treatment is
required, then an application must be made to the Board. The
Board then has
power to give consent to treatment, or alternatively, it might decide it more
appropriate to appoint a guardian with
power to consent to
13.4.12 In Queensland, if there is no one who
meets the criteria to be the person responsible, then the Public Guardian is
automatically
appointed as the person responsible as a ‘last
that there will always be a person responsible able to consent to treatment that
is not special treatment. It avoids the
need for an application to the tribunal
with the resulting delay, and avoids the need for a guardian. The Issues Paper
that this would seem to align with the principles of proceeding in a
manner that is least restrictive of a person’s freedom
of decision and
action, and the desire to only appoint a representative as a last resort. The
VLRC recommended this
Victoria’s subsequent legislative reforms, the Public Advocate may act as
medical treatment decision-maker if the treatment
is ‘significant
treatment’ (as
) and the health
practitioner has been unable to locate a relevant ACD or another
decision-maker.
13.4.13 Currently the Act takes this approach when dealing with forensic
procedures.
It enables the
Public Guardian to act as a ‘person responsible of last resort’
rather than needing to apply to the Board
where there is no person responsible.
The Issues Paper noted that one option for reform would be to extend these
provisions to apply
to all treatments (other than special treatments) to avoid
the need to apply to the Board for it to consent to treatment where there
person responsible. One of the questions that the Issues Paper posed is whether
this amendment would be appropriate and desirable.
If consent is required and there is no person responsible, should the Public
Guardian have power to act as the person responsible
of last resort to consent
to treatments other than special
13.4.14 Four
submissions
endorsed the
Act providing the Public Guardian as decision-maker of last resort where there
is no other person eligible to act as
the person responsible. Whilst endorsing
this approach, PCT also commented that decisions ‘in relation to a person
with a life
limiting illness, should be made based on an ACD (if available) and
information about the person provided by family, friends, and
professionals.’ Other recommendations in this Report address this
submission.
13.4.15 The Board’s submission noted advantages and disadvantages to
this option:
Sometimes there is more than one carer or close friend eligible to act, and
in the case of dispute, or where there is no person responsible,
there must be
an application to the Board for the appointment of a guardian to give consent.
Less cumbersome alternatives to this
could be for the Public Guardian to have
the power to mediate between disputing candidates or possibly even be the
default person
responsible — as is currently the case with forensic
procedures. Against this, is the concern that little effort may be made
locate a person responsible if the easy default position, is that the Public
Guardian becomes person responsible.
13.4.16 The OPMHS also commented that there could be advantages to enabling
the Public Guardian to act as person responsible of last
resort, but also
expressed the view that there can also be advantages to instead appointing a
guardian with power to consent to treatments:
For individual treatments this would avoid a protracted process for consent.
It would be beneficial to have a mechanism to prevent
serial use of the PG in
cases where an appointed Guardian could act in the interest of the RP in a more
co-ordinated way with greater
continuity. Continuity of care is extremely
valuable in health, and a Guardian can make better decisions with a longer
with the PR.
13.4.17 The OPG submitted that the present situation works well, but that
there is merit to considering reform to enable the Public
Guardian to act as
person responsible as a last resort where it would otherwise be necessary to
apply to the Board:
the current provisions of section 41, whereby treatment can be undertaken
without consent if there is no person responsible and the
person is not
objecting, work well and should continue. However, if these provisions were
discontinued, the OPG believes the Queensland
model of the Public Guardian
acting as the statutory health attorney of last resort has merit and should be
considered. This would
seem a more streamlined process that that of seeking the
Board’s consent or seeking a guardianship order.
Regulation 12 specifies various cases where medical or dental treatment
cannot be carried out without consent under section 41. The
OPG acting as
statutory health attorney of last resort is worthy of consideration as a means
of providing consent to treatment in
those categories.
13.4.18 In summary, all responses to this question either endorsed this
approach or considered that there was some merit to this alternative
circumstances. No respondents rejected the approach.
13.4.19 The Institute proposes revision to the Act to enable the Public
Guardian to act as person responsible of last resort where
consent is required
and there is no one else who would otherwise be eligible to consent as the
person responsible. This retains the
existing position under s 41 enabling
certain health care and treatment to be performed without consent where there is
responsible. Where, however, the Act requires consent, this reform
would enable the Public Guardian to act, avoiding the need to
apply to the Board
for the appointment of a guardian, or for it to consent. The Public Guardian
already functions as a guardian for
individuals and thus has expertise in this
area suited to this increased role.
13.4.20 This approach avoids the need to appoint a representative and is
therefore a least restrictive and more efficient alternative
situations where consent is required and there is no other person responsible.
It would minimise delay, noting that the
Board must generally give at least 10
days’ notice to conduct a
and that the
appeal period
generally have expired before the treatment may be performed (although the Board
can waive this requirement if the treatment
This reform
intends to streamline processes and improve responsiveness particularly when
health care or treatment is time critical
or necessary outside of business
hours. This, in part, addresses concerns raised by the OPMHS that there are
presently issues that
arise when consent is required outside of business hours
when the Board is not sitting in what might be perceived as
‘non-urgent’
circumstances such that an application for an emergency
is not considered
appropriate.
13.4.21 The Board’s concern that this could lead to inadequate
enquiries being made to find another eligible person responsible
is noted. It is
agreed that it is important to avoid this potential consequence which could lead
to decision-making being removed
from those otherwise more appropriate to act in
the role. There would remain the ability for a person to apply to the Board to
appointed as the patient’s guardian with power to consent to some or
all health care and treatment. It is also recommended
that guidelines be
developed to outline circumstances where it may be more appropriate to apply to
the Board. As the OPMHS commented,
one of the relevant considerations could be
whether there is a likely need for ongoing decisions to be made. It should also
be possible
for individuals to apply to the Board where they consider that they
are eligible to act as the person responsible but it has been
determined that
they are ineligible.
13.4.22 Recommendation 14.1 would have the effect of granting the Public
Guardian power to mediate matters where there is a dispute
person is eligible to act as the person responsible, or where there are multiple
individuals eligible to act as the
person responsible. Noting the potential for
a perceived or actual conflict of interest when resolution of a matter could
in the Public Guardian becoming the default person responsible, it is
important that there be an avenue to contest a decision via
an application to
the Board. Consistent with adopting the least restrictive approach, the
Institute endorses revision to the Act
to enable the review of a health
practitioner’s opinion that an individual is ineligible to act as the
person responsible without
this needing to be resolved by a formal appointment
as guardian. This issue is addressed in Part
When should the Board’s consent then be
13.4.23 The OPG’s submission indicated a need for clarity about the
circumstances in which the Board may consent to treatment
because s 39 provides
that consent may be given by the Board or by a person responsible. The OPG
The OPG is concerned about recent practice which has seen the Board providing
consent to particular medical treatment when a guardian
(and therefore a person
responsible) is already in place. The OPG believes this is problematic in a
number of ways: it creates uncertainty
medical practitioners or other applicants; the appropriate source of consent for
treatment arising out of complications from the original treatment to
which the Board has consented is blurred, particularly in cases
where there is a
‘domino effect’ of side-effects and delayed consequences; the role
of a person responsible is ambiguous,
when they need clarity as to the scope and
carrying out of their functions; and it is unnecessarily burdensome on
applicants and
The OPG’s view is that the legislation should clarify when the
Board’s consent should be sought, and require that it only
consent to treatment (other than special treatment) if there is no person
responsible and consent is required. This would
be consistent with the principle
of the least restrictive alternative and the priority that ought to be given to
less formal arrangements.
As discussed in chapter 11 the OPG has concerns about
delays associated with the provision of treatment when the Board’s consent
13.4.24 In addressing a separate question in the Issues Paper, the OPG also
submitted that:
Until very recently it was highly unusual for the Board to provide consent to
medical treatment. Historically, this provision of the
Act was used for consent
to psychiatric treatment for people with mental illnesses detained under the old
Mental Health Act
, as that Act did not have provisions for involuntary
Where there has not been a person responsible and consent for treatment has
been required, the usual practice had been to seek the
appointment a guardian
with powers to make health care decisions rather than applying for the Board to
consent to medical treatment.
In our view, this generally works well and is the
preferred approach from a ‘best interests’ point of view due to the
delays associated with seeking the Board’s consent. Delays are associated
with the required 10 days’ notice of a hearing,
and the appeal provisions
which could potentially amount to a 56 day delay (someone has 28 days to seek
reasons for decision, and
a further 28 days to lodge an appeal) before treatment
can commence, although the Board can consent to the treatment being carried
immediately in urgent situations.
In addition, the appointment of a guardian offers far greater flexibility if
further or additional treatment is needed. A common scenario
for a person with a
severe disability who requires an anaesthetic for a routine dental check, for
instance, is for other examinations
or investigations for which anaesthesia is
also required (e.g., a pap smear, taking of bloods, scans and x-rays) to be
in’ and performed at the same time. This makes practical and
medical sense and is certainly in the best interests of the patient
for trips to
hospital and the use of anaesthetic to be minimised. However multiple procedures
or investigations entails multiple
applications to the Board for consent to each
procedure, even if they are all to be conducted at the same time under the same
anaesthetic.
In these situations the appointment of a guardian would appear to
be much more straightforward and clear cut.
13.4.25 The Institute agrees that the Act should better articulate
circumstances where the Board may give consent to health care and
Currently, the Act provides that the Board may issue and make available to
members of the public guidelines specifying
situations in which applications
should be made to the Board for its consent to medical or dental
although no
guidelines exist. It is recommended that the Act confirm that the Board may
consent to health care and treatment:
• classified as special treatment; or
• where consent is needed and there is otherwise no other eligible
person responsible and no valid ACD that applies to the circumstances.
The effect is to provide a dual arrangement where either the Public Guardian
or the Board may consent to health care or treatment
where there is otherwise no
one falling within the definition of person responsible and no relevant ACD. The
development of guidelines
would assist to clarify whether it is more appropriate
to proceed with consent from the Public Guardian, the Board, or via the
appointment
of a guardian with power to consent to some or all health care and
13.4.26 A related issue is that the Board must have the ability to appoint a
guardian upon hearing an application for it to consent
to health care and
treatment. This issue was raised by the OPG in its response to a question asked
powers of the Board. The Act currently enables
the Board to make an emergency guardianship or administration order upon hearing
application for it to consent to health care and
The section,
however, requires a higher standard of proof for the Board to make an emergency
order in those circumstances —
requiring the Board to be satisfied that
the test to appoint a guardian or administrator is
This conflicts with s
65(1) which already enables the Board to make an emergency order of its own
motion and only requires the Board
to be satisfied that there
for making a guardianship or administration order (emphasis
13.4.27 The Act does not enable the Board to treat an application for consent
to health care and treatment as an application for a
guardianship order. The
Board may only appoint a guardian for a person in respect of whom an application
has been made for an order
appointing a guardian or
administrator.
enables an application for an administration order to be treated as an
application for a guardianship order. Similarly, an application
guardianship order may be treated as an application for an administration
It is appropriate
that an application for the Board to consent to health care and treatment be
able to be treated as an application
for a guardianship order, to enable the
Board to make an order appointing a guardian (other than pursuant to an
emergency order)
upon hearing an application for consent. It is unnecessary to
make further provision in relation to the making of an administration
noting that the Board already has power to make emergency orders irrespective of
whether it has received an application.
Recommendation 13.8
(1) That the Public Guardian be able to give consent to health care and
treatment as a person responsible of last resort where consent
is required and
there is no valid advance care directive that applies to the decision and no one
falling within the definition of
person responsible.
(2) That the Act provide that the Board may consent to health care and
• classified as special treatment; or
• where consent to health care and treatment is required and there is
no valid advance care directive that applies to the
decision and no one falling
within the definition of person responsible.
(3) That guidelines be developed to outline circumstances where it may be
appropriate to request the Public Guardian to consent as
the person responsible
of last resort, or instead apply to the Board for either it to give consent or
appoint a guardian with power
to consent to some or all health care and
(4) That s 46A of the Act be deleted and that, in its place:
(i) the Act provide that the Board may treat an application for it to
consent to the carrying out of health care and treatment on
a person as an
application for a guardianship order; and
(ii) the Board be permitted to make a guardianship order at a hearing of an
application for consent to health care and treatment
if the Board is satisfied
that the test to appoint a representative is met.
How is a request to a person responsible
13.4.28 It is important that decision-makers have access to relevant
information when deciding whether to consent to a particular
treatment. The Act
does not set out any special process that must be followed when making a request
of a person responsible, but
medical professionals have duties under other
legislation to ensure that fully informed consent is
13.4.29 In South Australia, provisions within legislation governing consent
to health care confirm that medical practitioners have
a duty to explain to a
patient, or their representative, as far as is practicable and reasonable in the
circumstances, the nature,
consequences and risks of the proposed treatment, the
likely consequences of not undertaking the treatment, and any alternative
or courses of action that might be reasonably
considered.
In New South Wales and the ACT, requests must be in writing, unless it is not
practicable. Requests must specify certain information
relevant to the decision
of whether to consent.
Institute queried whether there would be any benefit gained from the Act
containing specific provisions that govern the way that
requests of a person
responsible are made.
Should the Act set out how a request for consent is made to a person
responsible?
13.4.30 There were six responses to this question, with half supporting and
the other half rejecting legislative reform. The Board
endorsed this reform to
ensure that persons responsible have all relevant information to make decisions
and because it would provide
consistency with other jurisdictions. The OPG also
supported this reform on the basis of its observations that current processes
are ‘are variable and inconsistent and may sometimes be glossed
over.’ The OPG also submitted that the Act should require
professionals to confirm and document consent and the source of consent.
13.4.31 In answering this question in the negative, both MIGA and the OPMHS
commented that obligations in relation to obtaining consent
to treatment should
be the same, irrespective of whether consent is from the patient themselves or a
person responsible. MIGA, for
example, commented that existing professional
obligations and health professionals’ duty of care at common law
sufficiently
address this matter. The OPMHS also commented:
Adding further requirements which aren’t normally necessary (e.g. in
writing), could make the process excessively bureaucratic,
and also create an
impediment and potentially different or delayed treatment for the RP
[represented person] (compared with for someone
consenting for themselves).
13.4.32 The Institute is not satisfied of the need for reform to the Act to
require health practitioners to explain certain matters
or take certain steps
prior to and as part of seeking a person responsible’s consent to a
particular treatment. Existing obligations
adequately address this issue.
consent to health care and treatment
13.5.1 To consent to treatment, a person responsible must be satisfied
• the person is incapable of giving consent; and
• the treatment is in their best
To assess what is in a person’s best interests, a person responsible
must consider:
• the wishes of the person;
• the consequences if the treatment is not carried out;
• any alternative treatments available;
• the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
proposed treatment, or any alternative treatment; and
• that the treatment is to be carried out only to promote and maintain
the person’s health and
13.5.2 For the Board to give consent to treatment, it must be satisfied
• the person is incapable of giving consent;
• the treatment is otherwise
• the treatment would be in the person’s best
In determining whether the proposed treatment would be in a person’s
best interests, the Act provides that the Board must take
into account:
• the wishes of the person, so far as they can be ascertained;
• the consequences if the proposed treatment is not carried out;
• alternative treatments available; and
• whether the proposed treatment can be postponed on the basis that a
better treatment may become available and whether the
person is likely to become
capable of providing
The result is differing tests for persons responsible and the Board to apply
when deciding whether to consent to treatment.
13.5.3 The Board and persons responsible also have an overriding duty to
perform their role in accordance with the guiding principles
of the Act. These
principles were discussed in Part 3. Recommendation 3.3 proposes that one of the
revised guiding principles of
the Act be that the views, wishes, preferences and
rights of a person who may require decision-making support must direct decisions
that affect their lives. Other recommendations made in this Report are also
relevant to the present discussion. Recommendation 11.2
sets out a proposed
decision-making process for representatives to follow when making decisions.
This process emphasises the need
to give all practicable and appropriate effect
to a person’s views, wishes and preferences, or likely views, wishes and
preferences
and that a representative may only depart from these where it is
necessary to prevent unacceptable harm, or it would be unlawful.
Recommendation
5.6(4) proposes that the Act confirm that, where a patient has a valid ACD that
applies to the relevant circumstances,
any refusal to consent has the same
effect as if the person made the decision whilst they had the decision-making
ability to do so.
13.5.4 In Victoria, medical treatment decision-makers must make a decision
that they reasonably believe is the decision that the person
would have made if
they had decision-making
Effectively,
this amounts to a ‘substituted judgment’ based on what the
decision-maker considers the person would decide
for themselves. The Victorian
Act provides that, to make a decision that they consider the person would have
made if they had the
ability to make their own decision, a decision-maker must:
• first, consider any valid and relevant values directive;
• next, consider any other relevant preferences that the person has
expressed and the circumstances in which those preferences
were expressed;
• if the decision-maker is unable to identify any relevant preferences,
they must give consideration to the person’s values,
whether expressed
other than by way of a values directive or inferred from the person’s
• also consider:
o the likely effects and consequences of the medical treatment, including the
likely effectiveness of the treatment, and whether these
are consistent with the
person’s preferences or values; and
o whether there are any alternatives, including refusing treatment, that
would be more consistent with the person’s preferences
or values; and
• act in good faith and with due
The decision-maker must also consult with any person who they reasonably
believe the person would want to be consulted in the
circumstances.
13.5.5 If the decision-maker is unable to ascertain or apply the
person’s preferences or values, the decision-maker must act
in good faith
and with due diligence and make a decision that promotes the personal and social
wellbeing of the person, having regard
to the need to respect the person’s
individuality. This includes consideration of:
• the likely effects and consequences of the medical treatment,
including the likely effectiveness of the treatment, and whether
these promote
the person’s personal and social wellbeing, having regard to the need to
respect the person’s individuality;
• whether there are any alternatives, including refusing medical
treatment, that would better promote the person’s personal
wellbeing, having regard to the need to respect the person’s
individuality.
Again, the decision-maker must consult with any person who they reasonably
believe the person would want to be
13.5.6 Under the current framework articulated in the Act, a person
responsible must consider the patient’s wishes, but does
not need to make
a decision that the patient would have been likely to have made if they were
capable of giving their own
This permits
decision-making that is not consistent with the patient’s wishes, if the
person responsible considers that consent
(or withdrawal or refusal of consent)
is in the person’s best interests.
13.5.7 Given these considerations, the Issues Paper asked what test should
apply for a person responsible to give consent to treatment.
What test should a person responsible need to apply when deciding whether to
consent to treatment?
13.5.8 There were five responses to this question with the OPG and MIGA
endorsing the current approach to decisions about treatment.
The Board noted the
link to earlier submissions about the decision-making principles of the Act
(discussed in Part 3), noting the
need to give primacy to a person’s
likely wishes and taking into account any ACD of the patient. The OPG’s
also commented that persons responsible should also need to make
decisions in accordance with the guiding principles of the Act and
decisions should be consistent with any ACD. The Board and OPG both endorsed
consistency between the tests that the Board and
persons responsible must apply
when deciding whether to consent to treatment.
13.5.9 The OPMHS submitted:
A Person Responsible should apply only the same questions that a reasonable
person would apply when providing consent for themselves.
The test should not be
more difficult; the standard should not mean that a represented person will miss
out on treatment due to their
incapacity to consent.
13.5.10 Another submission endorsed decisions being based upon what the
person would want if making the decision themselves.
13.5.11 The Institute asked a separate question about what test the Board
should apply when deciding whether to consent to treatment.
What test should the Board need to apply when deciding whether to consent to
13.5.12 Three submissions addressed this question, with all endorsing an
equivalent approach to that applying to persons responsible.
13.5.13 This Report has already made several recommendations relevant to
giving substitute consent to proposed health care or treatment.
• Recommendation 11.2 which proposes that decision-makers follow a
Decision-Making Process, emphasising the need to make decisions
person’s wishes, views and preferences. The decision-making process also
provides that decision-makers should consider
whether a representative decision
is needed, or whether the decision could be deferred to a time when the patient
can make their
own decision; and
• Recommendation 5.6 which confirm that there is no need for a
representative decision if the patient has made a valid ACD applying
circumstances.
13.5.14 Most submissions endorsed existing factors for decision-makers to
consider and thus it is proposed that the substance of the
existing tests
remain. Consistent with recommendations made in this Report, it is proposed that
the existing tests that persons responsible
and the Board apply be revised as
• to provide consistency between the tests that apply to each; and
• to incorporate a will, preferences and rights approach, consistent
with the Decision-Making Process articulated in Recommendation
consistent with legislative provisions in Victoria and recommendations in New
South Wales outlined at [13.5.4]–[13.5.5].
Where a patient is likely to soon be able
13.5.15 The Act does not provide any different test that must be applied
where a patient is likely to be able to consent themselves
within a reasonable
time. It is a factor that the Board (not a person responsible) must take into
In Victoria,
where the patient is likely to become capable of giving their own consent within
a reasonable time, a person responsible
can only consent to the treatment where
the treating practitioner reasonably believes that delay would significantly
deteriorate
the patient’s
This matter was
also considered in Part 11 when outlining the proposed Decision-Making
13.5.16 The Issues Paper asked whether any special provisions should apply to
the giving of consent in these circumstances.
Should any special test apply where the patient is likely to shortly gain
capacity to consent?
13.5.17 Five respondents addressed this question with most endorsing a
provision similar to that in
Consistent with
responses, the Institute proposes that this revision is made to the Act. This
approach is incorporated into the Decision-Making
Process articulated in
Recommendation 11.2.
13.5.18 The intention is to facilitate representative decisions only being
made where necessary, as a last resort. If a decision can
be deferred until the
person is able to make their own decision, without that delay causing any harm
to the person, then a representative
decision is unnecessary. This is consistent
with adopting the least restrictive alternative. The Act already requires the
consider this factor when deciding whether to give consent to
This reform
would strengthen this requirement to provide that, rather than it only being a
factor that is considered, it is the threshold
test to establish whether a
representative decision should be made. The reform would also require persons
responsible to make this
assessment, rather than presently where only the Board
must take this into account.
Recommendation 13.9
(1) That the Act confirm that a person responsible and the Board may only
give consent to health care and treatment where the person
does not have the
decision-making ability to make a decision about that health care or
(2) That the Act contain a separate section outlining the test for both
persons responsible and the Board (decision-makers) to apply
to make decisions
(3) That the Act require decision-makers, when making decisions about consent
to health care and treatment, to:
(i) adopt the Decision-Making Process outlined in Recommendation 11.2;
(ii) consider the following:
• the consequences if the health care and treatment is not carried
• any alternative health care and treatment available;
• the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
proposed health care and treatment, or any alternative
health care and
• whether the proposed health care and treatment can be postponed on
the basis that a better health care and treatment may
become available; and
• that the health care and treatment is to be carried out only to
promote and maintain the person’s health and wellbeing.
13.6.1 Only the Board may consent to treatment
classified as ‘special
treatments’.
decisions are treated differently because of their nature — they are
generally treatments that are serious, invasive
or have irreversible
consequences. The Act defines ‘special treatment’ as:
• any treatment intended, or reasonably likely, to have the effect of
rendering the person permanently infertile;
• termination of
• any removal of non-regenerative tissue for
transplantation.
13.6.2 The Regulations also declare the following to be special
• psychosurgery, including neurological procedure carried out for the
relief of Parkinson’s disease; and
• any treatment involving the use of an aversive stimulus, whether
mechanical, chemical, physical or
13.6.3 It is important that the classifications of treatment as
‘special treatment’ are appropriate, unambiguous and exhaustive.
Institute therefore asked firstly, what the community considers ought to be
included within the class of ‘special treatments’,
and secondly,
whether there needs to be any changes made to the existing descriptions.
What ‘special treatment’ should the Board need to consent to?
Do any of the current descriptions or classifications of treatments need to
be revised, and if so,
13.6.4 Eight respondents addressed these questions with most endorsing the
existing classifications of ‘special treatments’.
One respondent
submitted that there should be no treatments classified as special treatments
where only the Board’s consent
is permitted. The two submissions that
suggested revision commented that they should perhaps deal with gender
reassignment treatment
restrictive interventions.
Gender reassignment is considered below, and restrictive interventions in Part
13.6.5 This next Part reviews the existing classes of special treatment.
Termination of
13.6.6 Termination of pregnancy is included in the class of ‘special
treatments’ requiring the Board’s
It is a crime
Criminal Code
to intentionally or recklessly perform a
termination on a woman
without their consent, whether or not they suffer any other harm. It also
provides that no prosecution is to be instituted against
a medical practitioner
who performs a termination on a woman if they are incapable of giving consent
and the termination is performed
in good faith and with reasonable care and
skill, is for the woman’s benefit and is reasonable having regard to all
the circumstances.
Comprehensive consideration of the provisions of the
Criminal Code
outside of the scope of this review.
13.6.7 The Convention provides that there must not be discrimination of
people with disability in relation to
This is stated to
include the right to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of
children, and to have access to
information, reproductive and family planning
13.6.8 There is no special test that applies for the Board to consent to
termination of pregnancy. The test that it must apply is
the same as the test
for other treatments.
Issues Paper noted that some jurisdictions provide a special test to give
substitute consent to the termination of a pregnancy.
In South Australia,
substitute consent to the termination of a pregnancy is only permitted if there
is no likelihood of the woman
acquiring the capacity to give consent within the
period that is reasonably available for the safe carrying out of the
termination.
also be no knowledge of any advance refusal having been communicated to a
medical practitioner whilst the patient was
consenting.
approaches are captured within other recommendations in this Report, notably
Recommendation 13.9 which proposes that the test
for the Board (and persons
responsible) to consent to health care and treatment require the decision-maker
to be satisfied that the
person is unlikely to have the ability to consent
themselves within a reasonable time, and Recommendation 5.6 which confirms that
a refusal of treatment in a valid ACD applying to the circumstances is
Sterilisation
13.6.9 ‘Treatment that is likely or intended to render a person
infertile’ is also included within the definition of ‘special
treatment’.
The Act does not provide any special test that the Board must apply to
consent to treatment likely or intended to render the patient
infertile. The
test is the same as consent to any other form of
13.6.10 The Convention provides that people with
disabilities, including children, must have the right to retain their fertility
an equal basis with
The World Health
Organisation has stated that any procedures that result in sterilisation must
only be undertaken where there is
‘full, free, and informed
Rights Committee has recently commented that it ‘remains concerned about
the compatibility of the practice of involuntary
non-therapeutic sterilisation
of women and girls with intellectual disability and/or cognitive impairment with
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
], in particular
the prohibition against cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, the right to
It stated that Australia should abolish the practice of involuntary
non-therapeutic sterilisation of women and girls with intellectual
and/or cognitive
impairment.
Commonwealth Senate Community Affairs Reference Committee delivered a report
into involuntary or coerced sterilisation in
The Reference
Committee recommended:
• that where a person has capacity to consent, including where they
have capacity to consent with support, sterilisation must
only be undertaken
with that person’s
• sterilisation should not be undertaken where it is reasonably
possible that a person might have capacity to consent in the
• legislation should explicitly state that the tribunal does not have
authority to hear an application for an order approving
special treatment,
including sterilisation, where the person has legal
• States should ensure that people with disability have independent
representation in sterilisation
Costs of legal
representation should be paid by legal aid
• that it be made an offence to take, attempt to take, or knowingly
assist a person to take, a person with a disability overseas
for the purpose of
obtaining a
sterilisation.
13.6.11 The Issues Paper summarised the Commonwealth Senate Community Affairs
References Committee’s statements that the following
factors must never
considered as part of approving sterilisation:
• pregnancy risks associated with sexual abuse;
• eugenic arguments; and
• assessments about the person’s capacity to care for
13.6.12 The Institute also has regard to the protocol developed by the
Australian Guardianship and Administration Council (AGAC) which
detailed processes and procedures to follow for a tribunal (including the Board)
to give consent to a sterilisation procedure.
The AGAC’s Protocol for
Sterilisation provides that, before an application for sterilisation is made,
‘all other alternative
treatments should be considered, and, if
appropriate, tried,
bringing an application for
sterilisation.’
The rationale is that:
The significant developments in the area of reproductive technology,
including contraception and menstruation management, mean that
there are a range
of treatments and procedures available, all of which are less invasive and less
permanent than sterilisation.
13.6.13 This is consistent with the views of the High Court in
Marion’s Case
where it was stated that sterilisation should be a
last resort.
13.6.14 The Issues Paper asked whether there were any treatments for which a
special test should apply to give substitute consent.
It was also asked whether
there were any matters for which substitute consent ought never be permitted.
Only the OPG’s response
to these questions raised the matter of consent to
sterilisation, commenting that there could be merit to the Act setting out a
test to consent to sterilisation, consistent with the policies
developed by the AGAC.
13.6.15 The Institute observes that the AGAC’s Protocol sets out in
some detail (11 pages) the process that the Board should
take in relation to
applications received seeking consent to sterilisation. Given the level of
detail in this document and that no
submissions raised issues or concerns about
the present legislative framework, the Institute has not made specific
recommendations
for reform. The revised test to give consent to treatment that
has been formulated
requires the Board to adopt the Decision-Making Process, providing a
rights-based approach to decision-making. This test more directly
focuses upon
the patient’s view, wishes and preferences, rather than the existing test
to consent to sterilisation (and other
special treatments) which requires the
Board to adopt what it considers to be in the patient’s best interests.
13.6.16 Sterilisation matters are rare in Tasmania, with no approvals having
been granted since January
The last reported
decision was in 2014.
addressing a separate question in the Issues Paper, the Interim Children’s
Commissioner stated as follows in relation to
substitute consent to the
sterilisation of children:
While I understand that applications for authority to perform sterilisation
on children are becoming increasingly rare, there remains
a question of whether
involuntary sterilisation of children can ever be appropriate at all. The UN
Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities has expressed ‘deep
concern’ that the Senate Committee referred to above fell short of
recommending
prohibition of sterilisation of children in the absence of their
prior, fully informed and free consent. This is not a matter which
I intend to
express a view on at this time ...
Gender Dysphoria
13.6.17 Earlier sections of this Part explained treatment for gender
2’ treatment for gender dysphoria is irreversible and can include
long-term infertility. Under the current definition
of ‘special
treatment’, Stage 2 treatment fits within the class of special treatments
as a treatment likely to render
the person infertile, requiring the
Board’s consent.
13.6.18 The Full Court of the Family Court has recently considered the issue
of consent to Stage 2 treatment for a 17-year-old
The Full Court
commented that judicial understanding of Gender Dysphoria and its treatment have
fallen behind the advances in medical
It noted that
Gender Dysphoria is a recognised mental disorder, and noted the risks associated
with not treating a young person with
treatment was therefore seen as therapeutic in nature. The Full Court concluded
that ‘[t]he treatment can no longer
be considered a medical procedure for
which consent lies outside the bounds of parental authority and requires the
imprimatur of
noted, however, that court authorisation continues to be required where a person
is under the care of a state government
department, or where there is a genuine
dispute or controversy about whether the treatment should be administered
— for example,
if parents or medical professionals are unable to
13.6.19 The decision aligns with the comments of the Human Rights Committee
which recently commented that ‘[i]t is concerned
that the delays and costs
associated with obtaining court authorisation may compromise the success of such
hormonal treatment for
individuals concerned and cause them psychological harm,
and welcomes the State party’s willingness to reconsider the role
Family Court in such
recommended that Australia should ‘[c]onsider ways to expedite access to
stage two hormone treatment for gender dysphoria,
including by removing the need
for court authorisation in cases featuring uncontested agreement among parents
or guardians, the child
concerned and the medical team, provided that the
treatment is provided in accordance with the relevant medical guidelines and
13.6.20 The Act does not presently distinguish between therapeutic and
non-therapeutic sterilisations with both falling within the
class of special
treatment. This raises the question of whether there should be an exception to
the definition of ‘special
treatment’ when Stage 2 treatment is
performed for therapeutic purposes to treat Gender Dysphoria. If the Act
permitted a person
responsible or guardian to consent to Stage 2 treatment on
the basis that it is therapeutic, a further question is then whether the
approach should be adopted for other treatments that are therapeutic in nature.
13.6.21 The Issues Paper asked for feedback about whether there needs to be
any changes to the existing definition and classification
of ‘special
treatments’. The OPG commented:
The OPG proposes that gender reassignment treatment should be added to the
current list of special treatment. Those aspects or phases
reassignment treatment that are likely to render the person infertile would
currently be included as special treatment,
however the OPG suggests it would be
prudent to consider adding it as a separate item. Having said that, the OPG has
no expertise
in this area – consultation with staff of THS’s Sexual
Health Service would be obviously be appropriate.
This submission suggests that gender reassignment treatment not be a matter
falling within the authority of a person responsible or
13.6.22 EOT also submitted that consent to medical interventions for intersex
children intended to modify sex characteristics should
require Board
In February 2016, the former Anti-Discrimination Commissioner released a
discussion paper on Legal recognition of sex and gender diversity
in Tasmania:
Options for amendments to the
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act
Among other matters
the paper considered issues related to surgical intervention on infants with an
intersex variation.
This matter is of considerable concern to the intersex community and one that
has been the subject of consideration and report by
the Senate Community Affairs
References Committee.
A key recommendation of the Senate Committee
that all medical treatment of intersex people take place under guidelines
that ensure treatment is managed by multidisciplinary teams
within a human
rights framework. The guidelines should favour deferral of normalising treatment
until the person can give fully informed
consent, and seek to minimise surgical
intervention on infants undertaken for primarily psychosocial reasons
To give effect to its recommended approach, the Committee proposed all
medical interventions relating to intersex children aimed at
modifications of
sex characteristics for psychosocial reasons be authorised by a civil and
administrative tribunal in each state
or territory or the Family Court (whose
child welfare jurisdiction under the
Family Law Act
applies also to the
application for the sterilisation of children without disabilities and exists
concurrently with state and territory
Responsibility for determining the mechanism for expanding the jurisdiction of
relevant tribunals was referred to the Standing Committee
on Law and Justice for
consideration.
In line with the recommendations of the Senate report, the former
Anti-Discrimination Commissioner recommended in her paper related
functions of the Guardianship and Administration
‘That treatment or any intervention primarily undertaken to modify or
“normalise” the visible or apparent sex characteristics
of children
for psychosocial reasons be classified as “special medical
procedures”, and require consent of a Tasmanian
board or tribunal such as
the Guardianship and Administration Board informed by experts on gender and sex
diversity.’
Guardianship Act
gives authority to the Board to provide
consent to medical treatment where there is evidence a person, by reason of
disability, is
unable to given informed consent or refusal to medical treatment
unless the procedure is required in urgent circumstances to save
person’s life or to prevent serious damage to a person’s health.
Contravention of these provisions may result in criminal prosecution and
proceedings for civil remedies. For the purposes of the
Guardianship Act
medical treatment includes any treatment intended or is reasonably likely to
have the effect of rendering permanently infertile
the person on whom it is
carried out.
Medical intervention in relation to an intersex child (other than that
required for emergency purposes) is likely to be irreversible
long-term adverse consequences.
It is for this reason that EOT recommends that consideration be given to the
appropriate mechanism for granting approval for any ‘normalising
treatment’ prior to the child being sufficiently mature to make informed
decisions of their own. There are strong grounds for
considering whether the
child will acquire the capacity to make a decision regarding surgical
intervention in the future and, if
so, the presumption should be against
performing the procedure until that time.
13.6.23 The Terms of Reference did not require recommendations about these
areas as part of this review. These matters have broader
relevance beyond
children and adults with disability to which the Act presently applies.
Specifically, it involves a broader discussion
children who are unable to understand matters relevant to the giving of consent
due to age and maturity
(ie children without
competence). These
are acknowledged to be important issues and it is appropriate that they be
considered separately. It is noted
that, at the time of writing, the Australian
Human Rights Commission is presently undertaking community consultation in
to medical interventions involving people born with variations in sex
characteristics.
consistent approach is desirable and this may necessitate reform to the Act
depending upon whether the Act continues to apply to
children and if so, whether
specifically to children with disability. This issue was discussed earlier in
Other matters
13.6.24 The Issues Paper asked a broad question about whether any particular
treatment decisions should require a special test to
give consent.
Are there any types of treatments that should involve a special test for the
giving of consent? If so,
13.6.25 There were three submissions addressing this question. One commented
that consideration should be given to the extent of a
person’s incapacity
and the need to promote a person’s wishes. These matters have been
addressed in Parts 3, 6, and 11,
as well as throughout this Report.
13.6.26 EOT made submissions about surgical intervention on infants with an
intersex variation, which were addressed in the previous
paragraph. OPG
submitted that there could be merit to the Act setting out specific tests for
consent to sterilisation and termination
of pregnancy, consistent with the
policies developed by the AGAC about consent to treatment in these
circumstances. These matters
have also been considered in earlier paragraphs.
13.6.27 The Institute also sought submissions about whether the community
considered there were any treatments where substitute consent
ought not be
permitted in any circumstances.
Are there any matters where substitute consent should never be
13.6.28 Three respondents answered this question, with two indicating that
there should not be any automatic preclusion within the
Act. The OPMHS commented
that euthanasia (ie with the explicit intention of terminating life) should not
be able to be the subject
of substitute consent, noting that ‘this is to
be distinguished from removing treatment which is burdensome or futile.’
The Institute notes that euthanasia falls outside of the scope of this reference
and is governed by other
legislation.
Legal representation for matters involving
applications for consent to special treatment
13.6.29 The Issues Paper noted that, given that decisions relating to
substitute consent to special treatment involve invasive or
serious procedures
that are likely to have an irreversible effect, it is important that
patients’ rights and interests are
protected and promoted. One way that
that could be achieved is through a legislative requirement compelling legal
representation
for patients the subject of an application to the Board for
consent to special treatment. In practice, it is already within the scope
Board’s powers to obtain separate representation for a
The AGAC Protocol
in relation to Sterilisation also provides that the Board should ensure that a
person the subject of an application
for consent to sterilisation is legally
represented. The question is therefore whether existing mechanisms enabling
legal representation
in these circumstances are sufficient, or if the community
expects legislative measures that compel legal representation for patients.
15 also considers ways that a person the subject of a Board hearing might be
better engaged in the process.
13.6.30 The Issues Paper asked whether the Act should compel the Board to
arrange independent representation for a patient at a hearing
involving an
application for consent to special treatment.
Should the Act require mandatory legal representation for people for whom
consent to special treatment is
13.6.31 There were five responses to this question, with two answering in the
affirmative, one answering in the negative, and the
OPG commenting that this
should be required where the patient is opposed to the special treatment. The
OPMHS answered that they defer
to ethicists and the views of the Institute.
13.6.32 Representation of a person the subject of a Board hearing is
considered more fully in Part
The Institute does not
propose any special legislative response for applications relating to consent to
special treatment and refers
to discussions later in this Report.
Continuation
of special treatment
13.6.33 The Board can authorise a person’s guardian to consent to the
continuation of special treatment or further special treatment
of a similar
This may be done
at the guardian’s request, or with their
guardian’s authority can be revoked, or conditions or directions
Similar provisions
apply in other
13.6.34 The Institute asked for community feedback about whether there is
need for reform of the provisions of the Act addressing
consent to continuation
of special treatment that has been approved.
(i) What improvements could be made to the way in which consent to the
continuation of special treatment can be given?
(ii) How could the Act better deal with the giving of consent to long-term or
indefinite treatment?
13.6.35 Only the OPG answered the first question, commenting that it
considers the current arrangements adequate. On this basis, the
Institute does
not propose any legislative reform.
13.6.36 In relation to the second question, the OPG made the same submission.
The OPMHS commented:
Further tests to allow a long-term or indefinite consent could be considered.
Review could be triggered by changes in circumstances
such as changes in the
condition, the Represented Person, side effects, or significant changes,
evidence, or advances, in available
13.6.37 The Institute notes that this is the only submission raising this
alternative and it is thus not proposed as a matter for
reform. The Institute
observes that the Convention requires interventions that are subject to review,
proportional, and operate for
as short a time period as possible. These
obligations support retention of existing requirements.
13.7.1 This next section reviews other health care and treatment matters not
dealt with previously in this Part.
Participation in research
13.7.2 The Act does not provide any special test when giving substitute
consent to participation in medical research. Decision-makers
must therefore
apply the same tests that apply to give consent to any other treatment. The
Issues Paper noted that the ‘best
interests’ test might be difficult
to apply in all situations dealing with substitute consent to participation in
for example, where:
• a person receives a placebo — receiving, or the potential of
receiving a placebo may not improve the patient’s
outcomes; or
• treatment is experimental in nature — the benefits of a
particular treatment may be the purpose of the research; or
• the reason for wanting to participate in research is for altruistic
purposes, rather than to treat any particular condition
that the patient has
— the research might be in the ‘best interests’ of the
community at large, but it might be
difficult to establish that the treatment is
specifically in the patient’s best interests.
Recommendation 13.9 proposes that the Act require decision-makers to make a
decision in accordance with the Decision-Making Process,
focussed on a
person’s values, preferences and wishes. The approach removes the
‘best interests’ basis of decision-making
for people unable to give
their own consent. This reform would improve some of the challenges listed
13.7.3 Participation in medical research involves balancing competing issues.
On one hand, participating in research could have direct
benefit for the
participant. Research also serves a public benefit and can lead to medical and
technological advancements
. Restricting the ability
of people with disability to participate as subjects in research can limit the
veracity of the research.
On the other hand, participants with support needs should not be exploited.
13.7.4 The Convention provides that no one must be subjected to medical or
scientific experimentation without their free
The National
Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) ethical guidelines which govern
research in Australia provide that, where
a participant does not have capacity
to consent, the ‘person authorised to consent’ may
There are special
provisions dealing with consent to participation in research in the majority of
other Australian
13.7.5 There was broad support for the Act including provisions dealing with
consent to participation in research where a person is
unable to provide their
own consent. Both Associate Professor Jo
and Professor
James Vickers
that the current lack of provisions in the Act creates uncertainty. They
commented that this will be an increasing issue
as research continues in
relation to the prevention and treatment of dementia. The Board made a similar
observation.
13.7.6 Dr Lisa Eckstein
made the following observations:
Whether and in what circumstances a surrogate decision-maker can enrol a
person in research is an ongoing challenge in Tasmania. As
identified in the
issues paper, the provision of surrogate consent depends on a research project
satisfying both the definition of
‘health care’ and/or
‘medical treatment’ and the ‘best interests’ criterion.
Both of these can
be unclear in the context of medical research. Consider, for
example, a longitudinal study on the activity levels of older persons,
involve providing participants with a fitbit and correlating their activity
level with a health outcome such as falls/injury
presentations. Would this fit
within a definition of health care for which a ‘person responsible’
could provide consent?
If research falls within the definition of ‘health care’ and/or
‘medical treatment’, a person responsible
also must consider the
trial to be in the person’s best interests. This can be very difficult to
establish in the context of
most clinical trials, which typically involve a
placebo arm and/or an intervention whose benefits are currently unclear. In
circumstances—for example, where there is no currently accepted
treatment for a condition—a clinical trial might satisfy
this criterion.
However, more commonly, ‘best interests’ will be equated with
standard medical care.
And yet it would be a travesty to prevent any medical research on persons
without capacity to consent. This would render whole areas
of disease incapable
of progressing (e.g., dementia—noting especially Tasmania’s research
strengths in this area, including
work by the Wicking Dementia Research and
Education Area) and foreclose an important component of broader research groups,
older persons. Precluding surrogate consent for research also can fail
to respect a person’s previous wishes if they have previously
that they would like to participate in research or consented on their own behalf
at a time when they had capacity. Notably,
paragraph 4.5.3 of the NHRMC National
Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research (‘National
Statement’) provides
that ‘persons with a cognitive impairment, an
intellectual disability, or a mental illness are entitled to participate in
and to do so for altruistic reasons’.
13.7.7 Dr Rick McAllister made similar observations:
Research is conducted to gain a benefit or potential benefit for research
participants in a study and potentially a direct benefit
to future patients.
What underpins research is that ‘No Harm’ is experienced by a
participant. Safety is always the first
priority. Health and Medical Human
Research Ethics Committees ensure research submissions meet the National
Statement on Ethical
Conduct in Human Research and researchers abide by the
Australian Code for the Responsible Conduct of Research.
13.7.8 The Board’s submission also made the following observations and
There is currently no legislative framework to regulate substitute consent to
participate in research which may mean that people with
decision making
incapacity are missing out on treatment that may be of benefit to them. The
Board would support the incorporation
of this within the Act.
13.7.9 The OPG’s submission also expressed support for the Act
containing separate provisions dealing with the substitute consent
participation in medical research and experimental health care.
13.7.10 One respondent commented that there should be no research conducted
on participants without the ability to provide their own
consent. Another
respondent submitted that research should only be permitted where the individual
has given their own advance consent
to participate in that particular research
13.7.11 Given the issues identified above, and that it has broad support, the
Institute proposes that the Act be revised to make special
provision in relation
to consent to research.
Recommendation 13.10
That the Act contain special provisions dealing with the substitute consent
to the participation in research for adults who do not
have the decision-making
ability to provide their own consent.
13.7.12 The Issues Paper asked for feedback about what components should be
included within the legislative framework for substitute
participation in research. The following questions were posed:
If the Act incorporates special provisions in relation to research:
(i) How should ‘research’ be defined?
(ii) What, if any, research should be able to be performed without
(iii) What, if any, research should a person responsible be able to consent
(iv) What, if any, research should the Board need to consent to?
(v) What test(s) should apply to the giving of consent to participation in
13.7.13 Answers are outlined in the following paragraphs:
How should research be defined?
13.7.14 The first question was what should be classified as
‘research’. Acts in other jurisdictions generally distinguish
between experimental research and clinical trials, although no distinction is
made in Victoria.
Northern Territory and Victoria, non-intrusive examinations, observing a
person’s activities and collecting information
are excluded from the
definitions of medical
13.7.15 The Board’s submission supported consistency across
with ‘medical research and experimental health care’, although did
not articulate what these terms should be
defined to mean. It suggested,
however, that ‘provisions should differentiate between low and high risk
13.7.16 Professor James Vickers suggested that there should be a distinction
between medical research that is likely to cause harm,
versus environmental
research which is unlikely to have a detrimental impact on the person. He
suggested this could be framed in
terms of a ‘low’ or
‘high’ risk distinction, or refer to ‘interventions’
compared to the administering
13.7.17 Dr Rick McAllister submitted that:
New guardianship legislation should clearly distinguish between a
‘medical research procedure’ that is an adjunct to ‘medical
treatment’ and a ‘medical research procedure’ that is
undertaken for the purposes of medical research and not primarily
purpose of providing a medical intervention to treat a person’s current
When a ‘medical research procedure’ is carried out as an adjunct
to ‘medical treatment’, the procedures dealing
with substitute
consent to ‘medical treatment’ should govern legal authorisation for
the treatment and the requirements
of the relevant ethics committee should
govern ethical authorisation for the ‘medical research
procedure’.
New definitions
New guardianship legislation should indicate that:
(a) Research that is carried out as an adjunct to ‘medical
treatment’ is not a ‘medical research procedure’
purposes of requiring authorisation when a person is unable to consent to that
(b) A procedure is not a ‘medical research procedure’ unless it
is approved by an ethics committee.
13.7.18 The OPMHS suggested the following as a possible definition:
• Investigation which does not, or is unlikely to, confer benefit to
the patient, but is being used to better the understanding
of conditions or
their treatments and management.
• Treatment which is being given only or largely for the benefit of
• Treatment where the choice of treatment is dictated by the research
project protocol, rather than through informed consent.
What, if any, research should be able to be performed without
13.7.19 The Issues Paper asked whether there were any research procedures
that ought to be permitted without consent in circumstances
participant was unable to give their own consent.
13.7.20 Dr McAllister suggested that the Victorian approach could be
patient to be given an experimental drug that they could potentially benefit
from where there is no person responsible
able to provide consent. Dr McAllister
In the event that a researcher discovers that the eligible patient does not
have an identified Responsible Person, the GAAT should
have provision for the
eligible patient to be afforded the right to participate in the research
study/trial.
Section 42T is utilized in Victoria with positive outcomes for the eligible
patient, researchers and the Guardianship Administration
13.7.21 The OPMHS commented that this could occur: ‘Where there is
little or no risk of harm, including the harm of significant
distress. Provided
there is ethics approval by the relevant authority.’
13.7.22 Another respondent commented that research should only be able to be
performed with the advanced written consent of the person
and not otherwise.
What, if any, research should a person responsible be able to consent
13.7.23 The next question asked was what authority a person responsible ought
to have in relation to giving consent to participation
in research.
13.7.24 In other jurisdictions, a person responsible is generally able to
consent to experimental
In Victoria,
substitute consent to participation in research cannot be provided where the
person is likely to gain decision-making
capacity to provide their own consent
within a reasonable time.
If a person has given a direction in an ACD, then that operates as valid
These provisions
are built into the proposed Decision-Making
13.7.25 In Victoria and the ACT, a person responsible can consent to a person
participating in a clinical trial without the tribunal’s
consent where the
trial has ethics committee
The tribunal
then acts as a dispute resolution and review venue. In New South Wales and
Queensland, the tribunal must consent to
participation in clinical
The NSWLRC has
recently recommended that a person responsible be able to consent to any medical
research procedure, including clinical
13.7.26 Dr Eckstein submitted:
a person responsible should be able to consent to participation in research
that has been approved by a Human Research Ethics Committee
(HREC). The HREC
should specifically consider whether the research is suitable for surrogate
decision-making, in accordance with
the provisions set out in Chapter 4 of the
National Statement. This includes an assessment under paragraph 4.5.4 that
risks and any burden involved in the proposed research are justified
by the potential benefits of the research’. For research
for which an HREC
has approved a waiver of consent, this waiver should also apply for persons
without decision-making capacity, unless
specified otherwise by the HREC.
13.7.27 Dr McAllister submitted:
A personal guardian or an enduring personal guardian with ‘medical
research procedure’ powers or a health decision maker
should be permitted
to authorise participation in a ‘medical research procedure’ for the
principal when the principal
lacks the capacity to make their own decision about
the matter.
The Public Advocate should be permitted to authorise participation in a
‘medical research procedure’ which is a ‘significant
procedure’ for a person who does not have the capacity to authorise their
own participation and who does not have a personal
guardian, an enduring
personal guardian or a health decision-maker to make that decision for them.
13.7.28 The OPMHS stated that a person responsible should be able to consent
to participation in the following research:
Research which is not burdensome for the patient. If there might be minor and
transient discomfort, and minimal risk, e.g. radiological
examination, blood
tests, non-invasive examination including psychological testing or psychiatric
evaluation.
13.7.29 One respondent commented that research should only be able to be
performed with the advanced written consent of the person
and not otherwise.
What, if any, research should the Board need to consent to?
13.7.30 The Institute asked whether there was any research that should only
be performed with the substitute consent of the Board
rather than a person
responsible.
13.7.31 Dr Eckstein submitted:
It is unclear what review by the Tribunal of individual research proposals
would add to this process in terms of protection of vulnerable
13.7.32 The OPMHS suggested that the Board might be appropriate to consent
to: ‘Research which might be burdensome for the patient
to experience.
Research where there is significant risk of harm.’
13.7.33 Associate Professor Dickinson commented that, if Board approval were
required for a clinical trial rather than a person responsible
or guardian, it
would seem more efficient for the Board to approve a particular clinical trial,
rather than each individual participant’s
participation in that trial.
This is the current approach in New South Wales where the Tribunal approves of
the participation of
people with disability in a clinical
The Tribunal then
decides whether a person responsible can consent to an individual participant
participating in the trial, or if
the tribunal needs to approve each
participant’s
participation.
endorsed this approach on the basis that it avoids the need for the tribunal to
hear multiple applications for consent to
the participation of each adult in the
Some criticise
this approach, however, because the research has already received independent
approval from a specialist ethics committee,
and requiring further approval from
a tribunal adds another layer of complexity and duplicates
What test(s) should apply to the giving of consent to participation in
13.7.34 Noting that the existing ‘best interests’ test does not
fit neatly with matters involving requests to give substitute
participation in research, the Institute asked what test the Act should require
representatives to apply when deciding
whether to give consent.
13.7.35 The OPG submitted that the test should ‘take into account the
wishes (or likely wishes) of the person, and where there
is not likely to be any
direct benefit to the represented person to weigh up the potential benefits to
society against any risks
to the person.’ Dr Eckstein submitted that the
test should be consistent with the test provided under the National Statement.
She commented that the Act should facilitate participation in research despite
it not necessarily benefiting the individual, but
instead having benefit to
society. Dr Eckstein noted that the existing test in New South Wales limits
research in this regard. Their
present test requires a particular drug or
technique to be ‘intended to cure or alleviate a particular condition from
the patients suffer’:
How would such a test fit, for example, with a low-risk trial assessing
optimal sleeping environments? It’s hard to argue that
sleeping conditions
are a ‘particular condition from which the patients suffer’ and yet
this research is likely to be
low risk and might be highly valuable for many
nursing home residents.
13.7.36 Dr Eckstein referred to the Wisconsin Social Services Chapter 54.25.
Duties and Powers of Guardian of the Person as a useful
example upon which
legislative reform could be
She supported the
Act providing that, where a person’s capacity fluctuates, consent should
be sought when they have capacity,
consistent with the approach under the
National Statement.
to provide consistency with the National Statement, it was submitted that the
Act should be explicit about the need to respect
a person’s expressed
objections to participate in
In Queensland,
substitute consent to participation in research cannot be provided if the
patient objects.
South Wales, on the other hand, substitute consent can be provided despite the
patient’s objection in some
circumstances.
13.7.37 Dr McAllister commented:
A substitute decision maker should only be permitted to authorise
participation in a medical research procedure if they believe that
it would not
be contrary to the patient’s personal and social wellbeing to participate
in that procedure. When determining
whether the procedure would not be contrary
to the patient’s personal and social wellbeing, the following are relevant
considerations:
a) the decision that the person might have made in the circumstances
b) the extent to which the procedure is likely to benefit the patient, or a
class of people to which the patient belongs
c) the matters set out in section 42U(1) of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
He also stated that the ‘focus should be upon whether the patient
won’t be harmed.’
13.7.38 On the other hand, Associate Professor Dickinson raised potential
issues with legislation referring to the term ‘risk’
research environment, many matters are considered risks — for example,
taking up a person’s time — meaning
that there is ‘risk’
involved in seemingly straightforward procedures like taking blood or performing
an ultra sound.
She suggested that, instead, the Act should distinguish between
low risk research and research where there is significant risk of
adverse health
outcomes. Both Associate Professor Dickinson and Professor Vicker commented that
there should be consideration given
to the benefits that the research may have
for society as a whole, in addition to considering the ‘best
interests’ of
the participant.
13.7.39 The OPMHS suggested that the test include:
• Whether the research is burdensome for the patient
• Whether there is risk of enduring discomfort
• Whether there is significant risk of significant harm.
Other matters
13.7.40 Dr McAllister’s submission also expressed a desire for national
consistency in relation to laws dealing with substitute
consent to participation
in research, and mutual recognition of laws:
a patient in Tasmania may require interstate transport from time to time for
ongoing medical specialist treatment. For patients who
are randomised or
enrolled into a research study/trial general recognition of the legislation
allowing enrolment to a research study/trial
should be mutually recognised.
It was also noted that there is a need for applications to be dealt with
within reasonable timeframes ‘taking into consideration
the specific study
Protocol inclusion criteria.’ The desirability of nationally consistent
laws is discussed in further detail
The Institute’s view
13.7.41 The Terms of Reference for this review did not require specific
consideration of the way that research is treated under the
Act. The Institute
considered it appropriate to raise the issue of consent to research in its
Issues Paper, observing that most guardianship
legislation in other
neatly fit within the substitute
consent regime for other treatment decisions.
13.7.42 Answers to questions outlined in the preceding paragraphs highlight
that there are a range of views about the way in which
the Act should deal with
consent to participation in research. It is appropriate that the details of
legislative reform be the subject
of separate detailed consideration and
consultation. The Institute instead adopts a principled approach when making the
recommendations in relation to how the Act might better address
substitute consent to participation in research.
Recommendation 13.11
(1) That non-intrusive examinations, observing a person’s activities
and collecting information be excluded from the definition
(2) That the Act confirm that a person can give advance consent or refusal to
consent to participation in research including in a
valid advance care
(3) That a donor of an instrument be able to confer authority upon their
enduring guardian to make decisions about consent to participation
in research
where the donor does not have decision-making ability to give their own consent.
(4) That the Board be able to confer authority upon guardians to make
decisions about consent to a represented person’s participation
research where a represented person does not have decision-making ability to
give consent.
(5) That the Board have authority to make decisions about consent to
participation in research for a person who does not have decision-making
to give consent.
(6) That, if any research decisions are reserved as matters for the Board
only, there be clear distinction between the role of the
Board and the relevant
Human Research Ethics Committee, avoiding duplication of functions.
(7) That the Act provide that, where a person’s decision-making ability
fluctuates, an attempt should be made to seek their
consent to their
participation in research at a time when the person has decision-making ability
to consent.
(8) That the Act provide that, for a decision-maker to give consent to a
person’s participation in research, that research must
have the approval
of a Human Research Ethics Committee.
(9) That the Act enable decision-makers to give consent to a person without
decision-making ability participating in research that
is not intended to treat
a condition that the person has.
(10) That a person’s objection to participate in research be respected.
(11) That there be an ability to apply to the Board for the review of a
decision to consent or refusal to consent to participation
in research.
Withdrawal or withholding of life
sustaining measures
13.7.43 The Act does not specifically refer to the giving of substitute
consent to the withdrawal or withholding of life sustaining
measures. The Issues
Paper commented that confirming when and how life sustaining measures may be
withdrawn or withheld may provide
greater clarity. It was noted that several
Australian jurisdictions have specific provisions that address substitute
consent to the
withdrawal of life sustaining measures. In Queensland, South
Australia, the ACT and the Northern Territory, definitions of health
withholding or withdrawal
of life-sustaining
In Queensland
and the ACT, this is limited to circumstances where the commencement or
continuation of the measure for the patient
would be inconsistent with good
medical practice.
NSWLRC recommended that New South Wales legislation also confirm that a person
responsible or the tribunal can consent to the
withdrawal or withholding of life
sustaining measures if starting or continuing the measure would be inconsistent
with good medical
practice and the decision gives effect to the patient’s
will and preference.
13.7.44 The Institute asked for feedback about whether the Act deals
adequately with substitute consent to the withholding and withdrawal
sustaining measures.
(i) Should the Act provide separate provisions dealing with withholding or
withdrawing life sustaining
13.7.45 There were eight responses to this question, with
endorsing the Act
containing specific reference to the role and powers of persons responsible to
give consent to the withdrawal or
withholding of life prolonging/sustaining
treatment, with the OPMHS also commenting that ‘[p]rotections for medical
practitioners
in withholding burdensome or futile treatments needs to be
considered.’ MIGA submitted that confirming the powers of a person
responsible to consent to the withdrawal or withholding of life sustaining
measures would provide certainty and protection for medical
practitioners and
persons responsible:
To avoid confusion, it is better to include withholding or withdrawing life
sustaining treatment within the general definition of
healthcare which a person
responsible, a guardian or the Board can consent to.
The present position, particularly around the powers of a person responsible,
is uncertain and does not reflect the realities of end
of life care ...
It is concerning that both practitioners treating such patients and persons
responsible, each acting in good faith, could potentially
be committing offences
under the Act because of uncertainty around the powers of a person responsible.
This potential scenario must
be avoided.
Although it is open for practitioners to rely on the doctrine of futility in
withholding or refusing treatment, this is a question
of interpretation often
involving complex considerations. It does not of itself provide a sufficient
basis to guide those involve
in end of life care decision-making.
13.7.46 Both the Board and the OPG’s submissions indicated that they
had not observed any issues with the current legislative
framework. The Board
The Board does not wish to comment except to say that these are largely
medical decisions, as treating doctors may only ethically
offer treatment which
is not futile or burdensome.
In practice the Board has received very few applications of this nature.
13.7.47 Whilst the OPG stated that it had not observed problems with the
current framework, it submitted that it ‘is not opposed
inclusion’.
13.7.48 One submission did not support the Act containing specific provisions
dealing with substitute consent to the withdrawal or
withholding of life
sustaining measures, whilst another did not express a concluded view either
13.7.49 As noted previously, most Australian jurisdictions confirm that
withdrawing or withholding treatment (including life sustaining
comprises ‘health care’, meaning that it falls within the ambit of
the authority of persons responsible, guardians
and the Board. For the sake of
clarity, and noting MIGA and the OPMHS’s statements about the confusion
that the present situation
can create, it is proposed that the definition of
health care includes the withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining health
Recommendation 13.12
That ‘health care and treatment’ be defined to include the
withdrawal or withholding of health care and treatment, including
sustaining measures.
13.7.50 In circumstances where the Act did contain specific reference to the
withdrawal and withholding of life sustaining measures,
the Institute also asked
(ii) If so, who should be able to consent and when?
(iii) Should a patient’s advance directions about withdrawing or
withholding life sustaining measures be binding? Should there
exceptions?
13.7.51 There were six responses to the first question, with all endorsing
any representative, including persons responsible, guardians
and the Board,
having the power to consent to the withdrawal or withholding of life sustaining
13.7.52 Recommendation 13.12 has the effect of proposing that the withdrawal
and withholding of health care falls within the definition
of ‘health care
and treatment’. Other recommendations in this Report provide that persons
responsible, guardians with
specific powers in relation to health care and the
Board may give make decisions about ‘health care and
treatment’.
defining the withdrawal or withholding of health care within the definition of
health care, it becomes unnecessary to make further
recommendations confirming
who ought to be able to give consent. The effect is that withdrawing and
withholding of health care, including
life sustaining measures, are dealt with
in the same way as any other health care or treatment that is not ‘special
treatment’.
13.7.53 Seven respondents addressed the second question, which asked what
effect a direction in an ACD giving advance consent to the
withdrawal or
withholding of life sustaining measures should have. Six endorsed valid ACDs
that apply to the situation at hand and
which are clear and unambiguous being
binding and unable to be overruled by a representative. The OPMHS commented that
individuals
may not always be realistic or able to predict future circumstances.
In particular, it commented that ‘[a]n ACD directive should
not direct a
doctor or health practitioner to engage in unethical or inappropriate
treatment.’
13.7.54 The nature and effect of ACDs were discussed in detail in Part 5.
Responses to this question all support and reinforce the
effect of the
recommendations made in that part which, in summary, provide that advance
refusal to consent to health care or treatment
in a valid ACD must be binding if
it applies to the situation at
The Institute does
not propose any further reforms to address these matters.
Other issues?
13.8.1 The Institute called for any other submissions about how else the Act
could be improved in relation to consent to treatment.
How else can the Act be improved in relation to consent to
13.8.2 There were eight submissions addressing this question. Answers can be
grouped into the following themes:
• a need for education for medical practitioners and the public more
• the importance of the Act being understandable and there being simple
processes that do not detract clinical time from
• issues relating to chemical restraint. This is addressed elsewhere in
this Report;
• that service providers need to know who a person’s person
responsible is;
• that people ‘should be able to sign to stop
treatment’.
This issue was considered in the previous paragraph where it was noted that,
the effect of Recommendation 5.6 is that any direction
in a valid ACD consenting
to the withdrawal or withholding of life sustaining measures must be binding if
they apply to the situation
at hand; and
• a desirability to formalise processes for persons responsible, for
example, having them complete documents.
Under the existing legislative framework, individuals are able to formally
designate a decision-maker for medical treatment matters
via an instrument. This
was discussed in Part 5, with it being proposed that this situation
13.8.3 In relation to the role of education in relation to health care and
medical treatment, Professors White and Willmott submitted:
Doctors’ knowledge of the law in this area should be recognised as an
important part of effective legal regulation of guardianship
and end-of-life
matters. ...
accurate knowledge of the law on the part of doctors is an important
component of effective legal regulation of guardianship matters.
Our research
has shown that significant knowledge gaps exist among medical professionals
practising in the end-of-life field, and
we have argued this can have
consequences for patient care and the legal liability of medical professionals
Our view is that knowledge of ethics and law in this area should be
integrated in medical education to provide doctors with the ability
knowledge of the law in clinical decision-making and understand its role and
significance in practice.
13.8.4 Further discussion about the important role of education is contained
in Part 18.
Similarly, the
need for the legislation and processes to be simple is addressed in Part 18.
Recommendations throughout this Report
have considered the need for the law to
be accessible and appropriately responsive to the needs of the community.
13.8.5 In summary, all matters raised in response to this final question have
been addressed elsewhere in this Report.
for Consent to Health Care and Treatment
Introduction
14.1.1 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to address the
appropriateness of current measures that address poor conduct of
responsible and guardians not acting in the best interests of a person with
impaired capacity. In this Report, we call these
‘safeguards’. Part 12 considered safeguards in relation to personal
and financial decisions. This
Part considers how the Act provides safeguards for
decision-making about health care and treatment.
14.1.2 The Convention requires safeguards that are proportionate, appropriate
and effective.
should always be to prevent abuse and neglect, rather than placing an
over-reliance upon punishment. Representatives and
supporters play a vital role
in the community and can be instrumental in advancing the interests of the
person they are supporting.
There is therefore a need for balance, so that the
role does not become unnecessarily burdensome, or the risk of personal liability
too great, resulting in well-intentioned and suitable individuals being
reluctant to accept these roles if required. On the other
hand, with these roles
comes a high degree of trust and confidence that the person has as their
paramount consideration the desire
to uphold the rights and interests of the
represented person. There can be serious consequences where a representative
exceeds their
power, with the potential for that conduct resulting in a denial
of a person’s human rights or endangering their health and
wellbeing. In
the context of consent to health care and treatment, the legislation in
Queensland describes this balance as one between
ensuring that people are not
deprived of necessary health care because of an impaired capacity, whilst
ensuring that the health care
that people receive is necessary and appropriate
to maintain or promote their health and
14.1.3 Whilst this Part focuses on specific safeguards for consent to health
care and treatment, other parts of this Report are also
aimed at strengthening
the rights of people who do not have the ability to make decisions about consent
to health care and treatment.
Part 13 considered reform to the Act to better
strengthen the rights and interests of people receiving health care and
Part 7 proposes that a legislated supported decision-making framework
apply to decisions about consent to health care and treatment.
Parts 15 and 16
consider the role and functions of the Board and Public Guardian which are also
relevant to those provisions in the
Act dealing with substitute consent to
health care and treatment. Proposed reforms to the overriding guiding principles
are also intended to promote a greater rights-based approach to
decision-making and the operation of the Act as are reforms proposed
providing greater recognition and facilitation of the role of support for
decision-making.
ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines
14.2.1 The ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines were explained in Part 12. The
Safeguards Guidelines provide:
ALRC Safeguards Guidelines
Safeguards should ensure that interventions for persons who require
decision- making support are:
(a) the least restrictive of a person’s human rights;
(b) subject to appeal; and
(c) subject to regular, independent and impartial monitoring and review.
(2) Support in decision-making
(a) Support in decision–making must be free of conflict of interests
and undue influence.
(b) Any appointment of a representative decision-maker should be:
(i) a last resort and not an alternative to appropriate support;
(ii) limited in scope, proportionate, and apply for the shortest time
possible; and
(iii) subject to
14.2.2 This Part evaluates current safeguarding provisions relating to
consent to health care and treatment against the ALRC’s
Guidelines.
Least restrictive interventions
14.3.1 The first of the ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines provides that
safeguards should ensure that interventions for people who
decision-making support are the least restrictive of a person’s human
rights. The need to adopt the least restrictive
intervention has been considered
throughout this Report, including Part 3 (‘Guiding Principles of the
Act’), and Part
6 (‘Decision-Making Capacity’).
14.4.1 The second of the ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines provides that
safeguards must ensure that interventions for people who
require decision-making
support are subject to appeal. The following paragraphs considers how the Act
approaches appeals of decisions
Appeals against decisions of the
14.4.2 Part 12 reviewed how the Act deals with appeals against Board
Recommendation
12.1 proposes that the Act enable internal reviews of Board decisions. It also
recommends that the process of external
appeal to the Supreme Court be free and
simple. Part 12 also looked at the use of alternative dispute resolution, with
revision to
the Act to incorporate the use of mediation being
It was also
suggested that the Public Guardian play a role in mediating
This approach is
considered later in this Part in the context of consent to health care and
Appeals in relation to decisions of persons
responsible
14.4.3 The Board does not have express power to review the decisions of a
person responsible unless they are appointed as a
If someone does
not agree with a person responsible’s decision, then the person could:
• request the Public Guardian’s
• apply to the Board for the appointment of a guardian. Any appointed
guardian would then act as the person
responsible.
14.4.4 These approaches may assist where a person responsible is
to consent to health care or treatment. However, they may be of
limited benefit where a person responsible
to health care or
treatment which is carried out before an application is made or
determined.
Board’s submission explained:
There is currently no formal mechanism in the Act for objecting to a person
responsible’s decision, or for that matter a guardian’s
administrator’s decision and the Board has no direct power to review such
decisions. However under the Act the Board has
the power to hear a review of a
guardianship or administration order which may result in consideration of the
appropriateness of
decisions made by a guardian and/or administrator. As there
is no formal appointment of a person responsible there is no ability
to review a
person responsible’s appointment and therefore decisions they have made.
There is some benefit in directly addressing
this in the Act.
The Board notes the appointment of a guardian upon application may come too
late given the necessary notice period and appeal period.
14.4.5 The OPG also commented that:
Currently, the only real option open to someone objecting to decisions of a
person responsible is to make an application for guardianship
to the Board. This
allows the Board to appoint a guardian, including the Public Guardian under an
emergency order, which provides
a measure of protection to represented persons
(particularly where the person responsible is not making decisions in the best
of the person) but can amount to a somewhat heavy-handed solution.
Guardianship appointments are not an appropriate mechanism when
it is the person
themselves objecting to the decision: they might be objecting to both the
decision and to being deprived of the
right to make their own decision. In such
cases the more restrictive alternative of a guardianship order is no
14.4.6 Recommendation 14.2 proposes that the Board be empowered to give
persons responsible advice and directions, consistent with
the approach in
relation to guardians and administrators. In several jurisdictions, the Public
Advocate/Public Guardian plays a role
in mediating disputes. This was discussed
in Part 12, with Recommendation 12.4 proposing that the Public Guardian have
power to attempt
to resolve disputes, consistent with the approach in South
14.4.7 The Institute called for submissions about whether and how a person
responsible’s decisions should be able to be reviewed
or appealed.
Should the Act provide a mechanism to object to a person responsible’s
decision? How could this
14.4.8 Most respondents endorsed there being some mechanism to object to a
person responsible’s decision, with one commenting
that, whatever the
approach, there should be consistency with the approach adopted for enduring
guardians. Three
respondents
endorsed the
Public Guardian playing a role in attempting to resolve disputes.
14.4.9 Recommendations 5.7 and 12.4 propose an extended role for the Public
Guardian to mediate disputes about ACDs or between representatives.
appropriate, for the reasons articulated in those parts, that the Public
Guardian have equivalent authority to mediate disputes
in relation to persons
responsible. This provides the Public Guardian complementary powers to resolve
disputes that can arise in
each area of a person’s life.
Recommendation 14.1
That Recommendation 5.7 be extended to enable the Public Guardian to attempt
to resolve disputes involving persons responsible and
consent to health care and
Safeguards in
relation to persons responsible
14.5.1 The ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines provide that interventions for
people who require decision-making support must be subject
to regular,
independent and impartial monitoring and
The Guidelines
also require support in decision-making to be free of conflict of interest and
undue influence.
14.5.2 There is no mandated oversight or monitoring of a person
responsible’s activities. Unlike Board-appointed guardians,
responsible are not required to periodically report to the Board about a
person’s circumstances. Their appointment
is not fixed for a certain term
or their suitability assessed by the Board. The main circumstance where the
Board might be called
upon to review the activities of a person responsible is
where a person applies to the Board, for example, for the appointment of
guardian. An applicant might do this where they hold concerns that a person
responsible is not acting in a patient’s interests.
If the Board considers
that the test for the appointment of a guardian is met, then it may appoint
another person (or the Public
Guardian) as a guardian, granting them powers to
consent to health care and treatment. The effect is to remove the authority of
individual otherwise eligible to act as the person responsible.
14.5.3 Discussion in Part 13 included formulating reforms intended to
safeguard the rights and interests of people without decision-making
give their own consent to health care and treatment. This includes prescribing
that some health care and treatment fall
outside of the scope of the authority
of a person responsible. The following paragraphs evaluate and outline
recommendations about
other safeguards that should be adopted to minimise the
risk of a person responsible acting improperly and remedying situations where
Advice to persons responsible
14.5.4 Enduring guardians, guardians and administrators can apply to the
Board for advice or direction. There is no equivalent provision
person responsible
request the Board’s advice or enabling the Board to give them directions.
Section 35 of the Act provides, for example, in
relation to enduring guardians,
• an enduring guardian may apply for advice or direction by the Board
on any matter relating to the scope of their role or the
exercise of any
• the Board may approve or disapprove of any act proposed to be done by
the enduring guardian;
• the Board has the power to give such advice or direction as it
considers appropriate; and
• the Board may, of its own motion, direct or offer advice to an
enduring guardian.
14.5.5 The Issues Paper commented that the ability to seek guidance from the
Board might act as a preventative strategy and avoid
situations where a person
responsible intentionally, or unintentionally acts outside of their powers. In
Victoria, for example, a
person responsible can apply for
Responses were
sought about whether the Act should enable a person responsible to apply to the
Board for advice and directions.
Should a person responsible be able to apply to the Board for
14.5.6 Eight submissions addressed this issue,
with all supporting persons responsible having the ability to apply to the Board
advice. Both MIGA and the OPG submitted that the Public Guardian should have
a role to provide advice and attempt to resolve disputes
involving persons
responsible, with an application to the Board only being necessary if this first
step is unsuccessful. This was
addressed in the previous paragraph.
14.5.7 Consistent with the views of respondents, it is proposed that there be
consistency with those parts of the Act which enable
representatives to apply to
the Board for advice and directions. As the OPG observed, this approach is
consistent with adopting the
least restrictive alternative as it may avoid the
need for a guardianship order.
Recommendation 14.2
(1) That a person responsible be able to apply to the Board for advice or
direction on any matter relating to the scope of their role
or the exercise of
(2) That the Board be empowered to:
(i) approve or disapprove of any act proposed to be done by a person
responsible;
(ii) give such advice to a person responsible as it considers appropriate;
(iii) direct or offer advice to a person responsible of its own motion.
Eligibility to act as a person
responsible
14.5.8 Assessing the suitability of a person to act as a representative or
decision-maker can act as a safeguard, by promoting the
likelihood that those
who have authority to make decisions are most appropriate to act in that role.
Suitability was considered in
Part 12 in relation to eligibility to be a
guardian and
administrator.
reviews how the Act addresses criteria to be a person responsible.
14.5.9 A patient’s person responsible is determined by reference to a
person’s relationship with the patient. A hierarchical
list determines
Giving classes of individuals priority to be the person responsible
14.5.10 The Institute asked for feedback about whether the list of persons
responsible should continue to be expressed in a hierarchy
and, if so, whether
the current order is appropriate.
Should there be an order of priority to determine the person responsible? If
so, should the current order be
14.5.11 Eight respondents addressed this question with mixed views expressed.
Three expressed support for retaining an order of priority
on the basis that it
provides clarity and avoids potential conflicts and disputes. The OPG’s
submission, however, stated that
it did not consider the hierarchical list
avoids or reduces the risk of conflict:
The intention of creating this ‘hierarchy’ is, presumably, to
avoid conflict by specifying who out of various people with
relationships, should have authority. However there is still plenty of room for
conflict, and the order of priority does
not help at all if, for example, there
is no spouse but multiple children and/or close friends.
14.5.12 Three responses indicated support for removing the priority
Carers Tasmania
observed that the hierarchy does not necessarily reflect those closest to the
patient or those most suitable to make
decisions about treatment:
it may be person is much better supported by a close friend or sibling than
their spouse, or an aunty or uncle rather than a parent,
dependant on family
14.5.13 The OPG also commented that:
In reality, many (if not most) medical practitioners are not aware of the
order of priority and will seek the consent of the person
who is presenting as
the ‘logical’ source of consent. This might be the sibling who
attends with the patient, or the
daughter when the husband is overwhelmed and
stressed, or the close neighbour when the only child lives overseas ...
The OPG believes the health practitioner seeking substitute consent is
capable of identifying the most appropriate person responsible
where there are
multiple contenders. Mostly, there is a ‘stand out’ or logical
14.5.14 Two responses, including the Board, did not express a concluded view
14.5.15 Three submissions contained suggestions about how to address
potential disputes, for example, where there are multiple adult
children of a
patient. The Board stated:
Sometimes there is more than one carer or close friend eligible to act, and
in the case of dispute, or where there is no person responsible,
there must be
an application to the Board for the appointment of a guardian to give consent.
Less cumbersome alternatives to this
could be for the Public Guardian to have
the power to mediate between disputing candidates or possibly even be the
default person
responsible — as is currently the case with forensic
procedures. Against this, is the concern that little effort may be made
locate a person responsible if the easy default position, is that the Public
Guardian becomes person responsible.
14.5.16 The OPG and MIGA also commented that there could be a role for the
Public Guardian to mediate disputes about who has authority
to act as the person
responsible where there are multiple contenders. This is the effect of
Recommendation 14.1.
14.5.17 MIGA also suggested that the Act clarify that, if there is more than
one person falling within the class of individuals eligible
to be the person
responsible, it should be the first available who has authority to act. This
raises the relevance of a person’s
willingness and availability to act, a
matter addressed
14.5.18 MIGA also suggested that public education could assist, stating:
The health professions and the community need further, practical advice about
how to deal disputes over who should act as person responsible.
This is to try
and avoid initial disputes escalating to a point where more formal resolution
mechanisms are required.
The Institute endorses preventative strategies to minimise and mitigate the
severity of potential disputes arising in this area. Recommendations
use and benefits of community education are outlined in Part
14.5.19 On balance, the Institute does not propose revision to the existing
approach of listing those classes of individuals eligible
to be the person
responsible in a hierarchy. This is because it provides an objective means to
identify the person responsible. The
alternative would be to provide third
parties the role of determining subjectively who they consider is most
appropriate. That individual
may not have sufficient information upon which to
decide who is most appropriate to act. There would be the risk of that decision
being based on misinformation or itself causing disputes between competing
eligible individuals. At worst, this could lead to delay
in the provision of
health care and treatment whilst these matters were being resolved. Instead, it
is suggested that the Act provide
some parameters around which to assess an
individual’s eligibility (discussed below).
14.5.20 One respondent stated that there is a need for legislative clarity
a person who is later
established to not have the highest priority to act as the person responsible.
The Institute is unaware of
whether this is considered more broadly to be an
issue requiring resolution, and so has not made any recommendations to this
Recommendations outlined below are likely to at least in part address
this issue, by requiring a person to be available to be a patient’s
responsible.
Priority of a Guardian
14.5.21 The Act states that if a person has a
guardian, that guardian is the represented person’s person
responsible.
The wording
does not distinguish between full and limited guardians. The Board has
interpreted this to mean that guardians with only
limited powers are the person
responsible irrespective of only having limited powers (for example, to only
make decisions about where
This extends the
powers of limited guardians and removes the ability of family members who would
otherwise be the person responsible.
The Public Guardian has commented that
‘[t]his is hardly the least restrictive option, and difficult to see that
it is in the
represented person’s best
interests.’
14.5.22 New South Wales and Victorian legislation provides that a guardian
only has priority as a person responsible
if they have authority to make the
relevant decision
similar provision applies in the Northern Territory and South
A different
approach is adopted in South Australia, where the list defining the person
responsible is not expressed to be in any
The effect is to
allow individuals fitting within a lower listed class to be the person
responsible.
14.5.23 The Institute enquired whether the Act should provide that a guardian
is only a represented person’s ‘person responsible’
have been given the express power to consent to treatment. That power could be
conferred in the instrument (in the case
of an enduring guardian), or by the
Board (in the case of a Board-appointed guardian).
Should a guardian only be the person responsible if they have been given
express authority to make treatment
14.5.24 Six submissions addressed this question with
endorsing revision to
the wording of the Act to provide that a guardian is only a represented
person’s person responsible where
they have been given explicit powers in
relation to health care and treatment. Rationales included that extending the
powers of a
guardian where it is intended that they have only limited powers is
not usually the least restrictive option. It was also observed
that the effect
can be to exclude others who might be more appropriate or suitable to act as the
person responsible, for example
a spouse or adult child. The OPMHS commented
that it has observed this causing confusion.
14.5.25 MIGA submitted that, whilst they endorsed this reform, they
considered it important that, procedurally, the Board should raise
this during a
hearing whilst appointing a guardian, so that it can consider whether the
guardian should be given powers in relation
to health care and treatment
matters. The OPG also submitted that a guardian should also be the person
responsible where there is
no one else to act in that capacity.
14.5.26 Sandra Taglieri SC did not support this reform and endorsed retention
of the existing position that a guardian becomes the
represented person’s
person responsible. It was commented that this may avoid the need for a
guardianship order and that it
is appropriate that guardians ‘trump’
other decision-makers. It was noted that a guardian is appointed based on
suitability
and that if a person wishes to make treatment decisions for their
family member, then it is open to them to apply to be their guardian.
submitted that, if an order is silent on the powers of a guardian to consent to
treatment, then this ought to be implied where
a need to give consent to
treatment arises as this may limit multiple applications being made to the Board
(except in the types of
cases where there was a potential for conflict between a
limited guardian and the person’s represented person, there is confusion
on the part of a limited guardian about what power he/she has, or where a
limited guardian was concerned about acting outside of
their powers, so refuses
or delays in giving consent, or the medical professional involved in the
anticipated treatment will not
provide treatment because of fear of committing
14.5.27 The Institute is persuaded by comments that conferring powers by
implication or by default is not the least restrictive alternative.
the need to adopt the least restrictive alternative, Recommendation 8.3 proposes
that the Board be required to tailor
orders and only give representatives powers
where they are satisfied that the test for appointment of a representative is
in relation to each function conferred. The Board would be unable to
do this if legislation continued to provide default powers to
a guardian to make
health care and treatment decisions as the person responsible irrespective of
whether the Board intended to confer
those powers.
14.5.28 A further factor supporting this reform is observations that the
present approach can create angst in emergency situations
where the Public
Guardian is appointed as a temporary or limited guardian to make a particular
decision under an emergency order,
with the consequential effect being that they
then become the person responsible with power in relation to medical treatment
This has the potential to further escalate distress felt by family
members, particularly where an emergency order has been required
circumstances. In urgent circumstances, family members do not have an
opportunity to apply to be appointed as the guardian,
and only the Public
Guardian may be appointed.
This Report does not recommend any revision to that
arrangement.
14.5.29 There may, however, be situations where a guardianship order is made
in non-urgent circumstances where the patient’s
spouse, or someone who
would otherwise be the default person responsible, is not appointed as a
guardian. This might be for reasons
including that the Board has determined that
they are unsuitable to act in that capacity, or that they did not nominate
for the role. Both of these situations could arguably justify them
being equally unsuitable to act as person responsible with power
to make health
care and treatment decisions. Nevertheless, in these circumstances, the Board
retains the ability to confer upon the
appointed guardian powers to consent to
health care and treatment, removing the otherwise default authority of that
family member.
14.5.30 It is proposed that reform be achieved in line with the approach in
Victoria and New South Wales, where legislation confirms
that a guardian is the
person responsible if they have authority to make the relevant
Recommendation 14.3
That the definition of ‘person responsible’ in the Act provide
that a person’s guardian is their person responsible
only if the order or
instrument appointing the guardian authorises the guardian to make a decision
and treatment or all health care and treatment
Classes of persons responsible
14.5.31 The hierarchy of those eligible to be an adult’s person
responsible (after their guardian) is as follows:
• their spouse;
• the person having the care of the other person; and
• a close friend or relative of the
14.5.32 ‘Spouse’ is defined to mean a person who is in a
significant relationship with a person under the
Relationships
This means that
they have a relationship as a couple, and are not
Relationships Act
does not require a relationship to last any particular
length of time to be a ‘significant relationship’, although the
duration of the relationship is
Under the Act,
for a spouse to be a person responsible, there must be a ‘close and
relationship’.
is a ‘close and continuing relationship’ is not
In New South
Wales, the definition of ‘spouse’ clarifies that where there is more
than one person who would fall within
the definition, the last person to qualify
as a ‘spouse’ is taken to be the
clarification is included in the
Coroners Act 1995
14.5.33 The Act does not give priority to any particular category of family
and friends. In Western Australia and Victoria, nearest
relatives are given
priority over close
concepts of family and relationship within their
definitions. For example, in
the Northern Territory, ‘relative’ is defined as including ‘a
person who is related
to the adult in accordance with customary law or tradition
(including Aboriginal customary law or
tradition).’
provisions are included in South
In Tasmania,
Coroners Act 1995
also recognises family relationships according to
Aboriginal and Torres Strait islander customs and
traditions.
14.5.34 The Issues Paper asked for feedback about whether there needs to be
any changes made to these definitions.
Should there be any changes made to the definition of the person
responsible?
14.5.35 Several responses raised matters considered elsewhere in this Part,
for example, issues relating to the priority of a guardian.
14.5.36 One respondent commented that there are differences between the
hierarchy of those eligible to give consent under the
(Tas) and the Act which create inconsistency and confusion. Another
respondent made a similar observation in addressing a separate
question in
relation to participation in research.
14.5.37 The
Human Tissue Act
(Tas) provides the following
order of priority of those who may act as the ‘senior available next of
kin’ with certain
powers to consent to organ donation following an
adult’s death:
• a spouse or other person in a significant relationship with the
deceased within the meaning of the
Relationships Act
, if they are
• where there is no spouse or partner available, then their adult son
or daughter who is available;
• where there is no adult son or daughter available, then their parent
who is available;
• where there is no parent available, then their adult brother or
sister who is available; or
• where the deceased is an Aboriginal person, then a person who is an
appropriate person according to the customs and tradition
of the community or
group that the deceased person belonged
The effect is to prioritise certain family members over others and to
prioritise family over close friends.
14.5.38 MIGA submitted that the current definition ‘works well where
there are no disputes between persons responsible of equal
status, as long as
the term “close friend or relative” acknowledges the diversity of
cultural relationships.’ It
suggested that this could be achieved through
guidelines. It also commented that disputes could be addressed through granting
to the Public Guardian to mediate. This is the effect of Recommendation
14.5.39 Both the Board and the OPG raised whether the term ‘person
responsible’ is the most appropriate term to describe
the role. The Board
observed that the term is not widely understood and suggested that the role
could be better explained using the
name ‘health decision-maker’ or
similar, consistent with the VLRC’s recommendations and subsequent
legislative
OPG also stated that consideration could be given to adopting the title of
‘health decision-maker’ as a more descriptive
name. It commented,
however, that the term could be inadequate if the scope of authority of the
traditional person responsible were
broadened to other areas such as
uncontentious accommodation decisions.
14.5.40 The Institute does not propose major revision to the definition of
‘person responsible’. It does, however, recommend
reform to provide
greater clarity to the definition and to reflect more contemporary concepts of
family and relationships. The first
recommendation is that the definition
clarify what is to occur in situations where a patient has more than one spouse.
Coroners Act 1995
it is suggested
that the Act clarify that, where a person has more than one person fitting
within the description of ‘spouse’,
then it is the most recent
spouse who is the person responsible. This reduces the risk of conflicting views
or disputes.
14.5.41 The second proposal also creates greater alignment with the
Coroners Act 1995
providing that the Act acknowledge and respect relationships recognised under
Aboriginal customary law. This aligns with more contemporary
recognise relationships existing under customary law.
14.5.42 The Institute has not made recommendations to revise the name
‘person responsible’, although is not opposed to
that change.
Apparent lack of awareness of the term or role may be improved through community
education rather than legislative revision
to the name. There is also a risk
that reforming the title could be confusing for those stakeholders who are
familiar with the term.
Recommendation 14.4
That the definitions of ‘person responsible’ in s 4 of the Act be
revised as follows:
• to provide that, where there is more than one person falling within
the definition of ‘spouse’ then it is the
most recent person to
qualify as the spouse who is the ‘spouse’ for the purposes of this
section; and
• for the term ‘relative’ to include any person who is
related to the person in accordance with customary law or
tradition (including
Aboriginal customary law or tradition).
Other Eligibility Criteria?
14.5.43 Currently, the Act only provides that a person is the person
responsible if they rank highest in priority by virtue of their
relationship
the patient. The Act does not require any subjective assessment of the
person responsible’s relationship
the patient. Their
suitability is not part of the test to be the person responsible in the way that
a proposed guardian or administrator
must satisfy the Board that they are
suitable to act in order to be appointed to the role. By contrast, in
Queensland, a person must
be culturally appropriate to be a person
responsible.
In the ACT, a
health professional can choose the person responsible that they believe is best
able to represent the views of the
14.5.44 Similarly, the Act does not explain what ought to happen where a
person, who would otherwise be the person responsible, declines
to act, or is
incapable of acting. In Victoria,
Queensland, Western Australia and
South Australia, the definition of ‘person responsible’ requires the
person to be reasonably
available and willing and able to
As explained earlier
in this Part, the definition of ‘senior next of kin’ under the
Coroners Act 1995
(Tas) also requires the person to be available to act
in that role.
14.5.45 In the Northern Territory, for a person responsible to be
‘willing and able’ to consent, they must have unimpaired
decision-making capacity, be reasonable available, willing to make the decision,
understand their obligations to act in accordance
with the principles of the
Act, have all the information needed, adequate time to consider that
information, understand the effect
of making the decision and must make the
decision voluntarily and without undue
In New South
Wales, the Act provides that a person can decline in writing to act as a person
responsible.
14.5.46 In practice, if a third party (for example, a health practitioner or
family member or friend) considers that the person is
inappropriate to act in
the role, then it is open to them to make an application to the Board for the
appointment of a guardian.
The OPG’s submission commented that they have
observed that, in practice, treating practitioners may make an assessment as
who they consider most appropriate or ‘logical’ to provide consent.
14.5.47 The Institute asked for community response about whether a person
responsible should have to meet any other criteria over
and above their
relationship to the patient.
Should the Act provide any other test to be eligible to be a person
responsible other than their
relationship?
14.5.48 The Board submitted:
There are currently no provisions in the Act in respect of persons
responsible:
• to ensure that they only make decisions if and when the person is
incapable of doing so
• to require unimpaired decision making capacity
• to require recording or reporting to the Board about decisions made,
or providing for the review of decisions
• to accept or refuse the decision making role should they become
incapable of acting
The Northern Territory’s test of a person responsible being ‘able
and willing to consent’ ... sets out useful criteria
for a person
responsible’s suitability for the role.
For the sake of consistency and good practice, whatever test is adopted for a
person responsible when deciding whether to consent
to treatment, should be the
same as the test imposed on a guardian and as far as possibly reflect the
principles adopted across the
law obligations.
14.5.49 Social Work Services RHH also commented that persons responsible
should need to meet similar tests to those applying to guardians.
MIGA similarly
endorsed additional criteria of persons responsible being reasonably available,
willing and able to act in that role.
14.5.50 The OPG submitted:
A person responsible who has not been appointed by the Board or the
individual themselves (e.g., under an enduring guardian appointment)
required to have a close and continuing relationship with the individual such
that they have an understanding of what the
person’s wishes might be and
can consider ‘best interests’ in a broader sense than purely
14.5.51 Both PCT and Carers Tasmania submitted that there should be
flexibility to adequately address situations where a person who
would otherwise
be eligible to be the person responsible is deemed unsuitable, for example, in
instances of domestic violence. PCT
submitted that this could be achieved by
enabling a person to appoint a substitute decision-maker in an ACD without
having to undertake
the formal process of appointing an enduring
made similar
observations, commenting that there can be practical difficulties where a
partner might be subject to a family violence
order and restricted from visiting
the patient. One submission commented that there may be no need for additional
criteria to determine
the eligibility of the person responsible if the list
defining the person responsible were not expressed to be in any order of
14.5.52 Consistent with responses received and approaches in other
individuals to meet to become a person responsible. The primary aim is to
promote decision-makers being appropriate for the role.
This acts as a safeguard
and promotes the interests of the patient. It provides greater consistency with
requirements for Board-appointed
representatives who are assessed for
suitability. It also facilitates the timely provision of consent where there
might otherwise
be delay in identifying and locating a person responsible.
14.5.53 The Institute endorses providing means for individuals to easily
renounce from their otherwise default position as a person
responsible. This was
also discussed in Part 4, with Recommendation 4.15 proposing that the Act
provide a simple method for enduring
guardians to resign. As discussed in that
part, this approach provides a quicker and more reliable method to identify a
decision-maker.
People should not feel that they have to accept the role, and
there should be an easy way for them to communicate this to third parties.
Recommendation 14.5
(1) That the definition of ‘person responsible’ in s 4 of the Act
require a person to:
• be reasonably available;
• have decision-making ability in relation to the particular matter;
• be willing to act; and
• be in a close and continuing relationship with the person.
(2) That the Act provide a simple, non-mandatory form for individuals to
complete and register with the Board to indicate their refusal
to act as person
responsible.
14.5.54 The next question posed was, if eligibility is assessed based on
criteria other than a person’s relationship to a patient,
who should make
that assessment. In Victoria, an eligible applicant may apply to the tribunal
for an order dealing with the authority
of a person to act as person
responsible.
The tribunal
may also make an order on its own motion. The Act enables the tribunal to
declare that a person is not the person
responsible
does so, it may either affirm or set aside the person’s
Similarly, in
Western Australia, a person with a proper interest in the
may apply to the
tribunal for a declaration as to the relevant
decision-maker.
Queensland, if there is a disagreement about who is the patient’s person
responsible, and the disagreement cannot be resolved
by the Public Guardian
mediating the matter, then the Public Guardian may make a
If the Public
Guardian exercises this authority, then it must advise the tribunal, providing
relevant information as
prescribed.
Who should assess whether a person responsible is ineligible or incapable of
14.5.55 Four submissions addressed this question. The OPG submitted that it
ought to be the treating health practitioner seeking consent
who should evaluate
a person’s ability to act as the person responsible. MIGA also stated that
it did not support any test
upon the health profession to determine whether a
person is ineligible or incapable of acting as person responsible. It commented
that any disputes could be referred to the Public Guardian to mediate, and
ultimately to the Board if required. Another submission
also stated that this
could be resolved by the Board.
14.5.56 The OPMHS submitted that the approach should be consistent with the
approach to the assessment of a proposed represented person
or represented
person. It commented that there should be a presumption of capacity until there
is evidence raising concerns. The
OPMHS also submitted that:
It should also be possible to ask the Board for a review if it is felt that
there is a possible conflict of interest and doubts about
this influencing
decisions of the PR, or if the PR does not appear to be acting in the
represented person’s interest.
14.5.57 It is proposed that the Act be revised to require a person to be
available, willing and able to act as a person
responsible.
Alternatives
would be for either the Board or Public Guardian or the relevant treating health
practitioner to make an assessment
against this criteria. The Board and Public
Guardian provide a level of independence and it is the Board who performs this
evaluating the suitability of representatives for personal or financial
matters. On the other hand, health practitioners are experienced
assessments about a person’s ability to give consent to health care and
treatment. If a treating health practitioner
does not consider that a patient
has the ability to give consent to a particular treatment, then they defer to
the patient’s
person responsible to seek that consent. This process does
not require the Board or Public Guardian’s involvement. If a health
practitioner were required to obtain the Board or Public Guardians’
determination about the person responsible’s ability
to act in the role,
then this raises the question of whether the Board or Public Guardian should be
involved in making the initial
determination about the patient’s ability
to themselves consent. This would impact the efficiency and effectiveness of the
system and likely risk negative health outcomes for patients. On this basis, the
Institute does not propose that any different situation
apply to assessing an
individual’s ability to act as a person responsible.
14.5.58 It is proposed, however, that the Board have jurisdiction to make an
order in relation to who is a patient’s person
responsible if a dispute
cannot be resolved by more informal means. This enables the Board to declare who
a patient’s person
responsible is, without having to appoint a guardian
who would then, under the current model, have authority to consent to health
care and treatment as the person responsible.
Recommendation 14.6
That the Board be able to make a declaration about the authority of a person
to act as another person’s person responsible upon
application from an
interested party, or of its own motion.
or detention of patients within secure facilities
14.6.1 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to address the question of
how long-term or indefinite medical treatment in institutional
non-institutional settings should be dealt with. Some patients admitted to
secure treatment and care facilities are admitted
Mental Health
. Other patients fall within the Act’s jurisdiction where they are
unable to give their own consent to admission for reasons
other than mental
14.6.2 There is debate about whether a person responsible can consent, or
should be able to consent, to a patient’s admission
to a secure facility.
The Public Guardian reports that it is the practice of the THS to apply to the
Board for the emergency appointment
of a guardian
to consent to the
admission of patients at the Roy Fagan Centre
who do not fall
Mental Health
The Institute
understands that this approach is adopted on the basis that a person responsible
is not appointed to the role, but
is appointed ‘by default’, by
virtue of their relationship to the patient. Their suitability or otherwise is
not assessed
and their decisions are not ordinarily subject to the Board’s
oversight in the way that a guardian is appointed and supervised.
There is no
review or appeal mechanism for the decisions of a person responsible and they
may have conflicting
The Institute notes that some of these matters have been considered elsewhere in
this Report, with recommendations made for reform.
Notably, this includes
proposals requiring persons responsible to have a close and continuing
relationship with the person, and that
they be willing, able and available to
act, as discussed earlier in this
14.6.3 Responses to the Issues Paper suggest that differing views are
influenced by whether admission within a secure facility is
considered an
‘admission’ like any other admission of a patient to a place for
medical treatment, or whether it is viewed
as ‘detention’. On one
hand, some consider the ‘admission’ of a patient within a secure
facility to be incidental
to the treatment itself, and so closely linked that
both matters should fall under the single banner. It was also viewed as an
where the patient is indicating their willingness to be admitted, or
at least not expressing their objection. On the other hand,
some viewed the
admission of a patient within a secure facility as a deprivation of that
person’s liberty and that their lack
of objection does not necessarily
indicate their consent. Applying that perspective, the admission within a secure
facility was described
as ‘detention’ rather than an
‘admission’. Given the impact of detention upon a person’s
human rights,
some submitted that it is appropriate that there be safeguards to
protect and promote the person’s interests, including having
that decision
subject to monitoring and review.
14.6.4 The OPG’s submission explained:
It seems the purpose of the admission is construed as not being primarily for
medical treatment, but rather assessment, monitoring
and management. In
addition, it seems there are concerns that any admission is deemed to be
‘detention’ — regardless
of the views of the patient, whether
or not they are objecting, and whether the patient is deemed safe to take leave
from the facility
— due to the RFC being a secure facility.
14.6.5 The OPMHS’s submission demonstrates its contrary view:
To call the detention component of management ‘treatment’ is
inaccurate and misleading. It is often not done purely for
the best interests of
the RP [represented person] (e.g. it may be for the safety of others), and by
definition it is never done for
the Will and Preference for the RP.
14.6.6 Currently, issues arise particularly where an urgent appointment of a
guardian is required pursuant to an emergency
Only the Public
Guardian can be appointed as guardian under an emergency
If the Public
Guardian is appointed as a patient’s guardian, the Public Guardian then
becomes the person responsible by virtue
of that appointment. It is immaterial
whether the Public Guardian has only been appointed for limited purposes, for
example, to restrict
visits on behalf of the represented
14.6.7 This Report does not propose any change to who can be appointed under
an emergency order, specifically to extend those eligible
for appointment to
private representatives.
It is however, proposed that a guardian only be a person’s person
responsible if they have been granted specific powers in
relation to health care
and treatment matters.
This would resolve the current issue of the Public Guardian’s appointment
as guardian under an emergency order having the automatic
effect of overriding
any otherwise prior right of a family member or close friend to act as the
represented person’s person
responsible.
14.6.8 Coroner McTaggart has recently recommended that the RFC implement a
written policy and system to ensure that persons admitted
to RFC who are
incapable of giving informed consent to their admission, residency and/or
treatment at RFC are identified and only
admitted, treated and/or continue
residence with the substitute consent of a guardian, or pursuant to a power or
order under the
Mental Health
Coroner McTaggart
commented that:
it has been recognised that there are reasons against voluntary admission,
particularly where capacity for informed consent is doubtful.
These include: the
potential for patient coercion and abuse, fewer opportunities for discharge, the
patient’s lack of access
to legal advice, a lack of legal process or
determination; and the patient is not free to leave.
14.6.9 Coroner McTaggart expressed concern that, in the absence of an
appointed guardian, admission was ‘unchecked, not scrutinised
guardian and not subject to the formal processes of the law or amenable to
challenge.’
14.6.10 The Issues Paper outlined a range of options that could be considered
to deal with the giving of substitute consent to the
admission of a patient in a
secure facility. These included:
Consent only permitted by a Guardian
: requiring an application
to the Board for it to appoint a guardian (in circumstances where the person
does not have an enduring
guardian). This would involve the Act providing that
consent in these circumstances falls outside of the scope of a person
responsible’s
Consent permitted by a person responsible, unless the patient is
providing that a person responsible can consent so long as the
patient is not objecting. If a patient indicates their objection, then
would fall outside of the authority of the person responsible and the
appointment of a guardian would be required;
Consent permitted by a person responsible, but with that consent
able to be appealed:
giving power to persons responsible to consent to
admission, with that decision able to be appealed in certain circumstances. This
was the recommendation of the VLRC which recommended that the restriction upon
the liberty of a person in a supported residential
care facility require the
approval of all three of: the person in charge of the facility, the medical
practitioner and the substitute
decision-maker.
patient is consistently resisting or opposing the restriction, then an
application should be made to the tribunal to
It proposed that
the person, or someone concerned for their welfare, should be able to apply to
the tribunal or Public Guardian for
a review of the decision to
and that a consent
be able to last for a maximum of 12 months before
Consent only by the Board:
reserving power to consent to
detention as a matter for the Board. This is the effectively the approach in
South Australia.
14.6.11 In South Australia, a separate section is included within
guardianship legislation dealing with how a patient may be detained
secure facility.
terms, this section enables a
to apply to the
tribunal for an order authorising the detention of a represented
The tribunal may
authorise persons involved in the care of the person to use such force as may be
reasonably necessary to ensure
the proper medical or dental treatment, day to
day care and wellbeing of the person. The tribunal can only make an order if
that, if an order were not made or carried out, the health or safety
of the person or the safety of others would be seriously at
An application can
be made for the revocation or variation of an
14.6.12 Noting these options, the Institute asked for stakeholders’
views about who should have power to consent to the admission
of patients to
secure treatment facilities.
Who should be able to consent to the admission of patients to secure
treatment and care facilities where the provisions of the
Mental Health
do not apply?
14.6.13 There were five submissions that addressed this question. One
respondent submitted that these decisions should be referred
to the Board. The
OPMHS and Social Work Services RHH supported the position that it should only be
an appointed guardian that is
able to consent. The OPMHS confirmed that, where a
patient does not have an existing guardian, it makes application to the Board
for the appointment of a guardian to provide consent to the admission of a
patient at the RFC. It commented that state-run facilities
can have a conflict
of interest in these situations:
One salient point in this debate is the need for independent oversight and
safeguards for patients at the facility.
in South Australia is an exemplar of failure of oversight ultimately leading to
It went on to comment:
facilities have conflict of interest in providing adequate care. Care is
expensive, and in limited budgets, decisions are not necessarily
made with the
Best Interests or Will and Preferences of those in the care as the only priority
... It would be a folly to believe
that a state run facility would always simply
‘do the right thing’. Underpinning all of this, it is extremely easy
elderly or impaired people to be neglected, and psychiatry has a poor
history in terms of self-regulation.
14.6.14 The OPMHS did not agree that whether a patient is objecting is an
adequate measure of whether safeguards are required:
objection to detention is not an appropriate measure of the safeguards
required. A Persons capacity to object is commonly impaired
by their disability,
for example due to aphasia, inertia, impulsivity, memory impairment, and
emotional lability.
14.6.15 Social Work Services RHH made similar comments:
We need to ensure people’s rights are protected and their detention of
a person against their will is weighed up against what
is in their best
interests. Depriving a person’s liberty and autonomy (detention) is
serious and deserves clear and explicit
consideration, from a human rights point
of view. Many patients of secure facilities also fluctuate a lot in their views,
often agreeable
one day and demanding to leave the next. For some patients they
are unable to express their objection to detention due to communication
difficulties (eg aphasia), fluctuating mood, impulsiveness, inertia or other
14.6.16 The OPMHS submitted that persons responsible might not necessarily be
appropriate to act and may not act in a patient’s
best interests,
particularly if there are conflicting interests:
Detention has various implications, including financial, and there can be
inherent conflicts of interest when such a decision is made
by someone who would
ordinarily be a Person Responsible (for example financial implications of a
person leaving their house, social
implications of not having to provide care,
interpersonal conflict between the RP and the PR [person responsible]).
Identifying a suitable Person Responsible is fraught with difficulties, such
as conflicts of interests, elder abuse, family conflict,
and frequently the
emotional distress in the circumstances (e.g. anticipatory grief, i.e. anger,
guilt, denial) of the Person Responsible
which impairs their
decision-making.
14.6.17 It noted, however, that sometimes a person responsible might be the
most appropriate person to make decisions about a patient’s
admission to a
secure facility:
Counter to these arguments, a Person responsible is often best equipped to
make decisions on behalf of the Represented Person. To
ensure the human rights
of the RP are maintained, if a PR were to make decisions on detention, there
would need to be a mechanism
for review of a Represented Person’s
detention, and the adequacy of the facilities and care provided. Such a
mechanism would
need to be independent of both the facility in which the person
is detained, and the Person Responsible.
14.6.18 The Board did not put forward an explicit position about who should
provide consent in these circumstances, but observed that
under any model, there
must be appropriate safeguards to protect the rights and interests of the
patient and that currently, consent
by a person responsible does not afford
those safeguards. It noted obligations under the Convention in relation to
deprivation of
a person’s liberty:
The Board notes that Article 14 of the UN Convention requires that people
with disabilities are:
‘not deprived of their liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily, and that any
deprivation of liberty is in conformity with the law,
and that the existence of
a disability shall in no case justify a deprivation of liberty.’
Article 14 requires that if persons with disabilities are deprived of their
liberty through any process, other human rights protections
will also apply
The Board would support clarification in the Act, consistent with
international obligations, to ensure adequate safeguards for people
subject to detention in a secure facility and unable to consent to admission to
such a facility, exist.
Irrespective of who is authorised to make such a decision, the Board is
concerned to ensure that any decision which involves the detention
of a person
in a secure facility, whether against their will or otherwise, should be subject
to external scrutiny and review. That
would not be the case if the decision were
made by a person responsible as part of a treatment consent.
14.6.19 The Board noted, in contrast to the Act, the safeguards contained
Mental Health Act
in relation to the detention of patients:
clear lawful authority for the detention of patients exists under the
Mental Health Act 2013
Mental Health Act 2013
provides that a person who does not have capacity to consent can only be
detained in a facility by virtue of an assessment
order or treatment order,
which is subject to regular review by the Tribunal. The
Mental Health Act
(Tas) also provides for a formal avenue for complaints and review,
through the Official Visitor scheme. It is noted that persons
detained in a
secure unit who are not subject to the
Mental Health Act 2013
not subject to the scrutiny of the Official Visitor complaints scheme or any
other complaint scheme.
It endorsed consistency between the Act and the
Mental Health Act
relation to detention of patients:
As detention constitutes a fundamental abrogation of rights, it is important
that there be best practice and consistency across Tasmanian
legislation and
throughout Australia. Terminology consistent, as far as possible, with the
Mental Health Act 2013
(Tas) is desirable, where explicit reference is
made to detention in assessment and treatment orders.
14.6.20 The OPMHS also endorsed the approach under the
Mental Health
Those detained under the MHA have extensive safeguards, with MHT reviews, OVS
[official visitor scheme], and formal avenues for complaints
and review ... By
removing the presence of a formally appointed substitute decision-maker in
detention, the care of those under the
GAA would have nothing like those
protections. There would be no professional or independent review of their care,
which introduces
a double standard in the safeguards for detention between the
MHA and GAA.
14.6.21 The Board also endorsed the approach in South Australia, commenting
that ‘South Australia’s guardianship legislation
dignifies the
subject of detention with a separate heading setting out special powers to place
and detain a person.’
14.6.22 The OPG submitted that consent ought to be permitted by a person
responsible where the patient does not object to their admission.
supported on the basis that it is consistent with the patient’s will and
preferences and in their best interests as
it enables family members with an
existing relationship to the person to make this decision, rather than
decision-making being taken
away from family. The OPG stated:
The current practice in relation to RFC admissions is particularly concerning
as the application for a guardianship order is generally
‘urgent’ circumstances requiring the Public Guardian to be appointed
under the emergency provisions. This effectively
displaces the role of family
members, who until the point of transfer to the RFC have been providing consent
to other in-patient
treatment (often in other locked wards) and find, suddenly,
that their authority is no longer accepted. This unreasonably and unnecessarily
adds to their anguish and distress in an already stressful situation.
The practice of guardianship appointments being made when a person
responsible is able to consent to these admissions is inconsistent
principles underpinning the Act: it is not the least restrictive alternative;
does not serve the best interests of the person,
adding to both the represented
person’s and their family’s distress and anguish; and is commonly
inconsistent with the
wishes of the represented person (many or most of whom
would prefer family members to support or make decisions on their behalf,
many of whom object to the sudden appointment of a complete stranger to make
substitute decisions) ...
The OPG considers that additional oversight and safeguards are required if
restraint or force is required to convey the person to
or keep them in the
facility. The OPG does not contend that the consent of the person responsible
alone should be sufficient to authorise
substantial or ongoing restraint.
The Institute’s view
14.6.23 The Institute considers that only a guardian or the Board should be
permitted to consent to the detention of a patient on
the basis that it
safeguards the rights and interests of the patient.
14.6.24 The right to liberty of movement and freedom to choose one’s
residence is enshrined in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
The Convention
Committee states that
Liberty of movement, an adequate standard of living as well as the ability to
understand and have one’s preferences, choices
and decisions understood,
form indispensable conditions for human dignity and the free development of a
14.6.25 Article 18 of the Convention confirms the right to liberty of
confirms the equal rights of people with disability to liberty and security of
the person.
14.6.26 An article by former President of the Board, Anita Smith, published
on the Board’s website, notes:
Because of the importance of human liberty, the deprivation of a
person’s liberty without lawful authority is an assault under
criminal law
and in civil law ...
As with all assaults, it is usually a defence to a charge of deprivation of
liberty that such an act took place with the consent of
complainant/plaintiff. Where a person lacks capacity to understand the
circumstances of their deprivation of liberty because
of a disability, such as
dementia, it is not a defence to say that the person consented, as the quality
of their consent is impaired.
Similarly, acquiescence of a person without
capacity to understand what they are acquiescing to is also no
14.6.27 The Institute observes the following obligations under the
that require
interventions for people requiring decision-making support to:
• be free of conflict of interest – as the OPMHS commented,
family members may have conflicting interests in relation
to the admission of a
patient within a secure facility. Conflicts of interest are assessed in relation
to the appointment of a
The Board is
also an independent body absent conflicting interests;
• be proportional and tailored and operate for as short a time as
possible – the extended detention of a patient within
a secure facility
for an unlimited period and without review may not be proportional to the
intervention necessary to promote the
individual’s health and wellbeing.
The Institute proposes that the Act require consent to detention to be time
limited, and
subject to review and appeal; and
• be subject to regular review – a person responsible’s
consent to a patient’s detention within a secure facility
is not subject
to periodic review. Instead, it requires an interested party to make an
application to the Board for the appointment
of a guardian if they are
concerned. A person requiring decision-making support may not have access to
support to understand their
rights and the role of the Board in this regard.
The Institute proposes that approvals for a patient’s admission to be
time limited and subject to regular review and appeal.
14.6.28 One concern raised by the OPG was that the appointment of a guardian
results in that guardian being the person responsible
with power to consent to
all medical and dental treatment. This means that, if an emergency guardianship
order is made for the urgent
admission of a patient to the RFC, the Public
Guardian becomes the patient’s person responsible by default.
Recommendation
14.3 partly resolves this issue by proposing that a guardian is
only a patient’s person responsible if they have been given
powers in relation to consent to health care and treatment.
14.6.29 The Institute agrees with the Board’s suggestion that, like
South Australia, the Act provide a separate section dealing
with detention.
14.6.30 The Board’s submission commented that it would be useful for
the Act to clarify whether the relevant decision-maker
is able to, or should,
take into account the potential for risk to another person. Currently the Act
requires only consideration
of the patient’s best
Conversely, the
Mental Health Act
enables decisions about assessment and treatment orders
to take into account the safety of
As discussed in
, it is proposed that the Act provide consistency with the
, enabling decision-makers to take into account the risk of harm
to the patient, or another
An Official Visitor Scheme
of the Issues Paper considered the interaction between the
Act and other legislation, including the
Mental Health Act
. A variation
identified was that the
Mental Health Act
establishes an Official Visitor
Scheme in relation to approved facilities and the secure mental health unit at
whilst there is no
Official Visitors Scheme under the Act.
14.6.32 Official Visitor Schemes involve the appointment of members of the
community who visit approved facilities and prisons to
check how people are
being treated. Their role is to make enquiries, review the adequacy and quality
of facilities and receive and
investigate complaints. This acts as a safeguard
to oversee the promotion of a patient’s rights and interests.
14.6.33 Under the
Mental Health Act
, a principal official visitor is
whose functions
• to arrange for Official Visitors to
visit approved facilities and any premises from which patients are provided with
Mental Health Act
• to receive complaints from (or
concerning) patients, including complaints referred to the Principal Official
Visitor by Official
• to assess and conduct preliminary
inquiries into complaints received from (or concerning) patients, including
complaints referred
to the Principal Official Visitor by Official Visitors;
• to refer suspected contraventions of
Mental Health Act
, or other matters that may require investigation,
to the Health Complaints Commissioner or Ombudsman;
• to promote, amongst patients and
administrators and in other relevant quarters, an awareness of Official Visitors
• to report on suspected contraventions
Mental Health Act
or standing orders or clinical guidelines;
• to report on the extent to which the
objects of the
Mental Health Act
and the mental health service delivery
principles are being met;
• to raise with the Minister for Health
or relevant Chief Psychiatrist any matters of particular concern that come to
the Principal
Official Visitor’s attention; and
• any functions conferred upon it under the
Mental Health Act
any other Act.
14.6.34 The prescribed functions of Official
Visitors are then:
• to visit approved facilities and premises from which patients are
provided with services under the
Mental Health Act
• to receive complaints from (or concerning)
• to refer complaints received from (or
concerning) patients to the Principal Official Visitor;
• to report suspected contraventions of the
Act, or other matters that may require investigation, to the Principal Official
• to check that patients are being informed
of and accorded their rights;
• to monitor the adequacy and quality of
approved facilities, with particular regard to the recreational, occupational,
and rehabilitation facilities available to patients;
• to raise with the Principal Official
Visitor any matters of particular concern that come to the Official Visitor's
• to perform such other functions as are
conferred under the
Mental Health Act
or any other
14.6.35 Official visitors are required to visit approved facilities at least
once a month.
power to do all things necessary and convenient to discharge their
All individuals with
responsibilities under the
Mental Health Act
are required to help people
to make complaints, including having to notify an Official Visitor within 24
hours if a patient expresses
a wish to see them, or make a
14.6.36 Prison Official Visitors are also created under the
Corrections
Practitioner has a similar role of investigation of funded disability providers
Disability Services
The recent report following review of the
Disability Services Act
comments that stakeholder feedback indicated that ‘the absence of a
community or authorised visitors scheme was regarded as
a significant omission
to ensure compliance under the
14.6.37 Official/Community Visitor schemes are endorsed by the Australian
Human Rights Commission (‘the Commission’) as
providing an effective
safeguard to protect the rights and interests of people with disability in
institutional settings to ‘identify
issues of concern and bring these to
the attention of government and other oversight
stated that, in the context of people with intellectual disability, ‘it
may be difficult for people to self-advocate
in instances of violence, abuse and
neglect without the support of an independent oversight mechanism such as
community visitors.’
Smith and Rigby also endorse consideration being given to adopting official
visitor schemes in the guardianship jurisdiction, commenting
that ‘it has
always been recognized that people with disabilities may be inhibited from
taking a complaint by their disabilities
or by their dependence upon the
agencies about whom they might
14.6.38 At the time of writing, the Commission is consulting on how to
execute Australia’s obligations following ratification
of the OPCAT in
December 2017.
Commission describes the OPCAT as ‘an international human rights treaty
that aims to prevent ill-treatment in places of
detention through the
establishment of a preventive-based inspection mechanism.’ It requires
State parties that have ratified
the OPCAT to ‘introduce a system of
regular inspections to all places where people are deprived of their liberty in
prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment.’
requires places of detention to be monitored through a National Preventative
Mechanism (NPM) — a domestic entity or network
responsible for conducting
inspections and oversight of places where people are
The Commission
notes that:
The Australian Government has already indicated that the implementation of
OPCAT in Australia will focus on ‘“primary”
detention, such as prisons, juvenile detention, police cells and immigration
facilities’, noting that these environments
pose the most
‘acute’ challenges for people deprived of their
It is unclear the extent to which the implementation plan may address other
contexts, including residential care facilities, hospitals,
aged care facilities
and secure mental health
Some stakeholders
have submitted that these environments ought to be covered by
The Commission
commented that: ‘Some of the more acute human rights issues arise in
environments that are not traditionally
considered a “primary” place
of detention.’
14.6.39 The Issues Paper commented that it may be useful to extend operation
of an Official Visitor Scheme to those individuals without
decision-making
ability to consent to their own admission within a secure facility outside of
Mental Health Act
14.6.40 The Issues Paper enquired about the level of support for this
Is there merit in establishing an Official Visitor scheme for individuals
without decision-making capacity who are admitted to secure
facilities outside
Mental Health Act
14.6.41 There were nine responses to this question with all indicating
support or strong support for introduction of an Official Visitor
Scheme under
the Act, with the exception of the Public Trustee which submitted that it held
no view. Comments made in support of
this reform included:
It is envisaged that Official Visitors can have an important oversight role
receiving complaints; checking a represented person is
being informed and
accorded their rights: monitoring the quality and adequacy of approved
facilities and the care provided; and ensuring
guardians and administrators are
acting within the powers of the Order. This type of oversight is very important
to ensure the rights
of frail or vulnerable people in aged care, mental health
and the disability facilities are upheld, particularly in light of the
Independent Commissioner against Corruption’s report into Oakden, Older
Persons Mental Health Services in South
We see the current lack of official visitors, other than for mental health
facilities, as a significant gap in Tasmania’s safeguarding
An official (or community) visiting scheme is an important element in the
protection of the rights of people with a disability and
should enable enquiries
and inspections of group homes and other supported residential facilities, to
ensure compliance with the
relevant standards, that care and support is provided
in a way that respects the dignity and autonomy of the residents, to identify
any issues of concern, and for both individual and systemic
Official Visitor programs have the potential to provide important safeguards
for vulnerable people living in supported accommodation
congregate-care or restrictive environments. ...
They provide a particularly important avenue for safeguarding the rights of
those with impaired capacity that may have difficulty
making complaint or
raising concerns.
14.6.42 The OPMHS submitted:
Those with dementia are no less vulnerable than those with mental illness,
and in many ways are more vulnerable due to cognitive impairment
inability to raise objection, and, typically, physical frailty. This would
provide some meaningful safeguard for instances
where the facility is not
properly resourced or where care has not been adequate.
Such a system would need to be tailored provide meaningful oversight, for
example it should not respond only to those individuals
who are objecting.
Dementia impairs a Person’s ability to object. Aphasia and inertia and
memory impairment are three impairments which may prevent
objection. Memory
impairment, impulsivity, paranoia, and emotional instability are examples of
impairments which can lead to spurious
objections. In such situation, it is
possible for a person who has grounds to object not being heard, while a person
who may incessantly
object when there is no remedy, being heard.
A system of oversight would need to review the whole facility and the care
14.6.43 Social Work Services RHH also commented about some of the functions
that an Official Visitor could serve:
They could be asking the questions does the person continue to lack capacity,
need secure facility care, is there a least restrictive
care environment and act
as a safeguards to oversee the promotion of a patient’s rights and
It also commented that:
When people move to secure residential aged care there should be a mandated
review to ensure they still require that level of restriction
of freedom.
14.6.44 The OPMHS commented that the use of an Official Visitor Scheme would
be ‘absolutely critical’ if persons responsible
were able to consent
to a patient’s detention.
14.6.45 Consistent with responses received, the Institute considers that
there is merit to extending the use of Official Visitors
to those admitted
to/detained within secure facilities pursuant to the Act. This provides an
effective means of protecting and promoting
the rights and interests of
patients. This scheme may have particular benefits for individuals who are
socially isolated and may
not have others within their social network to observe
and raise issues or concerns. It also provides a method of supporting a patient
to exercise and pursue their legal rights and express their views and wishes.
14.6.46 The Institute recommends that, consistent with the
Mental Health
facilities also
be required to provide patients with a statement of rights to promote awareness
and understanding. This approach
is consistent with the recent recommendations
of the Commission, which commented that quality, safeguarding and oversight
‘raise awareness and capability of people with disability to
understand their rights, what constitutes violence, abuse and
neglect, and how
to raise concerns, report violence and seek
14.6.47 Work to progress implementation of Australia’s obligations
under OPCAT are continuing and there is the potential for
the role of NPMs under
that framework to extend to monitoring and overseeing detention within hospital
settings, secure mental health
facilities and residential care facilities. The
use of an Official Visitor Scheme under the Act will need to be monitored and
reviewed following decisions being made about these matters.
Recommendation 14.7
(1) That the Act contain a separate section dealing with the consent to the
admission and, if necessary, detention of a patient within
a secure unit where
the patient does not have decision-making ability to give their own consent
where the provisions of the
Mental Health Act
(Tas) do not
(2) That the term ‘secure unit’ be defined to:
(i) exclude places of detention covered by the
Corrections Act 1997
(Tas) and any approved secure health units governed by the
Mental Health
(ii) include facilities as listed in the Regulations.
That the Regulations include the Roy Fagan Centre as a secure unit.
(3) That consent to the admission and, if necessary, detention of a patient
without decision-making ability within a secure unit fall
outside of the scope
of a person responsible’s authority.
(4) That the section contain the following elements:
• that only the Board or a guardian with specific authority be
permitted to consent to the admission or detention of a patient
within a secure
• enabling the Board to appoint a guardian with authority to consent
to the admission or detention of a patient within a
secure unit, including the
temporary appointment of the Public Guardian in urgent circumstances;
• requiring guardians’ decisions to consent to the admission or
detention of a patient within a secure unit to be subject
to periodic review by
• confirming that an application can be made to the Board for the
review of a decision to consent to the admission or detention
of a patient
within a secure unit;
• enabling the Board to conduct ‘own motion’ reviews of
the substitute consent to the admission or detention
of a patient within a
secure unit;
• confirming a patient’s rights, consistent with
Mental Health Act
(Tas). Key components include (but are not
limited to):
◦ the right to have contact with, and to correspond privately with,
his or her guardian, supporter, lawyer, or any other
person nominated by the
patient to represent their interests; and
◦ the right to have contact with, and to correspond privately with,
Official Visitors; and
• requiring secure units to provide patients with a statement of
rights, consistent with
Mental Health Act
(5) That the
Mental Health Act
(Tas) Official Visitors
Scheme be extended to the Act subject to any specific adjustments required to
meet the needs of the Act.
14.7.1 The Act provides offences where treatment is performed without lawful
consent, and where consent is purported to be given by
a person who does not
have power to consent. Where a person carries out special treatment without
consent, then they are guilty of
a crime under the
Where a person
carries out any other treatment without valid consent where consent is required,
then they are guilty of an offence.
A period of one year imprisonment may be
imposed, or a fine, or
A person who
purports to give consent, or represents to a registered practitioner that they
have the power to consent, is guilty
of an offence. A fine may be
14.7.2 The Issues Paper asked what the consequences should be for individuals
who breach the Act in relation to consent to treatment.
What should the consequences be for breaches of the Act in relation to
consent to treatment?
14.7.3 Five respondents addressed this question. Both MIGA and the OPG
commented that they observed that the existing provisions in
the Act are rarely
used. MIGA submitted that ‘this of itself raises issues as to its utility
and appropriateness.’ MIGA
did not support the Act containing discrete
consequences for breaches of its provisions. It commented that breaches can be
with under other laws, including the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law and through civil damages claims. It also commented
MIGA opposes what is effectively a strict liability provision under s 38 of
the Act providing that provision of medical treatment
which does not follow the
Act’s requirements exposes the provider to criminal penalty ...
The provisions in s 38 of the Act are inappropriate, unnecessary and should
be removed.
14.7.4 One respondent commented that fines and potential imprisonment should
be available as potential consequences. Two submissions
commented that there
could be criminal offences imposed.
14.7.5 One respondent commented that guardians should need to prove their
authority to give consent prior to doing so. The OPG submitted
as follows:
The OPG has concerns that treatment without consent is widespread in
situations where the person is not objecting but there is a person
responsible
available to provide substitute consent. We know this to be the case for persons
who are under the guardianship of the
Public Guardian: it is not uncommon for
the delegated guardian to discover by chance that a represented person’s
has been changed without any consultation, let alone formal consent.
We hear, anecdotally, that family members in the role of person
responsible are
even more likely to be overlooked. The Act should clearly state the requirement
for medical and other health practitioners
to document the consent and source of
It is considered that existing professional obligations address the need for
health practitioners to document consent given to perform
health care and
14.7.6 In summary, only one response objected to the existing approach in the
Act, whilst two endorsed criminal and civil penalties
being available,
implicitly endorsing the current approach. The Institute does not make
recommendations for reform to the existing
provisions of the Act.
Protection for
medical practitioners
14.7.7 The Act protects medical practitioners who perform treatment where a
person purports to consent without having authority to
do so. In those
circumstances, consent can be taken as valid if the treating practitioner did
not know that the person was not authorised
to consent or reasonably believed
that they were authorised to
14.7.8 The Issues Paper gave the following examples of protections given to
medical practitioners in other jurisdictions:
• where they administer (or do not administer) treatment in good faith
and without negligence believing on reasonable grounds
that they have complied
with the legislation;
• where they give treatment in reliance upon another health provider
who states that consent has been
• where they perform treatment relying in good faith upon the consent
of a person who has impaired decision-making capacity
where they did not know,
and could not have been reasonably expected to know, that the person had
impaired capacity.
14.7.9 The Institute asked whether stakeholders consider there needs to be
any additional protections in the Act to protect medical
professionals who
administer treatment upon reliance of substitute consent.
Does the Act need to provide additional protections for health care
professionals?
14.7.10 There were five responses, with a range of issues raised. The OPG
commented that it was unaware of any deficiencies with the
existing approach,
but ‘would be open to extending protection to include a practitioner
providing treatment in good faith on
reliance of another practitioner’s
advice that consent has been provided.’
14.7.11 MIGA submitted that there is a need for reform to the protections
afforded to medical and other health practitioners under
There needs to be protections for medical and other health practitioners from
criminal, civil or disciplinary liability, other liability
administrative process, or discrimination or other adverse action in workplace,
for actions taken in good faith and in a
reasonable belief of compliance with
Act, or in exercising a conscientious objection outside the context of emergency
Applying any additional criteria of ‘without negligence’ to such
a protection is inappropriate and confusing where a criteria
of reasonable
belief exists.
The existing protection, namely where person purports to consent without
authority, is insufficient. There are more situations than
that where good faith
protections for the health professions are required.
Practitioners may inadvertently breach provisions of the Act, exposing
themselves to potential penalty, claim or other adverse action.
Inevitably there
is considerable scope for unintentional breaches or disputes over whether
requirements of the Act have been followed.
14.7.12 One respondent commented that health practitioners should be
‘exempt from any risk of penalty’ where they withhold
consistent with a person’s ACD or instrument. This issue has been
considered and addressed elsewhere in this Report,
notably Part 5 which
considered the nature and effect of directions in an ACD. Recommendation 5.6
proposes that the Act confirm that
directions expressing a refusal to consent in
a valid ACD that applies to the circumstances must be binding and operates in
way that a decision by a person with decision-making ability does.
14.7.13 Another respondent stated that there should be whistle-blower
protections for medical practitioners. The Institute considers
that this issue
best addressed as part of a separate review into the merits of adult
safeguarding legislation, which the Institute
has recommended take
14.7.14 One submission also raised issues relating to protections in relation
to euthanasia. It is observed that this issue falls
outside of the scope of this
review and has thus not been considered further.
14.7.15 The Institute acknowledges the issues raised in MIGA’s response
to this question. As this is the only submission raising
these issues, the
Institute is unable to form a concluded view about the need or desirability for
legislative reform consistent with
this submission.
Other reforms
14.8.1 The Issues Paper concluded this Part by asking broadly whether there
was a need for any additional provisions in the Act to
act as a safeguard for
substitute consent to treatment.
How else could the Act better safeguard the giving of consent to medical and
dental treatment?
14.8.2 Both the OPG and MIGA made submissions in response to this question.
The OPG’s submission raised three matters:
• that the Board’s role in relation to giving consent to
treatment be confirmed. This matter was addressed in Part
• that it was not opposed to further consideration of the Public
Guardian acting as person responsible of last resort. This
was also addressed in
• that the Act clarify the effect of substitute consent given whilst a
patient did not have decision-making ability for a matter
where the patient
gains or regains decision-making ability. The OPG submitted:
The OPG believes the legislation should clarify whether or not consent for
medical treatment endures beyond the period of a representative’s
appointment. This is particularly relevant to OPG guardians consenting to
medication under an emergency order, where the administration
of the medication
might continue beyond the 28 day appointment. It is unclear if the consent is
still ‘valid’ after the
ceasing of an order in such cases.
14.8.3 The Institute considers that this is a matter better addressed through
guidelines and factsheets for the use of health practitioners,
rather than
legislative reform.
14.8.4 MIGA’s submission raised two matters. Firstly, that the common
law position that a medical or other health practitioner
is not compelled to
provide futile or non-beneficial treatment should be recognised. This should
include directions set out in an
ACD, requested by a decision-maker or
otherwise. It noted that:
This is particularly important in the context of end of life care. It would
also recognise the issues of clinical appropriateness
and practicality which
arise in the healthcare context.
14.8.5 MIGA also stated that health practitioners should have discretion to
make a conscientious objection. In relation to this issue,
it commented:
The Australian Medical Association, in its Position Statement on End of Life
Care and Advance Care Planning, addresses the issue of
conscientious objection,
outlining that (in cl 5):
‘Doctors caring for patients at the end of the patient’s life
should be under no obligation to recommend or participate
legally-recognised treatment or procedure related to end of life care to which
they hold a conscientious objection ... [a] doctor
should always provide
medically appropriate treatment in an emergency situation ...’
This is also consistent with cl 2.4.6 of the Medical Board of
Australia’s Good Medical Practice Code of Conduct, providing that
practitioners have a right not to provide or directly participate in treatments
to which they conscientiously object, so
long as the objection is not used to
impede access to treatments that are legal.
Given end of life care inevitably involves a spectrum of cultural, religious
or other ethical views, and bearing in mind the existing
health profession codes
and ethical positions on conscientious objection, MIGA submits that a provision
preserving the scope for
conscientious objection in relation to a ACD or end of
life care generally should be set out in the Act.
14.8.6 The Institute considers that community consultation in relation to
these proposed reforms is appropriate. These issues apply
equally to people with
decision-making ability as they do to individuals who do not have
decision-making ability to consent to treatment.
The scope of this reference is
to consider review to the Act, dealing with substitute consent to treatment for
individuals unable
to give their own consent. Broader consultation is therefore
appropriate, and the Institute is unable to reach a concluded view about
merits of any potential legislative reform.
Powers and Duties of the Board
Introduction
15.1.1 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to consider the functions,
powers and duties of the Board. One of the Board’s
existing duties is to
perform its functions and exercise its powers in accordance with the Act’s
guiding principles. These
were considered in Part 3. Earlier parts of this
Report also considered and made recommendations about some of the powers of the
Board, including its powers to appoint, supervise and remove
representatives
powers in relation to consent to health care and
therefore focuses upon the way in which the Board functions and discreet powers
not dealt with elsewhere in this Report.
15.1.2 It must be noted that the Board also has a range of powers under other
legislation,
review is limited to its functions and power under the Act.
need for a hearing
15.2.1 With some exceptions, applications to the Board typically require it
to hold a hearing before making
The making of
emergency orders without a hearing is considered separately at [15.3] below.
15.2.2 The Institute asked whether there are any circumstances where
stakeholders felt that a hearing should not be required for the
Board to make
Are there any situations where the Board should not need to hold a hearing
before it can make
15.2.3 Most responses highlighted the importance of the Board having
flexibility to make orders in urgent circumstances without a
hearing, as the Act
currently provides.
15.2.4 Other responses supported the Board retaining its ability to make
orders without a hearing in the following circumstances:
• where representatives apply for advice or directions, or where the
Board of its own motion provides advice or directions to
representatives.
submitted that this should be permitted where advice and directions are required
• where an application is withdrawn;
• applications dealing with a request for release of
information;
• reviews of ongoing orders in appropriate circumstances (explained
15.2.5 The Board raised an issue with the drafting of the relevant sections
enabling representatives to apply for advice and directions:
Section 31(3)(c) and section 61(3)(c) can at times, cause some practical
difficulties. In practice, the Board receives advice and
direction requests from
guardians (often the Public Guardian) and administrators (including the Public
Trustee) who seek an enlargement
of their powers due to particular circumstances
that have arisen. Sometimes the Board is asked to respond quickly to these
given time limits that may be involved. Section 31(3)(c) and section
61(3)(c) gives the Board the power to vary the Order, or make
any other order
that it would have made on the original application. These applications could
also be dealt with by way of an Application
for Review of an Order.
If the Board proceeds without holding a hearing, as it is able to do, it
arguably does not afford the represented person and parties,
natural justice and
particularly the right to put forward their views on the amendment of an Order,
or the possible increase in powers
of a guardian or to ask questions. It is very
difficult, if not impossible for the Board to obtain a person’s direct
hearing. Given this, the Board’s more recent practice has
been to hold a
hearing in respect of a request for advice and direction.
Consideration could be given to amending sections 31 and 61 by removing para
(3)(c), and instead utilising the review order process
and ensuring a hearing is
held when an increase or amendment to powers is sought. This approach appears
consistent with a number
of other guardianship jurisdictions in Australia.
15.2.6 The OPG’s submission also raised issues with these sections:
The OPG’s firm view is that the Board should be able to review an order
without having to conduct a hearing, where the purpose
of the review is to seek
revocation of the order on the ground the criteria for making an order are no
longer met. Typically this
would arise either because the represented person has
regained capacity or because there is no longer a need for decisions to be
on behalf of the person ...
This is particularly important in relation to emergency orders where a
hearing is not required for the Board to make an order, but
is now required to
revoke the order (until recently there had been some flexibility in the approach
taken by the Board). The corollary
is that a much higher standard of evidence is
required to revoke the order than to make it ... The requirement to hold a
in these cases is burdensome for the Board, the OPG, the original
applicant, and, importantly the represented person. The result
is that generally
reviews are no longer sought for emergency orders, which means that people who
clearly do not meet the criteria
can remain subject to a guardianship order for
some weeks ...
For on-going orders, a common scenario is that the represented person’s
circumstances have changed (often following the intervention
of the guardian)
such that there is no longer a need for substitute decision-making by a guardian
... the administrative burden of
holding a hearing, together with the imposition
and intrusion to the represented person, should be avoided ...
Guardianship legislation should and does provide important safeguards to
ensure that formal orders taking away an individual’s
right to make their
own decisions, are only made when the person lacks the capacity for reasonable
decision-making due to a disability,
there is a need for someone else to make
decisions on their behalf, and there is no less restrictive alternative. It is
crucial that
the legislation itself does not create (or prolong) unnecessary
restrictions on the person with a disability, by making it difficult
an order or to have the powers under the order reviewed and decreased. Clear and
uncomplicated provisions, devoid of unnecessary
bureaucratic process, are
critical to enable the revoking of orders in uncontentious circumstances, to
avoid people remaining on
orders when they no longer meet the criteria.
15.2.7 Whilst raising issues with the same sections, it appears that the OPG
and Board’s positions do not conflict:
• the Board’s submission indicates its concern when
representatives seek to invoke ss 31 and 61, applying for advice and
for their powers to be
. The Board expresses the view that the
conferral of additional powers to a representative is a matter that necessitates
natural justice
through the usual hearing process; and
• conversely, the OPG’s submission indicates its concern that
representatives cannot invoke ss 31 and 61 to request that
the order appointing
them as representative be
without a hearing.
15.2.8 The Board suggests that the issue it raised could be resolved by
removing its ability to make any orders that it could have
made upon hearing an
original application when determining an application for advice or direction
without a hearing. The effect would
be to require the Board to conduct a hearing
in order to confer additional powers upon a representative, unless the test for
an emergency
order is satisfied. This reform would effectively confirm within
statute the existing policy of the Board.
15.2.9 Sections 31 and 61 do not preclude the Board conducting a hearing if
it considers it appropriate, as it advises is the approach
it presently adopts.
It may also decide to give notice of an application to anyone it considers
interested in the
application.
The Institute
therefore does not consider there is a need for legislative reform and that the
matter is better addressed through
internal policies and procedures. This
approach provides flexibility to enable the Board to vary its original order if
it considers
it appropriate in the circumstances.
15.2.10 The issue that the OPG raised can be addressed through inclusion of a
separate section enabling the Board to revoke an order
appointing a
representative without holding a hearing. The OPG’s rationale for
proposing this reform in relation to the revocation
of emergency orders is
persuasive, and it is thus recommended that the Act be revised to enable the
Board to determine an application
for the revocation of an emergency order
without a hearing. The Institute considers that the OPG’s submission
proposing extension
of this approach to non-emergency orders appointing
representatives has some merit but that further consultation is desirable.
15.2.11 The OPG also submitted that a HCPR should not be required when
applying to have an order revoked:
Whilst not forming part of this review, the current
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations 2017
require any application to the Board
(including applications for review of an order) to be accompanied by a report by
a health care
professional stating that the person has a disability that impacts
on their capacity to make reasonable judgements. Evidence about
disability and capacity is irrelevant where the review is requested on the
ground that the person no longer meets
the requirement of subsection 20(1)(c),
i.e., that the person is in need of a guardian. Obtaining a health professional
report often
involves the inconvenience of a visit by the represented person to
their doctor or psychologist, for which there might be a financial
addition to the cost to taxpayers and the health care system), and inevitable
delays. It also involves the indignity of
an unnecessary focus on the
person’s disability and capacity, when this is not in question.
15.2.12 It commented that:
The corollary is that a much higher standard of evidence is required to
revoke the order than to make it ... The Board only has to
be satisfied that the
person might lack capacity for decision-making in order to make the order; to
then hold a hearing to test evidence
that the person has regained capacity is
heavy-handed and disproportionate.
15.2.13 For reasons articulated above, the Institute is persuaded that it
should be unnecessary for representatives to file a HCPR
when applying for the
revocation of the order appointing them as representative.
Recommendation 15.1
(1) That the Board not be required to conduct a hearing to revoke an order
appointing a representative where the representative applies
for the revocation
of the order.
(2) That applications by a representative for the revocation of an emergency
order not require a Health Care Professional Report.
‘Stable’ long-term
administration orders
15.2.14 The Board’s submission explained its present method of dealing
with long-term administration orders where the Public
Trustee is appointed:
the Board sometimes conducts review hearings of an administration order on
the documents, but only in limited circumstances where
the Public Trustee are
appointed and the administration is stable. A letter first goes out asking
whether the represented person
and any of the parties wish to attend the Review
Application. A hearing is listed if any person requests this. If no request is
the hearing proceeds on the papers. This process still requires the
Board to consider evidence as to a person’s disability,
incapacity and
whether there is still a need for an Order. This process is similar to that in
Victoria and ACT.
15.2.15 Legislative reform is not proposed.
15.3.1 Emergencies by their very nature create stressful circumstances for
the person involved and those close to them. It is critical
that the Act
provides appropriate and effective mechanisms to address issues that might arise
in an emergency. This section deals
with emergency circumstances requiring the
appointment of representatives. Part 13 also considered how the Act deals with
consent to urgent medical
15.3.2 The Act provides that the Board can make any order, or give any
directions, where it considers proper by reason of
2016–2017, the Board made 213 emergency guardianship orders and 133
emergency administration orders (a total of 346 emergency
The Board may
exercise its powers of its own motion or after receiving a request from a person
that the Board considers has a proper
interest in the
Requests can be
made by telephone or other means the Board considers
appropriate.
does not need to hold a hearing or give
It can receive
information informally and make inquiries or investigations that it considers
appropriate.
15.3.3 An emergency order may continue for a maximum of 28 days. It can be
extended once for a further period of a maximum of 28
In 2016–2017,
the Board extended 97 emergency guardianship orders and 86 emergency
administration orders.
This equated to 46 per cent of the emergency guardianship orders made during the
reporting period, and 65 per cent of emergency administration
orders. The number
of extensions to emergency guardianship orders has increased from prior
15.3.4 The Board can make orders and give directions in relation to
non-represented people.
The Act provides that an emergency administration order may be made even if the
person is the donor of an enduring power of
There is no
equivalent provision confirming that the Board can make a guardianship order
where the person is the donor of an instrument.
This is problematic as the Board
also does not have powers to review an instrument of its own
This issue was
discussed in Part 4, with it being recommended that the Board be given this
Social Work
Services RHH’s submission explained the situation that can arise as
Where there is an Enduring Guardian who can’t act in that role and
there are urgent grounds, there should be provision to make
an emergency order.
Example: A patient needing transfer to the Jasmine Unit (Roy Fagan Centre) for
rehabilitation who lacks capacity
to consent who has an enduring Guardian and
Enduring Power of Attorney who can’t be contacted despite intensive
make contact. Emergency Guardianship applications have been rejected
in such circumstances, with a 14 days hearing to review the
Guardianship, despite consent matters needing to be addressed.
15.3.5 The Board also raised concerns about this issue. It would appear to be
due to oversight that this is not included within the
Board’s powers. To
address this, it is proposed that the Act confirm that the Board can make an
emergency guardianship order
where the person is the donor of an instrument.
Recommendation 15.2
That the Act enable the Board to make an emergency guardianship order despite
the proposed represented person being the donor of an
instrument, equivalent to
s 65(4)(c) of the Act dealing with emergency administration orders.
Test to appoint a representative in an
15.3.6 The Board can make any order or give any directions where it considers
it proper by reason of
The Act does not
define the phrase ‘reason of urgency’, but the Board has interpreted
it to mean ‘when there is
sufficient evidence that a person with a
disability is at immediate risk of significant harm unless a guardian or
administrator is
appointed within the next 10 days to 45
Board’s submission commented that:
Consideration could be given to defining ‘urgency’ or using
different terminology which encompasses immediate risk to
a person, unlawful
detention of a person or to adopt some of the terminology in the Queensland Act
such as ‘risk of harm to
the health, welfare or property of the adult
concerned in an application, including because of the risk of abuse,
exploitation or
neglect of, or self-neglect, by, the adult.’
15.3.7 The threshold to appoint a temporary representative is not as high to
make an emergency order appointing a representative as
it is to appoint a
representative in non-urgent circumstances. The Board only needs to be satisfied
that there may be grounds to
representative.
OPG’s submission expressed a view that a higher standard of evidence of
disability and incapacity should be required:
Given many emergency applications are made by hospitals, stronger evidence as
to the person’s disability and capacity and the
likely length of
incapacity ought to be readily available.
15.3.8 In Queensland, the test to make an interim order in urgent
circumstances requires the Tribunal to be satisfied on reasonable
grounds that
there is an immediate risk of harm to the person’s health, welfare, or
property including because of risk of abuse,
exploitation, neglect or
self-neglect.
legislation proposed in Victoria adopts a similar approach, enabling the
tribunal to make an urgent order appointing a representative
without complying
with notice requirements
if the tribunal is satisfied on reasonable grounds that there is an immediate
risk of harm to the health, welfare or property of
a proposed represented person
if an order were not made.
This is clarified to include abuse, exploitation, neglect, or self
It will still
require the tribunal to be satisfied of the matters outlined in respect of the
test to appoint a guardian or
administrator.
Northern Territory, the tribunal must reasonably believe that the proposed
represented person has impaired decision-making
capacity and that there is an
urgent need for a
The NSWLRC has
recently recommended that the New South Wales Act be revised to enable an
emergency order to be made where there is
an unacceptable risk and
It proposes that
the test require the tribunal to be satisfied that there may be grounds for
making an order,
Act in Tasmania presently provides. A similar test applies in Western
Australia, the test requires the tribunal to be satisfied that urgent action is
In the ACT, the
test requires the tribunal to be satisfied that there are special circumstances
of urgency.
Use of interim orders
15.3.9 Pre-consultation with stakeholders during the drafting of the Issues
Paper indicated that s 65 (Emergency Orders) may not be
sufficiently flexible to
deal with urgent circumstances.
The Issues Paper
identified one alternative for reform being to enable the Board to make
short-term orders (longer than 28 days) appointing
representatives without
holding a hearing and/or without the need to give the required 10 days’
notice of a hearing, or giving
the Board power to make interim orders. New South
Wales and Queensland, for example, permit the making of short-term or interim
In New South
Wales, interim orders appointing an administrator can be made for six months
with the potential to extend the
appointments of guardians may also be
recommendations of the NSWLRC, however, propose that this be revised to enable
the tribunal to make emergency orders for 30
days with the potential to extend
them for a further 30
In Queensland,
interim orders can last a maximum of three
They can be
extended in exceptional circumstances for an unlimited
The QLRC did not
recommend any revision to this
On the other
hand, emergency orders in South Australia and Victoria may last for a maximum of
only 21 days.
15.3.10 The Issues Paper asked for feedback about if and how the Act might
better respond to urgent situations.
Does there need to be any changes to the powers and processes for the Board
to make orders in urgent
situations?
15.3.11 Social Work Services RHH’s submission explained the practical
difficulties that can arise due to the current timeframes
prescribed in the
Issue: The timeframe for emergency orders (28 days x 2 = 56 days) and
timeframe for full application to hearing (45 days) rarely allows
time to gather evidence and determine the need for a full application. Often
this only gives the applicant 11 days from
the date of first applying for an
emergency order (which could be between 7-9 working days) to get to know the
person requiring a
substitute decision maker, their views, whether they need a
full application, who the applicant proposes as the Guardian/Administrator.
will only acknowledge receipt of an application with a health report. It is
often difficult for a Doctor to provide a HCPR by
day 11 to support a full
application with clear information about diagnosis, disability and decision
making. Making a hasty application
within 11 days often subjects proposed
represented people and their families/carers to increased stress and anxiety.
Example: Mrs Smith has an emergency Guardianship order granted on 1st
February due to delirium and suspected dementia. On the 2nd
of February she is
transferred to the Roy Fagan Centre for assessment, diagnosis and restorative
care, under a new treating team.
It takes some time for the new treating team to
get to know her, for the delirium to resolve and dementia to be diagnosed. By
12th of February, the applicant is required to make an educated guess
whether a long term application/order will be required, often
application without robust information. In this case delirium is still present
and it is not known whether Mrs Smith will
regain capacity. The Social Worker
must list who they propose as Guardian and therefore good practice entails
detailed conversations
with families/carers/interested parties to ensure the
application is fair and considered. Good applications are time consuming and
often stressful for interested parties and families and the represented
Recommendation: There needs to be a provision for emergency orders to be
extended (beyond 56 days), or reduce the length of time to
full hearing (e.g. to
4 weeks), allowing more time for thorough assessment of medical condition,
confirmation of disability and proven
need for a substitute decision maker. This
would prevent unnecessary applications, reduce unnecessary distress to the
patient/family,
and save time for the applicant and the Board. A timeframe of 28
days to make application would prevent such guesswork, reduce the
unnecessary applications and would make sense that the need for an ongoing order
is reviewed at the time the first emergency
order is due to expire.
Suggestion: First emergency order to continue for 28 days, full application
due on day 28, then 4 weeks to hearing.
15.3.12 The Board also suggested that consideration could be given to
revising the current timeframes:
Consideration could be given to making a single emergency order for up to 60
days. This is because the vast majority of emergency
orders made by the Board
are for an initial 28 days and the Public Guardian or Public Trustee frequently
has to apply for the order
to be renewed for a further 28 days. This is in line
with the ‘short term orders’ which are made in other jurisdictions
such as Queensland. If it is deemed that a hearing is not required and notice
not given, then the reality is that these short term
orders should only be made
in urgent circumstances, so as to not deny the represented person and interested
parties natural justice.
15.3.13 The OPG endorsed reform enabling the Board to make interim orders. It
commented that:
The OPG believes consideration of the arrangements available in other
without hearings,
has merit. If implemented, we believe an interim order made without a hearing
should be for a maximum period of
three months, and should only be made if it is
not practical to make a regular/ongoing order after holding a hearing. Such
should be reviewable by the Board on application by the represented
person or other person with a proper interest in the matter.
15.3.14 Members of the Elder Law Committee also supported reform enabling the
Board to make interim orders where there is an immediate
threat of harm. It
suggested that the Queensland
provides a useful
example upon which to base reform.
15.3.15 Another submission suggested that one improvement that could be made
to the Board’s processes in determining emergency
applications would be to
require the Board to speak directly with the applicant and to investigate the
circumstances surrounding
the application.
15.3.16 The Public Trustee submitted that it held no view about any changes
that should be made to how the Act deals with urgent circumstances.
The Institute’s view
15.3.17 Reforms dealing with the way in which the Board may respond to cases
of emergency involve the need to balance a person’s
right to natural
justice with their right to be free from abuse, neglect or exploitation. Some
submissions raised issues about the
length of emergency orders, particularly
when combined with the requirement to give 10 days’ notice of a hearing to
longer-term appointment of a representative. Options include to:
• extend the period in which emergency orders may last, noting that the
Board suggested an extension to perhaps 60 days and
the OPG suggesting a maximum
of three months; or
• reduce the 10 days’ notice period required to give the proposed
represented person notice of an application prior to
hearing. This issue was the
subject of a separate question in the Issues Paper and is considered in the
following paragraph.
15.3.18 On balance, the Institute does not recommend extension to the length
in which emergency orders may last. Victoria and South
Australia provide shorter
timeframes, with the NSWLRC having recently recommended a similar approach to
that already included within
the Act. Providing a relatively short period in
which an emergency order may last safeguards a person’s rights in
circumstances
where hearing and notice requirements are waived, adversely
impacting the person’s right to natural justice. There has also
any conclusive finding that the person does not have decision-making ability or
that there is a need for a representative.
Evidence may be limited and untested.
This approach promotes interventions for those requiring decision-making support
for as short a time as possible, consistent with adopting a least
restrictive approach. The Institute considers these factors outweigh
desirability of reducing potential inconvenience in having to sometimes make an
application for an order appointing a representative
in what might be less than
ideal circumstances.
15.3.19 It is also not proposed that there be any increase to the threshold
to appoint a representative for a non-represented person
circumstances. This is due to the need to ensure that the Board has adequate
powers to respond appropriately and effectively
in urgent circumstances.
Retaining the requirement for emergency orders to only be permitted for a
maximum of 28 days safeguard’s
a represented person’s interests
where the threshold to appoint a temporary representative is not as high as the
test to make
an order appointing a representative.
15.3.20 Consistent with submissions received, it is recommended that the
phrase ‘reason of urgency’ be replaced in s 65
with a more useful
description to clarify when an emergency order may be made. This approach is
consistent with approaches in Queensland
and Victoria.
Recommendation 15.3
That, to make any order or give any direction under s 65 of the Act, instead
of referring to ‘reason of urgency’, the
Board be required to be
satisfied on reasonable grounds that there is an immediate risk of harm to the
person’s health, welfare,
or property if an order or direction were not
made, including because of a risk of abuse, exploitation, neglect or
self-neglect.
Notice of hearing
15.3.21 All relevant
must be given no
less than 10 days’ notice of a
The Act provides
that a determination is not invalidated because of a failure to give notice to
anyone other than the person in respect
of whom a hearing is
In South Australia,
the tribunal must give ‘reasonable notice’ of a
In Queensland, 14
days’ notice is
although the
tribunal has discretion to reduce this
15.3.22 The Issues Paper commented that, on one hand, greater flexibility to
hold hearings without giving 10 days’ notice may
improve the Board’s
functioning. On the other hand, natural justice requires people to have adequate
notice of a hearing. The
Institute therefore sought feedback about whether the
notice provisions in the Act require reform.
What period of notice of a hearing should the Board need to give interested
15.3.23 There were 10 responses to this question. Four stated that the
current notice requirements are appropriate and that no change
was required.
15.3.24 Both the OPG and members of the Elder Law Committee supported
revision to enable the Board to give ‘reasonable notice’.
This would allow the flexibility for hearings to be scheduled at very short
notice in certain circumstances, particularly if there
was no disadvantage to
any party to the proceedings (e.g., where there is no contention about the
matter and/or where there is only
one or two parties for whom short notice is
Members of the Elder Law Committee similarly commented that this:
[provides] flexibility for the Board to regulate its own procedure whilst
affording natural justice to parties which may be affected
by any decision it
15.3.25 The Board’s submission endorsed a standard notice period, but
with the Board having flexibility to shorten that period
if it deemed
appropriate:
The Board acknowledges the importance of ensuring interested parties are
afforded natural justice and have sufficient notice of hearings.
In practice, the period of notice can cause some difficulties for the Board
Registry particularly if the personal circumstances of
a person dictates the
application to be heard quickly but don’t necessitate an emergency order.
It would be useful if the Board
could shorten the period of notice of a hearing
if the Board considers it appropriate to do so. Such an amendment, similar to
69(3)(b) of the Act could possibly even remove the need for the
emergency order provisions in the Act.
15.3.26 Section 69(3)(b) of the Act provides:
(3) The Board is not obliged to give notice of a hearing: ...
(b) if the matter relates to the provision of medical or dental treatment and
the Board considers it proper to dispense with notice
of the hearing by reason
of urgency.
15.3.27 Three submissions stated that the notice period should be extended,
with two supporting at least a two week notice period
and one suggesting a 30
day period. In summary, four respondents expressed support for the current
notice period, three proposed
that the notice period be extended and three
supported flexibility to enable the notice period to be shortened.
15.3.28 The Institute does not recommend revision to the notice requirements
based on the important role that it plays in affording
a proposed represented
person natural justice. If reform were made, the preferred option would be to
give the Board discretion to
shorten the length of the notice period, consistent
with the existing s 69(3)(b). This alternative is preferred because it still
provides a default minimum notice period applying in most instances, gives the
Board flexibility to respond in urgent circumstances
and aligns with existing
provisions in the Act. The alternative of requiring ‘reasonable
notice’ gives greater scope
for the Board to shorten the notice period. It
should only be in the most extreme cases where it is necessary that the Board
be permitted to shorten the notice period.
15.3.29 The Institute suggests that, if change is made, enabling notice
requirements to be dispensed with because of reasons of urgency,
it should still
be necessary to endeavour to give ‘reasonable notice’ where
possible. This is on the basis that it promotes
natural justice and the rights
of a person subject to an application to the Board.
Recommendation 15.4
(1) That there is no change to the notice of hearing provisions of the
(2) That, if there is change to the notice of hearing provisions, the Board
have discretion to shorten the notice period if it considers
it proper to
dispense with notice of the hearing by reason of urgency but that, if it does,
it be required to provide reasonable
Representatives who may be appointed in an
15.3.30 When making emergency orders, the Board can only appoint the Public
Guardian or the Public Trustee. It cannot appoint private
representatives, for
example, family or friends. The Issues Paper queried whether private
representatives should be able to be appointed
under emergency orders.
Should the Board be able to appoint private guardians or administrators in
urgent situations?
15.3.31 Seven submissions addressed this issue, with four supporting the
ability to appoint private representatives under an emergency
PCT strongly believes that when making emergency orders in the case of a
person with a life limiting illness the Board should follow
Responsible hierarchy and appoint the appropriate Person Responsible as the
Guardian. This could follow the New South
Wales system regarding short term
orders if appropriate.
15.3.32 Both the OPG and Members of the Elder Law Committee also suggested
that this could be addressed by enabling the Board to make
short-term or interim
orders. The OPG submitted that:
the OPG’s view is that interim orders, under which a private guardian
or administrator may be appointed for a limited period
of time, has merit ...
particularly where the proposed representative has been acting informally in the
same or a similar capacity
but suddenly requires formal authority for a
particular action. However we believe such appointments should only proceed if
has sufficient evidence of the proposed representative’s
suitability for the role.
15.3.33 The Board and Social Work Services RHH did not support this reform.
Both commented that the making of emergency orders in
the absence of a hearing
does not give the Board adequate opportunity to assess the suitability of a
private representative, or canvas
the views of others. Social Work Services RHH
also commented that:
The Public Guardian and Public Trustee are aware of the legislative framework
for their practice and of the powers they have. Public
Trustee are also able to
take swift action to protect the finances of vulnerable people.
15.3.34 The inability to appoint a private representative under an emergency
guardianship order presently results in the Public Guardian
automatically
becoming the represented person’s ‘person responsible’ able to
consent to medical treatment (where
the represented person is unable to provide
their own consent). This matter was discussed in Part
with it being
recommended that this be revised so that a guardian is only the person
responsible if they have been granted express
powers to consent to health care
and treatment.
resolve the issue described above, without requiring reform to enable the Board
to appoint a private representative under
an emergency guardianship order.
15.3.35 This issue requires a balancing of the following considerations:
firstly, the need to adopt a represented person’s views,
preferences and, secondly, the need to provide adequate safeguards to protect a
represented person. Presently the Board
is precluded from appointing a private
representative in an emergency even if it reflects the proposed represented
wishes. On the other hand, as discussed in Part
one of the existing
safeguards for representative decision-making is that the Board must assess a
proposed representative’s
suitability according to prescribed criteria. As
the Board and Social Work Services RHH submitted, in urgent circumstances and
giving notice and/or holding a hearing, the Board may not have
opportunity to assess the proposed representative against that criteria.
15.3.36 Given the need for appropriate and effective safeguards for those
requiring decision-making support, the Institute does not
propose reform to
enable the appointment of private representatives under emergency orders. It is
noted that the Institute has not
recommended extension to the maximum duration
of emergency orders, meaning that the Public Guardian or Public Trustee would
be appointed for a maximum of 28 days (with the possibility of extending
for a further maximum 28 days). If reform were made to enable
the Board to make
interim or short-term orders despite this approach not having been endorsed,
then it may be appropriate to revisit
the question of whether private
representatives should be permitted under an interim or short-term order.
The Board hearing
15.4.1 The following paragraphs address how the Act governs the way in which
Board hearings are conducted, noting that the scope of
this reference is to
address the need for legislative reform, rather than reform to the Board’s
internal policies, procedures
or membership.
Parties to a hearing
15.4.2 The Act does not clarify who the parties to a hearing are. The Board
has issued a Practice Direction to give guidance to its
members about who the
parties to a proceeding
It observes that:
Whether or not a person will be defined as a party will determine important
questions about the level of participation that person
can expect in a hearing.
‘Parties,’ unlike ‘witnesses,’ will have a greater
entitlement to notice, access
to all documentation and evidence and
representation at the hearing
A ‘party’ is more likely than a witness to make, and be granted,
preliminary applications for adjournments, exchange of
documentation or
representation ...
Generally, Board hearings are conducted informally and in an inquisitorial
style. In some circumstances, it may be necessary to conduct
proceedings in a
more formal or traditional style. In those cases, it will be important to
distinguish between who is a ‘party’
and who is a
15.4.3 A number of Acts in other jurisdictions confirm who the parties to
guardianship proceedings
The Institute
therefore asked for feedback about whether the Act should clarify who the
parties to proceedings are.
Should the Act clarify who the parties to a hearing
15.4.4 Eleven respondents addressed this question with seven endorsing reform
to clarify who the parties to Board proceedings are.
In supporting this reform,
the Board stated:
Whether a person is a party is an important consideration as it will
determine important questions about the level of participation
that person can
expect in a hearing, entitlement to notice, access to hearing papers and
representation at the hearing. Clarity as
to who the parties are to a hearing
would appear appropriate. If the Act clarifies who the parties to a hearing are,
it would also
be useful for the Board to have the discretion to join anyone else
not specified in the Act, it thinks should be a party.
15.4.5 Two of the three responses that did not support this reform commented
that they were not aware of issues with existing arrangements.
15.4.6 Given that the Board suggests a need for clarity and that it was
endorsed by most respondents who addressed this question,
the Institute proposes
that the Act contain a section clarifying who the parties to a hearing are. The
Board’s Practice Direction
lists individuals that it considers are parties
to an application, interpreting the existing sections of the Act that outline
is entitled to notice of a hearing and to be represented at a
The Institute
proposes that the Act adopt the approach outlined in the Practice Direction.
Recommendation 15.5
(1) That the Act contain a section outlining who the parties to a hearing
(2) That the section adopt Table 1 of the Board’s Practice Direction
‘Who is a “party” to an application before
the Board?’
which provides that the parties to an application are:
• in relation to applications involving guardianship (including
reviews and advice and direction), the proposed represented
person, the
applicant(s), the proposed guardian, and the Public Guardian;
• in relation to applications involving administration (including
reviews and advice and direction), the proposed represented
person, the
applicant(s), the proposed administrator, the Public Guardian, and the Public
• in relation to applications for consent to health care and
treatment (including advice and direction), the person who is
the subject of
the application, the applicant(s), the health practitioner who will carry out
the health care or treatment, any person
responsible for the person who is the
subject of the application and the Public Guardian; and
• in relation to applications to review an instrument (and advice and
directions to enduring guardians), the donor or purported
donor of the
instrument, any guardian or purported guardian, the applicant(s), and the
Public Guardian.
(3) That, if Recommendation 7.8 is adopted, then, in relation to applications
for support orders, the Act provide that the parties
to an application are the
proposed supported person, the applicant(s), the proposed supporter, and the
Public Guardian.
(4) That the Board have discretion to join anyone as a party not otherwise
specified, if it considers they should be a party.
15.4.7 The Board is not bound by rules of evidence, but must act in
accordance with procedural
Evidence may be
given orally or in writing and on oath or by statutory
declaration.
given may not be used in any civil or criminal proceedings other than for an
offence under the Act or at a hearing of the
This section was
discussed in Part 12.
15.4.8 A person who refuses to be sworn or to answer any relevant question
when required to do so is guilty of an offence, with a
fine or imprisonment, or
both, able to be
15.4.9 The Issues Paper called for submissions about whether there is a need
for any change to the way in which evidence is given
at hearings.
Does there need to be any changes to the way in which evidence is given at a
15.4.10 There were 11 submissions addressing this question. The Board, OPG
and members of the Elder Law Committee considered that
there was no need to
revise the existing provisions. The Institute understands the Public
Trustee’s submission as expressing
a similar view:
Although Public Trustee does not support the implementation of strict rules
of evidence in hearings it does take the view that some
restrictions should be
implemented by the Board on a case-by-case basis to ensure relevance and
efficiency in process.
15.4.11 Six submissions suggested reform. One respondent submitted that all
evidence should be provided to all parties prior to a
hearing or, if not
provided beforehand, that the Board be required provide parties with all the
evidence following a hearing. The
rationale was that there should not be
‘secret evidence’ that is undisclosed to some parties. Two other
submissions raised
issues about the need for transparency in order to provide
accountability.
15.4.12 Conversely, Social Work Services RHH submitted that there should be
an ability to keep evidence private in certain circumstances:
there needs to be provision for protection of people providing highly
sensitive information to the Board, especially where sharing
that information
could be harmful.
Example: A victim of abuse needs to be able to safely provide information
safe from harm from the proposed represented person. Victims
of abuse (e.g. a
spouse or child of the PRP) often hold very important information to determine
whether the PRP is engaging in risky
decisions, may be able to demonstrate how
impaired insight impacts the PRP’s decision making and add to the
Board’s understanding
of whether the least restrictive option has been
trialled or could be trialled. This often informs a Board’s determination
on whether a substitute decision maker is required. Therefore assisting people
to provide information with some protection is important.
Recommendation 12.23 addresses this issue, proposing that a person be able to
apply to the Board for an order that any document lodged
with the Board not be
disclosed to a specified person or class of people.
15.4.13 One respondent commented:
powers such as being excused from compliance with rules of evidence and being
permitted ‘to inform itself in relation to any
matter and in such manner
as it thinks fit’ - which, even in an undemocratic, non-Western country,
would seem draconian ...
Another respondent expressed a similar view. The OPG, however, commented in
response to a separate question of the Issues Paper that
it ‘is strongly
supportive of an informal inquisitorial approach to the conduct of
15.4.14 One respondent raised concern with their observation that evidence
can go untested. Another endorsed reform to enable evidence
being received and
tested by email without the need for a hearing.
15.4.15 The Institute acknowledges concerns raised by respondents that, in
their view, the Board has significant power to decide what
evidence it receives,
how it receives it and how evidence is tested or challenged. Concerns that
people may have in relation to individual
cases may be assisted by
Recommendation 12.1, which proposes that a person be able to apply to the Board
for an internal review of
a first-instance decision. There would remain the
ability to appeal a decision to the Supreme Court. It is not proposed that there
be reform to the way in which the Act deals with the giving of evidence at a
hearing given the desirability of ensuring that Board
hearings and processes are
accessible and user-friendly, particularly for people in respect of whom a
hearing is held.
Legal representation for people the subject
of Board applications
15.4.16 The Act provides that those attending a Board hearing may be
represented in some circumstances. The applicant, the Public
Guardian and the
person in respect of whom a hearing is being held may be legally represented as
Any other person
who is given notice of a hearing may be legally represented, with leave of the
15.4.17 The Board can appoint a person to represent the person in respect of
whom a hearing is being
The Board’s
submission commented that its discretion to retain legal representation for a
person is typically only exercised
where it considers they do not have the
ability to retain representation themselves.
15.4.18 Under the
Mental Health Act
, the MHT must make arrangements
for a patient to be represented if they consider that the person is, or may be,
personally incapable
of making those arrangements and that they are not, or may
not be, receiving useful assistance
15.4.19 The Issues Paper summarised the views of the Law Council of Australia
which argues that people who are the subject of guardianship
proceedings should
have legal representation at a first
The Council
supports legal representation being free of charge, in addition to having
funding available for people to obtain medical
reports where there is dispute
in respect of whom
a hearing is being held for the appeal or review of a
decision are entitled to be represented if they wish to
with the associated
paid by the
government.
Paper noted that if legal representation was compulsory for some or all Board
hearings, this could detract from the benefit
of having hearings conducted
informally. It would also require adequate funding and resourcing.
15.4.20 The Institute sought to ascertain what level of support exists for
compulsory legal representation for people the subject
of applications to the
Should the Act require mandatory representation for people in respect of whom
a hearing is being
15.4.21 There were 14 responses to this question, with most expressing
support for an increased use of independent representation
at hearings but that
it not be mandatory. Mandatory representation was not supported due to the need
to promote a person’s
will and preference and thus the importance of
enabling a person to choose not to have legal representation. Members of the
Law Committee endorsed the South Australian model (explained above) which
provides people with the opportunity to obtain free legal
representation. They
observed that this would be particularly useful where a proposed represented
person’s ability to enter
into a retainer with a lawyer was in doubt.
Another submission also endorsed legal representation being made available if
15.4.22 Several submissions indicated that there might be circumstances where
representation ought to be compulsory. Two submissions
stated that the Act
should outline circumstances in which legal representation is required. Both the
OPG and Social Work Services
RHH gave similar examples of when representation
should be provided. These were:
• where the proposed represented person does not have an independent
informal advocate (for example, a family member) and they
are unable to attend
the hearing themselves;
• where the proposed representation person is unable, or does not wish,
to attend the hearing.
The OPG described the purpose as being to ensure that in these circumstances
the person’s ‘wishes and concerns are able
to be raised and
considered.’ It submitted that representation could be provided either via
advocacy or legal representation.
15.4.23 Two submissions endorsed the
Mental Health Act
requiring representation for a person in respect of whom a hearing is being held
where the MHT considers that they are not
(or may not be) receiving useful
assistance elsewhere, and they are incapable of making those arrangements
themselves.
15.4.24 One submission supported introduction of mandatory legal
representation for a proposed represented person at a hearing. They
however, that the role of a legal representative should be to act as an advocate
rather than transforming proceedings
into a formal legal and adversarial
environment. The Board observed that, if the Act were revised to provide for
mandatory legal
representation, then this would likely have resourcing
implications for the Legal Aid Commission Tasmania and Community Legal Centres
Tasmania and that, on that basis, there is a need for broader community
consultation around this potential reform.
15.4.25 The Institute observes the importance of appropriate and effective
safeguards for those impacted by the Act. Safeguards were
considered in some
detail in Parts 12 and 14. Provision of representation for those appearing
before the Board can function as a
safeguard, as it is aimed at protecting and
promoting a person’s rights and interests. It also serves as a means for a
views, wishes and preferences to be communicated, which is
fundamental under a revised model providing greater emphasis upon the
act consistently with a person’s will and preference. For these reasons,
it is proposed that legislative provisions
dealing with representation for those
the subject of Board proceedings be strengthened.
15.4.26 Noting support for the
Mental Health Act
model, it is proposed
that this form the basis of reform to the Act. This would require the Board to
arrange representation for a
person who it considers is not, or may not, be
receiving useful assistance elsewhere, and who it considers is, or may be,
to arrange representation themselves. A variation to the
Mental Health
is proposed to provide that the Board is not required to obtain
representation for an individual where it is satisfied that it is
inconsistent
with their views, wishes and preference. The focus of the Convention is upon
ensuring that people have supports
to them. It does not require
that those supports be mandated or provided where it is inconsistent with a
person’s wishes.
15.4.27 Both EOT and Speak Out advocates endorsed reform to provide a direct
requirement for the Board to arrange (rather than direct)
representation where
it has determined that representation is necessary. This might include, for
example, making initial contact
by way of referral and arranging a first
conference. The Institute agrees that this is appropriate and is part of
ensuring that a
person has access to appropriate support. This is captured in
Mental Health Act
Recommendation 15.6
(1) That the Act contain an equivalent provision to cl 7(4) of sch 4,
Mental Health Act
(Tas), requiring the Board to make
arrangements for the representation of a person in respect of whom a hearing is
being held if it
considers that the person is, or may not be, receiving useful
assistance elsewhere and that they are, or may be, personally incapable
making those arrangements.
(2) That the Board be required to make arrangements for the views and
interests of a person in respect of whom a hearing is being
independently represented where the person in respect of whom the hearing is
being held does not wish to, or is unable
to, attend the hearing.
(3) That the Board not be required to make arrangements for separate
representation of a person in respect of whom a hearing is being
held where it
is satisfied that it is inconsistent with the person’s views, wishes and
preferences.
Other ways to involve a person in the Board
15.4.28 The Issues Paper asked for suggestions about other ways that the Act
could be improved to ensure that a person in respect
of whom a hearing is being
held is included and encouraged to participate in the process.
What is the best way to ensure that a person who is subject of an application
is included in the
15.4.29 There were 14 responses to this question. Suggestions and comments
included a person in respect of whom a hearing is being
• having access to information;
• having contact with Registry staff prior to a hearing;
• being encouraged to attend a hearing; and
• providing opportunity for the person to speak at a hearing
15.4.30 Social Work Services RHH suggested that the Act require advocates and
representatives (if any) to ensure that a person is
included in the process.
15.4.31 It was also suggested that adjustments can be made to the hearing
environment to encourage and support a person being included
and able to
participate in the process, including:
• hearings being conducted informally, in an inquisitorial style,
adopting a therapeutic jurisprudential approach. A good investigative
prior to a hearing was also endorsed;
• the importance of providing appropriate and accessible venues;
• the use of telephone or video conferencing facilities and
communication assistance; and
• the use of
15.4.32 The Board commented that ‘[h]earings need to be user friendly,
non-threatening and non-adversarial, which means that
the training of staff and
Board members is critical.’ It noted that it already employs a number of
strategies (including those
listed above) to facilitate a person’s
inclusion in the Board process. It commented that the AGAC is in the process of
best practice guidelines in response to recommendations of the ALRC
to ensure that a person in respect of whom a hearing is being
opportunity to participate in the hearing process. The Institute has not made
recommendations proposing reform to the Board’s
existing processes and
instead proposes that consideration is given to implementing the AGAC’s
recommendations once made. Many
suggestions raised by respondents to this review
outlined how policy and physical, technological and educational strategies can
to make Board hearings accessible. These matters do not require
legislative reform and thus fall outside of the Terms of Reference
Use of intermediaries
15.4.33 The Institute has recently made recommendations in relation to the
development of an intermediaries scheme within the criminal
justice system in
its Final Report,
Facilitating Equal Access to Justice: An
Intermediary/Communication Assistant Scheme for
recommends use of intermediaries as a means of providing individuals with access
to support to maximise their participation
within the legal system on an equal
basis with others.
15.4.34 The report commented that it was outside of the scope of the
reference for that project to consider the potential use of intermediaries
within the civil system, including in tribunal proceedings such as the
It also falls
outside of the scope of this reference. There would, however, seem to be
synergies between the need to ensure that
support is available for those within
the criminal justice system and those in the guardianship jurisdiction. Both the
OPG and EOT’s
submissions highlighted the opportunity that could exist for
the use of intermediaries within this jurisdiction. The Interim Children’s
Commissioner also supported further consideration of the use of intermediaries
in Board proceedings involving consent to medical
treatment for children. The
Institute recommends that the potential use of an intermediaries scheme within
the Board be investigated.
Recommendation 15.7
That a review be conducted in relation to the merits of utilising
intermediaries in the guardianship jurisdiction.
of the Board
15.5.1 The Act gives a range of powers to the Board. Some of these have been
discussed in previous Parts. Additional powers are discussed
15.5.2 The Board’s powers to appoint administrators and guardians were
considered in Part 8. Its powers to supervise administrators
and guardians, and
review, revoke and amend their appointment were explained in Part
Powers to request
copies of a person’s Will were also considered in Part
Powers in relation to unlawful
15.5.3 The Board has power to make orders when it receives information that a
person with a disability is being detained against their
will. If the Board
receives information that a person with a disability:
• is being unlawfully detained against their will; or
• is likely to suffer damage to their physical, emotional or mental
health or well-being unless immediate action is taken,
the Board can order the Public Guardian or another person to visit the person
with a police officer to prepare a report for the
Police may use
reasonably necessary force to enter the premises for that
Any person who
delays or obstructs a person acting under these provisions is liable on summary
conviction and a fine may be
15.5.4 If, after considering the resulting report, the Board is satisfied
that the person is being unlawfully detained against their
will, or is likely to
suffer damage to their physical, mental, or emotional health or well-being
unless immediate action is taken,
the Board may order the person’s removal
to a safe place until an application for a guardian is
Police also have
power to enter premises and remove a person with a disability if they consider
that they are, or have been, ill-treated,
neglected or unlawfully detained
against their will, or that they are likely to suffer serious damage to their
physical, emotional
or mental health or well-being unless immediate action is
taken. Police must be accompanied by a person that the Public Guardian
and may use reasonable necessary
The nominated
person must take the person to a safe place as soon as possible, ensure an
application for guardianship is made and
provide the Board with a written
15.5.5 EOT made the following comments about this section:
we are concerned about the linkage in sections 29 and 30 of the Act to
application for guardianship order because of the potential
to automatically
link abuse of persons with disability (including older persons) to questions
the circumstances in which this authority
may be used is broadened ...
Guardianship orders should not be turned into a catch-all protective
mechanism or a strategy of first resort in situations where the
Board receives
information that a person is subject to abuse or unlawful detainment. There are
several reasons why this is the
• Guardianship orders are a reactive response and emphasis on its use
to address situations where individuals are vulnerable
deflects emphasis from
preventative strategies
• It leads to a focus on situations where individuals are suffering
abuse at the hands of others
• It deflects assessing where more simple service system measure may
improve the person’s quality of life
• It generally risks turning adult protection into something that is
seen as someone else’s responsibility
Importantly also the use of guardianship orders to appoint a substitute
decision-maker as a first response or only possible response
is inconsistent
with the CRPD.
Nor do we consider it appropriate to restrict the powers of the Board or
Public Guardian to examining the situation of people with
disability. Not all
people with disability need protection and not all adults who need protection
have a disability. Our preference
is to use a broader term such at at-risk
adults. This would encompass persons who because of disability, age or illness
may be unable
to care for themselves or protect themselves against significant
harm or exploitation.
15.5.6 This submission raises the point that not all at-risk adults have
disability and that not all people with disability are at
risk. Recommendation
12.28 recommends that there be a separate review into the merits of establishing
adult safeguarding legislation
in Tasmania. EOT’s submission demonstrates
the utility in reviewing this matter to ensure that the Board and/or the Public
Guardian or another authority are able to adequately respond to concerns about
the abuse or neglect of adults, irrespective of whether
the adult has a
disability. It falls outside of the scope of this reference to consider this
matter in any detail.
Other reform needed to the Board’s
15.5.7 The Institute asked broadly whether there is any need for reform to
the existing powers given to the Board under the Act.
Should there be any changes made to the powers of the
15.5.8 Several responses have been considered elsewhere in this Report:
• the OPG expressed its view that the Board have greater flexibility to
determine the revocation of orders without holding a
hearing. This issue was
considered earlier in this
• two submissions suggested a need for reform in relation to the
Board’s powers to request and read copies of a person’s
was considered in Part
• one respondent proposed reform to appeal processes. This was also
considered in Part 12;
• another raised issues about the Board’s accountability and
transparency, a matter addressed earlier in this Part and
in Part 12.
15.5.9 One respondent suggested that the Board should have a duty to attempt
to investigate matters, including in an emergency, and
that it be required to
demonstrate that it had done so. As this matter relates to a potential reform to
the duties of the Board,
it is considered below.
15.5.10 The Board raised several matters for potential reform. Two have been
addressed elsewhere:
• that the Board have power to make an emergency guardianship order
despite the person being the donor of an instrument. This
is the effect of
Recommendation 15.2; and
• that upon revoking an instrument, the Board have power to appoint a
guardian, consistent with equivalent powers the
Powers of Attorney Act
This is the effect of Recommendation 12.7(2).
The following matters it raised have not been considered elsewhere and are
thus addressed in this Part:
• that the Board have a general power to do ‘all things necessary
and convenient’ to carry out its functions and
powers, consistent with
other statutes creating bodies like the Board.
The Act provides that the Public Guardian has power to ‘do all things
necessary or convenient to be done in connection with
the performance of his or
her functions.’
Institute endorses an equivalent power being included for the Board, as
• that, whilst the Board has power under s 10 to appoint an Australian
legal practitioner or medical practitioner or any other
person with appropriate
expertise to assist the Board in any proceedings, it commented that does not
have funding to meet the costs
of that assistance or to fund independent medical
reports. It noted that this provision has been utilised in relation to obtaining
expertise to assist the Board in applications for sterilisation and consent to
restrictive practices. It commented that ‘[s]ignificant
difficulty results
in finding medical practitioners who are willing to assist the Board without
The Institute considers that this issue is not one requiring legislative
reform, but a matter relating to the Board’s resourcing.
The issue of
resourcing is considered in Part
• that other jurisdictions have legislative provisions dealing with the
appointment of an administrator for the estate of a
missing person, irrespective
of disability and capacity. It suggested that ‘consideration of this issue
as to whether the Act
or the Magistrates Court, civil division is the
appropriate jurisdiction may be appropriate.’
The Institute acknowledges this suggestion, noting that it falls outside of
the scope of the Terms of Reference for this project.
It is suggested that the
utility of legislative reform to deal with the administration of a missing
person’s estate be separately
Recommendation 15.8
(1) That an equivalent power to that granted to the Public Guardian in s
15(2) of the Act be conferred upon the Board, providing it
with power to do all
things necessary or convenient to be done in connection with the performance of
its functions.
(2) That the need for legislative reform to deal with the appointment of an
administrator for the estate of a missing person be reviewed.
of the Board
15.6.1 The Board has an overriding duty to perform its functions in
accordance with the guiding principles of the Act of what is in
best interests, least restrictive of their freedom of decision and action and,
if possible, carrying out their
These principles
were considered in Part 3 with recommendations made for their
15.6.2 As the Institute’s Terms of Reference asked specifically about
whether there should be reform to the duties of the Board,
the Institute asked a
separate question about this:
Should the Board have any additional, or different,
15.6.3 As with the previous question, most responses have been addressed
elsewhere in this Report, including:
• that the Board should have a duty to consult with those close to a
represented or proposed represented person, including their
carers. This matter
is addressed in Part 3 and throughout this Report; and
• that the Board should need to facilitate resolution of a dispute via
mediation prior to a formal hearing. This was considered
15.6.4 Other suggestions that have not been discussed elsewhere were:
• that the Board should have a duty to attempt to investigate matters,
including in an emergency, and that it be required to
demonstrate that it had
done so (as noted above).
The Institute considers that this requirement is already implicit, including
s 11(4) which provides that the Board may inform itself
in relation to any
matter and in any manner that it sees fit. Legislative reform is not proposed;
• that both the OPG and the Board provide community education. The OPG
stated that ‘[i]t would be useful for the Act to
clarify what, if any,
role the Board should play in this area.’
This matter is considered in Part 16 as part of discussion of the functions
and duties of the Public
• that both the Board and the Public Guardian have a duty to promote
good practice in relation to supported decision-making
in the community.
Recommendation 3.3 proposes that one of the revised guiding principles of the
Act be that ‘people who require support in decision-making
provided with access to the most effective support necessary for them to make,
communicate and participate in decisions that
affect their lives.’ The
Board would be required to exercise its functions and powers in accordance with
this overarching guiding
principle. Recommendation 6.4 proposes that the Act
confirm that a person has decision-making ability if they can make decisions
with practicable and appropriate support. Similarly, Recommendation 6.4 proposes
that an adult not be treated as unable to make a
decision about a matter unless
all practicable steps have been taken to provide the adult with support and
access to necessary information
to make and communicate a decision. It is
suggested that these proposals address the desirability of the Board and Public
promoting good practice in relation to supported decision-making in the
15.6.5 The Board did not address this question and the Public Trustee
responded that there was no need to revise the Board’s
duties contained
within the Act.
15.6.6 As a concluding question, the Institute asked broadly whether
stakeholders considered there was any need to reform other provisions
dealing with the functions, powers and duties of the Board not otherwise
addressed in earlier responses.
How else can the Act be improved in relation to the functions, powers and
duties of the Board?
15.6.7 The OPG raised several matters:
• that the Board have flexibility to make an on-going guardianship
order upon hearing an application for medical consent, if
it was satisfied that
a guardian making health care decisions rather than the Board consenting to
specific treatment would be in
the person’s best interests. This matter
was addressed in Part
• for the Board to be able to make a guardianship order on reviewing an
instrument, noting that the Board may make an administration
order on an
application to review an enduring power of attorney. Recommendation 12.7
addresses this issue;
• considering granting the Board uniform powers to conduct ‘own
motion’ reviews of any type. It is understood that
this is addressed via
Recommendation 12.5 relating to the Board’s power to review instruments of
its own motion. The Board
already has power to review administration and
guardianship orders of its own motion; and
• giving the Board the ability to decline registration of an enduring
instrument if there is clear evidence that the donor did
not have the mental
capacity to make it. This is the effect of Recommendation 4.11(1).
15.6.8 Other submissions pointed to the need for reform to processes and
practices rather than the need for legislative reform. For
example, it was
commented that the avenue of seeking advice from the Board needs to be well
promoted, regularly communicated, and
an accessible process. PCT submitted:
PCT receives approximately 30 calls per year relating to the GAB and Public
Guardian. These calls have never been about following
legislative requirements,
but rather people not understanding the reason for decisions, or service
providers not understanding that
families and friends can still be involved in
palliative and end of life care, even if they are not the Guardian.
15.6.9 Other submissions raised matters that are addressed elsewhere in this
Report, including:
• the need for the Board to be accountable including that the
Ombudsman’s power be improved and that the Board not be
immune from claims
against it. One respondent commented ‘other state [organisations] —
such as the Anti-Discrimination
Commission, Anti-Discrimination Tribunal, the
Ombudsman Tasmania and the Prosecution Service — will not investigate the
of bodies such as the GAB and the Legal Aid Commission’;
• that evidence before the Board should be able to be subject to a
subpoena and able to be used in another court.
15.6.10 Some suggested improvements to the Board’s processes, including
reducing the amount of paperwork, making it easier for
a represented person to
complain about their representative and ensuring that hearings are accessible.
Revision to the Board’s
internal processes and practices falls outside of
the scope of this review unless requiring legislative reform, although issues of
accessibility were discussed previously in this
15.6.11 Carers Tasmania suggested that there be methods of checking on the
safety or wellbeing of representatives as well as represented
persons as part of
review processes, noting that carers are also vulnerable to
This was the only
submission that raised this issue and it is not directly raised by the Terms of
Reference so has thus not been
considered further. Recommendation 3.3 does,
however, propose that one of the guiding principles of the Act be an
acknowledgement
of the important role that families and carers and other
informal supporters play.
Powers and Duties of the Public Guardian
Introduction
16.1.1 The Public Guardian is one of the two bodies established by the Act,
the other being the Board. The Public Guardian’s
role can be broadly
divided into two functions. The first is to act as a representative for
individuals. The second is to act as
an advocate for the rights of people with
disability, irrespective of whether they have a representative appointed for
16.1.2 The role of the Public Guardian is itself a safeguard aimed at
protecting and promoting the rights and interests of people
with disability at
an individual and broader systemic level. Whilst Parts 12 and 14 made specific
recommendations proposing improvements
to safeguards in relation to
representative decision-making and consent to health care and treatment, this
Part also aims to strengthen
the role of the Public Guardian as a means of
safeguarding those impacted by the jurisdiction.
16.1.3 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to consider the functions,
powers and duties of the Public Guardian. This Part reviews
these matters and
makes recommendations for reform.
of the Public Guardian
16.2.1 The Act provides that the functions of the Public Guardian are to:
• foster the provision of services and facilities for persons with a
disability;
• support the establishment of organisations which support persons with
a disability;
• encourage the development of programs that support persons with a
disability (including advocacy programs, educational programs,
and programs to
encourage persons to act as guardians and administrators);
• to promote, speak for and protect the rights and interests of persons
with a disability;
• to deal, on behalf of persons with a disability, with persons or
bodies providing services;
• to represent persons with a disability before the Board;
• to investigate, report, and make recommendations to the Minister on
any matter relating to the operation of the Act;
• to act as a guardian or administrator when appointed by the
• to disseminate information about the functions of the Public
Guardian, the Board and the operation of the Act;
• to give advice on the powers that may be exercised under the Act
relating to persons with a disability, as to the operation
of the Act generally
and on appropriate alternatives to taking action under the
• any other function assigned to
16.2.2 The OPG’s submission commented that these descriptions could be
improved to better articulate the Public Guardian’s
role. For example, it
stated that:
the advocacy functions of the OPG need to be made explicit and to be focused
on the aims of advocacy, i.e., promoting and protecting
the rights and interests
of people with impaired capacity for decision-making or reduced capacity for
self-representation. In relation
to the systemic (as opposed to individual)
advocacy, the focus should be on influencing and promoting reforms to
legislation, policy
and service/program provision that protect people with a
disability from harm and encourage autonomy and participation in all aspects
community life.
16.2.3 More broadly, there appears to be some duplication, or at least lack
of clarity, in the list of functions allocated to the
Public Guardian,
particularly in relation to the establishment of services, programs and
facilities (refer to the first three dot
points above). It would assist both the
OPG and the community to provide greater clarity. Noting that the OPG supports
improve clarity surrounding the role of the Public Guardian, it is
recommended that this be reviewed.
Recommendation 16.1
That the descriptions of the functions of the Public Guardian in s 15(1) of
the Act be reviewed for clarity and to eliminate duplication.
16.2.4 The OPG’s submission stated that:
the OPG’s view is that the roles and functions of the Public Guardian
need strengthening in four main areas: (1) its investigation
functions; (2) its
role in community education; (3) its role in supporting other decision-makers;
and (4) its systemic advocacy role.
A stronger role in each of these domains is essential to ensure that
guardianship and administration appointments generally, as well
appointment of the Public Guardian specifically, are truly a last resort. Whilst
resourcing has been the key barrier to the
OPG fully performing the
‘non-guardianship’ functions currently conferred on the Public
Guardian, we believe it is critical
that the legislation make explicit the role
expected by Parliament and by the community.
16.2.5 The following sections consider some of the existing functions of the
Public Guardian and evaluate options for reform.
Community education
16.2.6 Two of the existing functions of the Public Guardian are to
disseminate information about the functions of the Public Guardian,
and the operation of the Act and to give advice on the powers that may be
exercised under the Act, the operation of the
Act generally and on appropriate
alternatives to taking action under the
submission commented that both the OPG and the Board provide community
education. The OPG stated that ‘[i]t
would be useful for the Act to
clarify what, if any, role the Board should play in this area.’ In
relation to its community
education function, the OPG submitted that:
Our view is that these functions should remain with the OPG and that the
legislation should make it clear that the OPG has the primary
or lead role. This
would avoid duplication with the role the Board might take, in providing
education sessions and developing written
and other information/education
16.2.7 Noting the need to ensure that resources are used effectively, it is
agreed that there should be clearly defined roles for
the Public Guardian and
the Board in this area. The Act does not provide a specific role for the Board
to disseminate community information.
At a practical level, it is useful for the
Board to have readily accessible information about the Act and its own processes
who come into contact with the Board, or who contact the Board seeking
out this information. The Institute has not made recommendations
for legislative
reform on the basis that there may not be a need for such change, but with the
issue instead addressed through the
Board and OPG coordinating activities.
Other roles?
16.2.8 This Report has already made recommendations to extend the role and
powers of the Public Guardian. Parts 4 and 12 outlined
reforms to provide the
Public Guardian power to mediate
submission also proposed the following extensions of the Public Guardian’s
role, depending on other reforms
to the Act:
Supporting other decision-makers
Our view is that the OPG should take the lead role in supporting and guiding
enduring guardians and attorneys, Board-appointed private
guardians and
administrators, persons responsible and any future decision making supporters or
co-decision makers. We believe this
role/function should be explicitly
identified in the legislation ... our view is that the Public Guardian’s
role should be
one of support, education and guidance rather than formal
monitoring and oversight. In the event that new roles arise under revised
legislation for supporters and co-decision makers, our view is the OPG is the
logical agency to take the lead in the provision of
training and education, and
potentially in coordinating new services ...
In addition, the OPG should be considered as the agency to take on the role
of coordination and/or management of any new related services,
official visitor scheme and an intermediary scheme, in the event that such
programs are introduced to Tasmania.
16.2.9 The first proposal is that the Act explicitly confirm the role of the
Public Guardian to support representatives. This is implicit
in the current
drafting of the Act, which provides that one of the Public Guardian’s
functions is to give advice on the powers
that may be exercised under the Act,
the operation of the Act generally and on appropriate alternatives to taking
action under the
Explicitly confirming that one of the roles of the Public Guardian is to support
representatives and supporters has the following
advantages:
• it may assist in increasing community awareness of the role that the
Public Guardian can play in supporting supporters and
representatives;
• supporting supporters and representatives promotes them acting in
accordance with the Act and performing the role competently;
• it is one means of providing a person with broader decision-making
For these reasons, the Institute endorses this proposal.
Recommendation 16.2
That one of the functions of the Public Guardian be to support and educate
representatives, supporters and informal supporters, including
by giving advice
on the functions and powers that may be exercised under the Act, the operation
of the Act generally and on appropriate
alternatives to taking action under the
16.2.10 The second of the OPG’s suggestions is that it take a lead role
in coordinating and managing any newly related services,
such as an official
visitor scheme or intermediary scheme. These matters are addressed elsewhere in
this Report.
Investigative function
16.2.11 The Act states that the Public Guardian may investigate complaints
and allegations against
representatives.
investigate matters that the Board refers to it for
investigation.
advises that its staff no longer investigate matters that are the subject of an
application and instead refers matters
to the Public Guardian where it considers
that further information is
16.2.12 The OPG submitted that:
Currently section 17 gives the Public Guardian quite narrow powers to
investigate (1) complaints and allegations concerning the actions
of a guardian,
administrator or a person acting under an enduring power of attorney and (2) any
other matter before the Board, on
the request of the Board. In many other
who are not
represented persons and may be made at the Public
Guardian/Advocate’s own initiative.
16.2.13 It is proposed that the Public Guardian be able to investigate
matters of its own motion. This provides the Public Guardian
with an equivalent
ability to the Board to determine when investigations should occur. It removes
the need for the Board’s
involvement, thus reducing its workload. This may
improve the jurisdictions’ responsiveness and lead to improved outcomes,
better safeguarding the rights of people requiring decision-making support. It
provides consistency with powers granted to the Public
Guardian in Queensland
and aligns with the VLRC’s
recommendations.
16.2.14 It is also suggested that the Public Guardian be able to investigate
matters involving non-represented people. The OPG submitted
The OPG is of the strong view that its investigation function should be
broadened to include investigating circumstances where a person
disability (other than currently represented persons) is suspected to be subject
to or at risk of abuse, exploitation or neglect.
16.2.15 EOT also submitted:
we are of the view that the ability to undertake the functions [to
proactively protect the rights of people with disability] should
be adequately
resourced as part of a broader strategy to prevent and address the abuse of
vulnerable adults including people with
disability and other adults who by
reason of age or illness may be unable to protect themselves against significant
harm or exploitation.
This safeguarding function should be legislated to enable protective actions
to be taken even in situations where a person does not
satisfy the need for
substituted or supported decision making.
16.2.16 This is already implicit, as the Board may, and does, refer
investigations to the Public Guardian involving non-represented
people. It is
proposed that this be extended to enable the Public Guardian to also investigate
matters involving non-represented
people of its own motion. The ability to
investigate matters relating to non-represented people is a function typically
upon Public Guardians in other
functions as a safeguard, particularly when most members of the community
requiring decision-making support are supported informally
and do not have a
representative appointed.
16.2.17 The OPG also suggested that the Public Guardian have power to
investigate other decision-makers in addition to representatives:
The current powers to investigate complaints or concerns about the acts or
wrong-doings of guardians, administrators and attorneys
should remain and be
extended to other substitute decision-makers including persons responsible and
any (formal) supporter or co-decision
16.2.18 This suggestion is endorsed on the basis that it aligns with the
existing functions of the Public Guardian in supervising
representatives. It
serves as a safeguard for those who do not have a formal representative
appointed, but have a need for decision-making
support in the context of health
care and treatment decisions.
Recommendation 16.3
That the Public Guardian have the following additional functions and
• to investigate complaints and allegations against supporters and
representatives including persons responsible;
• to investigate matters of its own motion; and
• to investigate circumstances where a person with a disability is
suspected to be subject to or at risk of harm, abuse, exploitation
Investigations in relation to elder abuse
16.2.19 Four submissions referred to and supported the Public Guardian having
power to investigate allegations of elder abuse. This
could provide a mechanism
to better detect, investigate and respond to allegations of elder abuse. The
potential role would seem
to align with existing investigative functions and
powers granted to the Public Guardian within the Act.
16.2.20 Victims of elder abuse may include people with disability, but are
not exclusively individuals with disability. Elder abuse
extends to a range of
other individuals within the community who, for a range of reasons, are at risk
of abuse, neglect or exploitation.
To the extent that a person with disability
may be subject to elder abuse, Recommendation 16.3 would enable the Public
Guardian to
investigate, by direction of the Board or at its own instigation,
allegations of elder abuse against a non-represented person. The
resolve is whether the Public Guardian should play a role in investigating elder
abuse perpetrated against people without
disability. People without disability
should have equal protections from the risk of elder abuse as those with
disability. One option
to seek to detect and respond to elder abuse might be to
grant the Public Guardian specific powers to investigate elder abuse
irrespective
of whether the alleged victim is a person with
disability.
One advantage
to that approach is that it results in all members of the community being
treated equally and having equal protections
against abuse. Granting the Public
Guardian powers to investigate elder abuse in this broad manner would, however,
extend the existing
scope of its traditional role relating only to people with
disability.
16.2.21 The Coroner recently recommended that:
the Tasmanian government give consideration to the establishment of an
independent body with specific responsibility for elder abuse
by, inter alia,
investigating complaints, researching and responding to the ill-treatment of
older people, developing community education
programs and by overseeing cases
where there is a risk of elder
And further that:
alternatively, that the Tasmanian government give consideration to enhancing
the powers of, and appropriately resourcing, the Office
of the Public Guardian
so that the above functions can be effectively
16.2.22 Elder abuse is an increasing problem requiring both a legislative and
policy response.
Responding effectively to elder abuse is a matter that requires separate
consideration. It is outside of the scope of this review
to consider
comprehensive responses to the issue of elder abuse in Tasmania. Recommendation
12.28 of this Report does, however, propose
that the merits of introducing adult
safeguarding legislation in Tasmania be further investigated. This comprises one
possible strategy
to better address issues of elder abuse in the community. In
relation to this issue, the OPG’s submission commented that:
The OPG is mindful of the findings and recommendations of the recent ALRC
report into elder abuse which included recommendations for
the states to enact
adult safeguarding laws and establish adult safeguarding agencies. Whilst the
report did not finally propose
that Public Guardians/Advocates should
necessarily be given a broader adult safeguarding function, much consideration
was given to
the roles already undertaken in most jurisdictions and the logic in
strengthening and possibly extending their investigation functions
to vulnerable
adults who do not necessarily have impaired decision-making capacity. The
OPG’s proposed broadening and strengthening
of the Public Guardian’s
investigation function would ready the office for likely future policy
development in this area.
Should the Board or Public Guardian investigate matters before the
16.2.23 Two submissions raised whether it should be the Board or the OPG that
investigates a matter prior to a Board hearing. One
respondent submitted that
this should be a role for the Public Guardian. Members of the Elder Law
Committee’s submission commented:
The PG [Public Guardian] might be appropriately placed to be the policing
body/punitive guardian of the legislation ... Alternatively
the Board’s
funding should be increased to enable the return of a dedicated investigator
role (the Board functioned well in
the years that a dedicated investigator was
16.2.24 This would appear a matter of policy and thus falls outside the scope
of the Institute’s Terms of Reference. The Institute
notes, however, the
importance of avoiding any perception of conflicting interests and that the
Public Guardian has the advantage
of being an independent body separate to the
Board that hears and determines a matter.
Systemic advocacy role
16.2.25 The Australian Human Rights Commission has recently endorsed the role
of systemic advocacy as one component of safeguarding
the rights and interests
of people with disability within institutional
It comments that
effective systemic advocacy requires organisations to be ‘well trained and
resourced’ to undertake this
16.2.26 The Public Guardian reports that the OPG has limited resources to
take a proactive role in fostering the provision of services
and facilities for
people with
disability.
It does not currently have additional advocacy programs other than its direct
work in its role as a guardian for individuals. It
makes referrals to
community-based advocacy services as
16.2.27 The Institute asked for feedback about whether the Public Guardian
should continue to have a role in systemic advocacy for
people with disability,
or whether there is any merit to that function being delegated to a separate
body as occurs in some other
Queensland, the systemic advocacy function is delegated to a separate authority,
the Public Advocate who:
• acts as a watchdog for all vulnerable citizens whether or not subject
to a guardianship
• conducts a public advocacy role in promoting and protecting the
rights of people with disability, and protects against neglect,
exploitation;
• encourages the development of programs and the provision of services
and facilities.
The Public Guardian then performs the roles of acting as a representative and
conducting investigations at an individual level.
16.2.28 The Institute is cognisant that delegating systemic advocacy to a
separate body does not necessarily mean that the work would
be performed any
differently or better as success largely depends upon adequate resourcing. In a
small jurisdiction such as Tasmania,
it may not be sustainable to separate the
functions amongst different organisations. The Institute therefore asked for
whether establishing a separate role of a Public Advocate might
better serve the needs and interests of people with disability in
Is there merit to further investigating the establishment of a separate
Office of the Public
16.2.29 Fourteen submissions addressed this question. Many noted the
importance of systemic advocacy. The Board, for example, commented:
The Board wishes to highlight the need for systemic advocacy. Systemic
advocacy seeks to influence or secure positive long-term changes
that remove
barriers and address discriminatory practices to ensure the collective rights
and interests of people with decision making
incapacity are upheld and can
address systemic abuse and neglect. Systemic advocacy also pursues positive
changes to legislation,
policy and service practices and facilitates referral to
and information exchange with relevant government and community sector
organisations.
These are important functions, particularly if there are
significant changes to the Act being considered.
16.2.30 Several respondents pointed to a perceived gap in the current
provision of systemic advocacy in Tasmania. Six responses expressed
support for
the establishment of a Public Advocate being further considered, with five
indicating some level of reservation or rejection
of the option. Other
submissions did not indicate a view either way, highlighting the potential
advantages and disadvantages to each
16.2.31 The OPG did not agree that there be a separate Office of the Public
Advocate. It submitted that:
The OPG is strongly opposed to the establishment of a separate office to
undertake the public advocacy functions currently conferred
on the Public
Guardian. There is no merit in creating yet another small office in such a small
that splitting the functions would further
stretch resources.
The only other jurisdictions that have separate offices of the Public
Guardian and Public Advocate are the ACT and QLD. In the ACT,
there is a single
office of The Public Trustee and Guardian, and a separate Public Advocate, who
is also the Children and Young People
Commissioner. Anecdotally, we understand
there is some overlap in the roles resulting in unnecessary duplication of
(scarce) resources.
In Queensland, the Public Guardian has responsibility for
protecting the rights and interests of children and young people in the
protection system, as well as adults with a disability. Again, we have heard
anecdotally that there is some overlap/duplication
in the roles of the Public
Guardian and public Advocate.
The OPG advocates consideration of models that might combine statutory
offices in other protective jurisdictions such as the Children’s
Commissioner or Official Visitor schemes where there is a synergy of roles,
which would provide some economies of scale and sharing
of administrative
The OPG is open to a change in title from Public Guardian to Public Advocate.
For those states and territories other than the ACT
and Queensland, half have
Public Guardians and half have Public Advocates. The functions of all include
both acting as guardian of
last resort and systemic advocacy. Two potential
advantages of calling Tasmania’s officer the Public Advocate rather than
Guardian might be decreased confusion between the roles and offices of
the Public Guardian and the Guardianship and Administration
Board, and a greater
consciousness of and focus on the systemic advocacy functions, which to date
have been poorly neglected.
16.2.32 The Public Trustee did not express a view, commenting ‘that a
business case be undertaken to identify the pros and cons
and financial
viability of such a proposal.’ PCT also submitted that it considers there
is merit to further investigating this
model, but that it believes it would not
be economically viable. It submitted that ‘it may be more appropriate to
examine further
programs and funding for existing organisations like Advocacy
Tasmania and relevant Community Legal Centres.’ Members of the
Committee also submitted that if the Public Guardian ‘is not able to
adequately fulfil its advocacy function, an
increase in financial resources and
powers ought first be considered.’
16.2.33 Two submissions commented that, in their observations, the system is
already too complicated and that a further body for people
to interact with
would only add to complexity and confusion.
16.2.34 Speak Out advocates highlighted the following matters that it
considered relevant:
• that the roles of a guardian and advocate are different, with
possibly different desirable skill-sets;
• that making the roles separate might assist to provide clarity of
function and reduce competing pressures impacting upon the
performance of a
systemic advocacy role; and
• the need to avoid the system becoming disparate.
They commented that, if the roles were to be separated, the respective bodies
would need to keep each other informed. They noted that
it may be desirable to
maintain a watching brief in relation to the role of the Senior Practitioner and
Disability Commissioner under
the NDIS, querying the role that a Public Advocate
would play following these national reforms, whilst acknowledging that not all
people with disability will fall under the NDIS.
16.2.35 The Board expressed support for the institution of a Public Advocate
being further considered, commenting:
Essentially, the Public Guardian prioritises some of her functions as
specified in the Act over others, when in fact the legislation
gives equal
priority to all of these functions. While this is partly a resourcing issue, the
result is a lack of systemic advocacy.
Even with greater resourcing being
provided to the Public Guardian, this prioritisation could continue, and
therefore gives some
weight to the appointment of a separate authority.
16.2.36 TasCOSS endorsed establishment of a Public Advocate separate to the
OPG. It proposed that the Public Advocate’s role
be to ‘engage in
individual advocacy, community empowerment and systemic oversight and
advocacy.’ It suggested that some
of its functions could include to:
• establish a legislated supported decision-making regime including
performing an oversight and monitoring role;
• execute a decision-support program; and
• produce and disseminate capacity building resources, including
coaching decision-makers and supporters.
It expressed a preliminary view that these roles should not be assigned to
the Public Guardian, commenting that ‘that this would
not be desirable due
to the conflicting demands of these very different roles.’
16.2.37 Advocacy Tasmania endorsed establishment of a separate Office of the
Public Advocate, stating that it observes that ‘[t]hese
offices fulfil an
essential role in other jurisdictions.’
16.2.38 In summary, responses to this question indicated that systemic
advocacy for people with disability remains important as it
was when the Act was
initially enacted. Whilst EOT plays an important role in protecting and
promoting the equal rights of Tasmanians,
it is the specific remit of the Public
Guardian to advocate exclusively for people with disability. EOT states that
there is a need
for both the Board and the OPG to take a proactive role in
protecting the rights of people with disability.
16.2.39 The Board’s submission comments that the potential for the
Public Guardian to prioritise its workload in acting as a
representative over
its other functions should be avoided. It is acknowledged that the role of
representative can be both time-intensive
and time-critical, particularly when
the Public Guardian is appointed under an emergency order. It can take time to
develop a relationship
with a represented person. The need to ensure the
establishment of strong relationships becomes increasingly important under
reforms calling for decision-making based on a person’s view,
wishes and preferences. This review also recommends enhanced
powers for the
Public Guardian under a revised Act to better safeguard the rights and interests
of people who may become subject
to the Act. The potential increase in functions
should be considered when determining future resourcing allocations to the OPG.
16.2.40 It may be that the establishment of a separate Office of Public
Advocate is the best way to ensure that there is a separation
of functions and
accountability for the performance of the dual roles currently allocated to the
Public Guardian. Alternatively,
if the issue is one of resourcing, then this
problem should be addressed without establishment of a Public Advocate being
The underlying cause, and therefore solution, needs to be further
analysed. The Institute endorses the Public Trustee’s comments
appropriate that the assessment of whether there is a need for a Public Advocate
requires development of a business case.
As the OPG notes, Tasmania is a small
not be dilution
of resources. It is proposed that these matters be further
considered.
Recommendation 16.4
That strategies be developed to improve the delivery of systemic advocacy for
people with disability.
Amalgamation of the roles of the Public
Guardian and Public Trustee
16.2.41 The previous section considered the desirability of reform to
establish a separate Office of the Public Advocate. The Issues
Paper also noted
that, in the ACT, roles traditionally assigned to a Public Advocate/Public
Guardian and Public Trustee have been
combined through the establishment of a
‘Public Trustee and
is to act as guardian and administrator for
individuals.
The Institute
asked whether there was merit to further investigating this model in Tasmania,
noting that one of the Institute’s
Terms of Reference is to consider ways
to make the Act more sustainable and responsive.
Is there merit to further investigating the combining of the role and
functions of the Public Guardian and the Public
16.2.42 There were eight responses to this question, with only one expressing
support for this model. As with the previous question,
the Public Trustee
submitted that it held no deliberated view and that a business case ought to be
developed to consider the merits
and financial viability of this option.
16.2.43 The OPG did not support the amalgamation of the functions of the
Public Trustee and Public Guardian, commenting:
An amalgamation of the functions of The Public Trustee and the Public
Guardian in Tasmania was explored three to four years ago and
not, ultimately,
pursued. Whilst there is some similarity in the functions of each, there are
significant cultural and philosophical
differences in the approaches taken and
vastly different skills and expertise required of account managers compared to
those of guardians.
The Public Trustee in Tasmania is a Government Business Enterprise (GBE)
operating on a commercial basis, with clear expectations
that it will pay
dividends to Government. The functions of the Public Guardian do not sit easily
in such a model of operation. Arguably
the activities of the Public Guardian, if
it were to be merged with The Public Trustee, could be provided as a Community
Obligation (CSO) under part 9 of the
Government Business Enterprise
. The OPG considers there would be real risk the full range of
functions of the Public Guardian would not be adequately funded under
arrangement.
There are occasionally conflicts of interest between the roles of guardian
and administrator which could be difficult to resolve if
The Public Trustee and
Public Guardian were merged as one authority. In addition, from time to time The
Public Trustee is unable
to act as the administrator for a represented person
due to a conflict of interest it has with another role it performs, for example,
when a represented person contests a will for which The Public Trustee is
executor. In such cases the Public Guardian may be appointed
administrator thereby avoiding The Public Trustee’s conflict of
The Public Guardian needs to be free to advocate on behalf of represented
persons under administration at both individual and systemic
levels. This would
be difficult if the Public Guardian and Public Trustee roles were merged.
16.2.44 Members of the Elder Law Committee made similar observations about
the Public Trustee as a GBE and the potential for conflicts
of interest to
The Public Trustee (‘PT’) is a GBE and is focused on profit.
Merging the PG and PT gives rise to conflict of interest
concerns (because the
PT are in an interested position to get the administration).
16.2.45 One respondent endorsed this option as effectively providing a
‘one stop shop’ for members of the community. It
was commented that:
I want to know that if I’ve walked through a door that looks like it is
the right door, then it IS the right door, and I’m
not about to be told to
look for a different door.
16.2.46 In addressing another question, another respondent stated:
‘There should be collaboration between the Public Guardian,
Public Trustee
and any Advocate when decisions have to be made that reflect a person’s
stated wishes.’
16.2.47 Issues relating to the potential amalgamation of the Public Trustee
and Public Guardian involve similar considerations to
those raised in Part 4 in
relation to whether the roles of an administrator and guardian ought to be
For several
reasons, including the differing functions and desirable skill-sets and the
potential for conflicts of interest, it was
recommended that the legislative
framework retain separate roles of administrators for financial matters and
guardians for personal
matters. For these same reasons, and noting the lack of
public support for this model, the Institute has not made recommendations
merge the roles of the Public Trustee and Public Guardian. The Institute does,
however, endorse further consideration being given
to the development of
strategies which may have the potential to create efficiencies within the
also be given to options to respond to
framework is confusing and expressing a desire for the system to be
more user-friendly and consumer driven.
of the Public Guardian
16.3.1 The Public Guardian has power to do all things necessary or convenient
to be done in connection with the performance of her
This next Part
considers specific powers granted to the Public Guardian in the Act. The Coroner
has recently commented that the Act
‘does not appear to provide
comprehensive and targeted powers to the Office of the Public
Investigative powers
16.3.2 As discussed previously in this Part, the Public Guardian must
investigate matters that the Board refers to it for
investigation,
investigate other complaints and allegations against
representatives.
does not confer express powers upon the Public Guardian to execute its
investigative function.
The Issues Paper commented that it could be appropriate to provide a direct
power for the Public Guardian to compel the provision
of information. It noted
that the Public Guardian could, for example, be given equivalent powers to those
provided to the Board to
require government departments, state authorities,
services providers and representatives to provide reports and information
investigation.
16.3.3 The Institute observes that the Public Guardian’s investigative
role is not that dissimilar to the roles of the Senior
Practitioner under the
Disability Services Act
and Official
Mental Health Act
. It is therefore useful to review how those Acts deal
with the provision of information and the need for third parties to assist
bodies when investigating complaints or concerns. The
Mental Health Act
provides that anyone with responsibilities under the Act is required to assist
Official Visitors investigating matters by giving
people reasonable help to make
complaints. It provides:
(3) if a person discharging responsibilities under this Act knows that a
patient has expressed a wish to see or complain to an Official
Visitor, the
person must, to the maximum extent of the person’s lawful and physical
capacity to do so –
(a) grant Official Visitors access to those
parts of premises in which the patient is being accommodated or being assessed
or treated;
(b) facilitate private and direct
communication between Official Visitors and the patient (consistently with the
wishes); and
(c) grant Official Visitors access to records
relating to the patient’s assessment, treatment and care, including
records (unless the patient has asked that Official Visitors not be
granted that access); and
(d) grant Official Visitors access to other
relevant records or registers required to be kept under this Act; and
(e) answer questions about the assessment,
treatment and care of the patient to the best of the person’s knowledge
full and frank manner (unless the patient has asked that Official
Visitors not be provided with that information); and
(f) give Official Visitors such other
reasonable assistance as they may
Disability Services Act
(1) The Senior Practitioner may require a disability services provider, any
employee of the provider, and a funded private person,
to provide the Senior
Practitioner with any reasonable assistance that the Senior Practitioner may
require to perform a function
or exercise a power of the Senior Practitioner in
the disability services provider’s premises or the private funded premises
of the funded private person.
(2) A disability services provider, any employee of
the provider and a funded private person –
(a) must not fail to provide reasonable
assistance when required to do so under
subsection (1)
(b) must give full and true answers to the best
of the provider’s, employee’s or funded private person’s
respectively, to any question asked by the Senior Practitioner in the
performance or exercise of a function or power of the Senior
Practitioner under
16.3.5 It is also useful to review how the powers of the Public Guardian are
addressed in other jurisdictions. In Queensland, for
example, the
Guardian Act
provides as follows:
Right to information
(1) The public guardian has a right to all information necessary to
investigate a complaint or allegation, or to carry out an audit,
in connection
with an adult.
(2) The public guardian may, by written
notice given to a person who has custody or control of the information, require
the person—
(a) to give the information to the public guardian; and
(b) if the person is an attorney or administrator and the information is
contained in a document—to give the document to the
public guardian;
(c) if the person is not an attorney or administrator and the information is
contained in a document—to allow the public guardian
to inspect the
document and take a copy of it.
(3) The person must comply with the notice, unless the person has a
reasonable excuse.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
(4) It is a reasonable excuse for a person not to comply with the notice
because complying with the notice might tend to incriminate
the person.
(5) Subject to subsection (4), this section overrides—
(a) any restriction, in an Act or the common law, about the disclosure or
confidentiality of information; and
(b) any claim of confidentiality or privilege, including a claim based on
legal professional
16.3.6 The Institute asked whether, and how, the powers of the Public
Guardian might be reformed.
Should there be any changes made to the powers of the Public
16.3.7 Some of the responses to this question have been addressed previously
in this Part as they related primarily to the role and
functions of the Public
Guardian rather than its powers.
Investigative powers
16.3.8 In relation to the Public Guardian’s investigative powers, the
OPG submitted:
The OPG is also of the strong view that its powers of investigation should be
strengthened and made enforceable by specific powers
to compel people or
organisations to provide information. To be effective, such powers should
include the ability to serve notices
requiring a person or organisation to
provide specific documents and other relevant material; to answer questions,
both in writing
or in person; to attend conferences; and to visit the person in
any premises if access by the owner is denied, either with a warrant
order of the Board as currently available under section 29 of the Act (noting
that this section has rarely, if ever, been
The advantages of an expanded scope in investigation functions and enhanced
powers to enforce the provision of information include:
• It will go some way to filling the current gap in responding to
• Proactive referrals to other agencies such as the police, the
Ombudsman, the Aged Care Complaints Commissioner, and medical
therapeutic counselling/support services.
• Opportunity for dispute resolution and other interventions that
might avoid the need for applications to be made to the Board
appointment of guardians and administrators, or the review of enduring
appointments.
• Advocacy for improved service provision, again with the potential to
avert guardianship and administration applications/appointments.
• Means of monitoring and providing education, support and guidance to
substitute decision-makers (private guardians and administrators;
operating or purporting to operating under an enduring power of attorney;
persons responsible) and, potentially, to formal
supporters or co-decision
makers if such arrangements are included in the legislation.
16.3.9 Members of the Elder Law Committee commented that ‘[g]iven the
comments in the Issue’s Paper, the possible need
for greater powers of
investigation should be closely examined.’
16.3.10 Speak Out submitted that the Public Guardian needs stronger powers to
ensure that people are safe. Speak Out advocates commented
that the powers of
the Senior Practitioner under the
Disability Services Act
adapted for the Public Guardian. They also commented that the Public Guardian
should have power to access bank accounts
and other information, in order to
investigate allegations of abuse. Another respondent commented that ‘[t]he
Public Guardian
appears to have little power to revoke an appointment or
properly investigate issues due to time constraints and lack of
16.3.11 MIGA submitted that there should be some limits to the extent to
which medical or health practitioners should be required
to provide information:
If the Public Guardian is provided with investigative powers to compel
information from medical and other health practitioners, there
should be: ...
• Scope for reasonable excuse for declining or otherwise failing to
provide information in response to the exercise of any investigatory
including around issues of self-incrimination and practicality
This matter was discussed in
16.3.12 Whilst the Act provides a ‘catch all’ provision,
providing the Public Guardian with power to do all things necessary
its role, it is agreed that the Act should confer specific powers upon the
Public Guardian to enable her to execute the
Public Guardian’s
investigative function as a critical component of the role.
16.3.13 As discussed in Part 12, the Convention requires that ‘all
measures that relate to the exercise of legal capacity provide
for appropriate
and effective safeguards to prevent abuse ... Such safeguards shall ensure that
measures relating to the exercise
of legal capacity ... are subject to regular
review by a competent, independent and impartial authority or judicial
ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines provide that interventions for people who
require decision-making support must be subject
to regular, independent and
impartial monitoring and
Guardian’s oversight and investigative role is one of the existing
overarching safeguards of the Act. The Public
Guardian’s ability to
investigate complaints or concerns is particularly important for people who are
socially isolated and
may not have others from within their existing support
network able to supervise the suitability of decision-making supports and
conduct of representatives.
16.3.14 The Institute has not made suggestions about the precise powers that
ought to be given to the Public Guardian to perform investigations.
details should be guided by suggestions of the OPG about how they see the Act
best facilitating the investigative process,
in addition to further consultation
with key stakeholders likely to be impacted by the reforms. Powers given to the
Senior Practitioner
and Official Visitor under the
Disability Services
Mental Health Act
may be useful to guide legislative reform.
Further consideration could also be given to adopting or adapting the powers
the Public Guardian in Queensland (extracted previously in this
Part). The Institute makes several suggestions about the powers that
conferred, without this list being intended as an exhaustive list. These
• confirming the Public Guardian’s rights to information, with
Public Guardian Act 2014
(Queensland) providing a useful
example of a provision of this type;
• giving the Public Guardian powers to require provision of reports,
information, or documents relevant to an investigation.
This could be achieved
through providing equivalent powers to the Board (as provided in s 11(11) of the
Act) to require any government
department or state authority, or a service
provider, representative or person responsible to provide a report or
information on
any matter relating to a matter being investigated.
Recommendation 12.22 proposes that this provision be extended to include
of a ‘document’, and that the section also include health
practitioners, and for ‘service provider’ to be
defined by way of a
non-exhaustive list;
• confirming that anyone with responsibilities under the Act is
required to assist the Public Guardian conducting investigations,
Mental Health Act
providing a useful example upon which to
consider legislative reform;
• requiring people to answer questions or attend conferences; and
• granting the Public Guardian powers to access premises either with a
warrant or on an order of the Board, as currently available
under s 29 of the
Recommendation 16.5
That the Public Guardian have adequate powers to conduct investigations.
These provisions should:
• provide the Public Guardian with equivalent powers to the powers of
the Board to require the provision of reports, documents
and information;
• require individuals and bodies to assist the Public Guardian with
its investigations, including answering questions and attending
conferences;
• give the Public Guardian power to access premises either with a
warrant or on an order of the Board; and
• permit a person to decline to provide information or answer a
question in exceptional circumstances, for example, where it
might tend to
incriminate the person.
16.3.15 The OPG’s submission also referred to specific powers of the
Public Guardian in Queensland, enabling it to suspend the
operation of enduring
powers of attorney:
Queensland’s Public Guardian has broad investigation powers, and has
specific powers to suspend (and reinstate) the operation
of a power of attorney
for up to three months. During the period of any suspension the public trustee
assumes the role of attorney.
The OPG is of the view that these provisions have
merit and should be considered for Tasmania’s Public Guardian.
16.3.16 This reform has not been further considered on the basis that further
consultation is desirable to ascertain what support
exists for this potential
reform. The ability for the Public Guardian to suspend the operation of an
enduring instrument would extend
the scope of its existing powers which, in
relation to enduring instruments, only extends to applying to the Board seeking
revoke a document. This proposal would also have implications for the
Powers of Attorney Act
Protections for disclosing information to the Public Guardian
16.3.17 The Issues Paper noted that, to encourage the provision of
information to the Public Guardian, it may be beneficial to extend
the current
provisions which protect people who provide information or give reports to the
Board to also cover information provided
to the Public
submission commented:
If the Public Guardian is provided with investigative powers to compel
information from medical and other health practitioners, there
• Protections from civil, criminal, disciplinary or other liability
under an administrative process, and against any discrimination
action in the context of employment or other workplace arrangements, in relation
to the exercise of the public representative’s
proposed investigation
16.3.18 The ALRC noted that this is an important part of removing impediments
to people reporting abuse.
The Institute proposes that the Act provide individuals who report suspected
abuse with the same protection regardless of whether
that report is made to the
Board or the Public Guardian.
Recommendation 16.6
That the application of s 85 of the Act be extended to cover provision of
information to the Public Guardian.
Other functions and powers?
16.3.19 Other suggestions made to reform the Public Guardian’s powers
are as follows:
16.3.20 Members of the Elder Law Committee commented that reform could
Partnering with charitable/not-for-profit organisations to provide guardians?
Consideration might also be given to decentralising
it from a government body
out into communities. This would require amending the legislative framework for
delivery, accountability
and monitoring of services.
16.3.21 Currently when a professional administrator or attorney is required,
there is the option of appointing either the Public Trustee
or Tasmanian
Perpetual Trustees Limited. There is no equivalent alternative professional
guardian institution, with the Public Guardian
being the only alternative unless
another private professional was willing, able and suitable to act in the role.
This limits the
options available and gives some merit to members of the Elder
Law Committee’s suggestion. As they note, this would require
amendment to
the legislative framework and it is outside of the Institute’s Terms of
Reference to consider the matter further.
16.3.22 A second respondent commented that the Public Guardian must have
adequate powers to execute a donor’s wishes under an
instrument:
The Public Guardian needs to have the full power to execute the expressed
wishes of a competent person when they register their EG
[enduring guardian]
document, in the absence of family member or other person to act as a
person’s Guardian ...
This matter was discussed in Parts 4, 5 and 11 with a range of reforms
proposed to enhance obligations for representatives to uphold
a represented
person’s views, wishes and preferences.
of the Public Guardian
16.4.1 The Public Guardian has an overriding duty to perform her functions in
accordance with the guiding principles of the Act. These
principles were
discussed in Part 3.
16.4.2 As the Terms of Reference called for investigation into the utility of
any reform to the existing duties of the Public Guardian,
the Institute asked a
specific question about this.
Should the Public Guardian have any additional, or different,
16.4.3 Responses to this question have been included elsewhere in this Report
as relevant. EOT, for example, commented: ‘From
a legislative perspective,
the Board and Public Guardian should be required to promote good practice
[supported decision-making]
throughout the community.’ This was discussed
in Part 15.
It was noted
that several recommendations made in this Report would strengthen the need for
the Board and Public Guardian to promote
good practice supported decision-making
throughout the community.
16.4.4 In answering the Institute’s question in the Issues Paper about
how the Act might be improved in relation to the Public
Guardian (see below),
PCT commented:
While PCT believes that the Public Guardian could have additional duties, in
line with those outlined in the Issues Paper, this should
be weighed up with the
capacity of the Public Guardian to perform these duties. Unless further funding
can be provided to the Public
Guardian, adding additional duties may lead to
current duties not being able to be performed effectively.
These views are acknowledged and have been considered when making
recommendations throughout this Part. The issue of resourcing is
considered more
fully in Part 18.
16.5.1 The Institute concluded by asking more broadly how the Act might
otherwise be improved in relation to the functions, powers
and duties of the
Public Guardian.
How else can the Act be improved in relation to the functions, powers and
duties of the Public
16.5.2 Most answers have either been addressed previously in this Part, or
elsewhere in this Report. For example, two submissions
endorsed a role for the
Public Guardian to mediate disputes.
16.5.3 Two respondents raised matters relating to the internal policies and
processes of the Public Guardian:
• that they had observed that the staff of the OPG did not regularly
meet with a represented person; and
• that it is difficult to raise issues internally where issues relate
to the Public Guardian herself.
These submissions are included for completeness although, as they relate to
matters of policy and process, they fall outside of the
scope of the
Institute’s Terms of Reference.
Interrelationship
with other Legislation
Introduction
17.1.1 The Terms of Reference asked the Institute to review the
interrelationship between the Act and other relevant legislation,
including the
Mental Health Act
Disability Services Act
Powers of Attorney
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act
Public Trustee Act
Trustee Act
17.1.2 Some of these Acts also deal with the making of substitute decisions
for people deemed unable to make their own decisions.
These include:
Powers of Attorney Act
, which enables a person to appoint
an attorney to make financial decisions for them if they lose capacity to make
their own decisions;
Disability Services Act
, which provides for decisions in
relation to the use of restrictive interventions by disability services
providers and funded private
Mental Health Act
, which governs the assessment and
treatment of people with mental illness; and
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act
, which deals with the
treatment and control of persons suffering from alcohol or drug dependency.
17.1.3 It is outside the scope of this review to analyse these Acts or
consider options for their reform. The purpose of this Part
is to instead
summarise the operation of related legislation, and how these Acts should
interact following legislative reforms proposed.
Mental Health Act
deals with the assessment and treatment
of people with mental
intended as the primary source of authority for the involuntary assessment and
treatment of persons with mental illness
17.2.2 The MHT has jurisdiction in relation to the operation of the
. The MHT functions independently of the Board. The effect is that
individuals may be the subject of applications before the MHT and
This results in the person having to attend separate hearings and being subject
to separate orders.
17.2.3 Amendments to the
Mental Health Act
in 2013 were intended to
resolve issues relating to the interaction between the
Mental Health Act
and the Act. The Second Reading speech notes:
While the current
Mental Health Act 1996
provides authority for the
detention of persons with a mental illness, the authority for treatment for
persons lacking decision-making
capacity is contained within the
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
The review process highlighted deficiencies in the current legislative
framework, suggesting that working between the two Acts is
unnecessarily complex
This Bill seeks to remedy the difficulties associated with the current
framework, which sees decisions about the treatment of a person
with a mental
illness who lacks capacity made pursuant to the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
; while decisions about the setting in which treatment
should be given are made pursuant to the
Mental Health
17.2.4 The Institute requested advice about whether respondents consider
there remain any issues relating to the interaction between
the Act and
Mental Health Act
and whether any consequential reforms to the Act is
needed. The first question asked was:
(i) Are there any gaps between the Act and the
Mental Health Act 2013
that need to be
17.2.5 Six respondents
addressed this question, although the Public Trustee expressed that it held no
view. The MHT stated that it holds the view that there
are no gaps between the
Acts. The Board did not make a submission in response to this question.
17.2.6 The OPMHS submitted that the Act should facilitate a person undergoing
assessment, similar to the way that the
Mental Health
provides. This
was considered in
17.2.7 Members of the Elder Law Committee stated that an existing gap is the
lack of Official Visitor Scheme under the Act which is
included under the
Mental Health Act
. This issue was considered in
, with it being
proposed that an Official Visitors Scheme operate under the
17.2.8 The Institute also enquired about any overlaps between the Act and the
Mental Health Act
that need to be resolved:
(ii) Is there any overlap between the Act and the
Mental Health Act
that needs to be
17.2.9 Two submission
stated that there needs to be clear distinction maintained between the roles of
each respective Act. Recommendation 9.4 proposes
that the Act make clear that
the proposed term ‘health care and treatment’ be defined to
specifically exclude assessments
and treatments for mental illness covered under
Mental Health Act
, consistent with the MHT’s submission.
17.2.10 Members of the Elder Law Committee expressed support for a more
holistic approach between the
Mental Health Act
and Act, which may be
progressed if Tasmania introduces a single Civil and Administrative Appeal
On this point,
however, the MHT submitted that:
The Mental Health Tribunal is of the view that a single Tribunal would have
various streams given that each jurisdiction considers
different types of
decisions requiring different expertise. Therefore under a single Tribunal a
person may still come before various
protective jurisdiction streams and not be
treated holistically.
17.2.11 The OPG also endorsed reform to avoid individuals being subject to
orders under both the Act and the
Mental Health Act
The OPG is keen to avoid, wherever possible, a person being subject to both a
treatment order under the MH Act and a guardianship
order ... Currently, someone
subject to a treatment order under the MH Act can also be subject to a
guardianship order with powers
for the guardian to decide where the person is to
live – our view is that if the person’s accommodation is central to
their treatment, the requirement to live in particular accommodation should form
part of the treatment order. This is arguably available
subsection 41(5)
Mental Health Act
however it seems it is not often used for this
17.2.12 The OPMHS made similar statements:
For example, a Guardian may be making accommodation and medical decisions for
a Represented Person due to their dementia, and parallel
to this the MHT may
have authorised a Treatment Order for treatment of Schizophrenia. In the initial
phases of this, the person may
have three hearings in the first two months, and
could be trying to understand two separate processes which are new to them
impaired). This requires significant intrusion upon the person through
hearings and other processes, the existence of more than one
order is more
restrictive. For many impaired people we see, the process of hearings is
enormously stressful, and can be difficult
to understand.
A less restrictive approach would be for allowances to be made for the use of
the GAA in some cases (e.g. where people lack capacity
due to illnesses not
covered by the MHA) to also consent to treatment of mental illness. For example,
once a Guardian for medical
consent is appointed, they could have the authority
to provide consent for medical decisions including psychiatric treatment.
Separately to this, when a Person is admitted with the consent of a Guardian,
but happens to be on a MHA order, then their MHA order
needs to be amended to
reflect their whereabouts. This introduces redundant processes to satisfy the
Board that admission is necessary.
This may need remedy of either the MHA or its
implementation.
We hold the view that there should be a single legislative framework for the
care/treatment of people with any form of disability
who lack the capacity to
consent to such care/treatment and thus require a proxy decision maker. To have
a legislative framework
(MHA) that distinguishes ‘mental illness’
from other conditions is fundamentally discriminatory and perpetuates societal
discrimination against those with mental illness. There is growing understanding
of the biological basis of serious mental illnesses
such as schizophrenia,
making a legislative distinction between conditions such as schizophrenia and
dementia even less relevant.
The needs of people with serious mental illness in
terms of financial/accommodation/social decisions frequently overlap with mental
health treatment decisions, the former currently covered by GAB legislation, the
latter by the MHA. This is cumbersome and more intrusive
17.2.13 These submissions raise matters relating to the
Mental Health
rather than the Act, and thus fall outside the scope of this review. The
Institute observes that the State Government is presenting
conducting a review
Mental Health Act
and that these issues are best addressed through
that project.
Services Act
Disability Services Act
governs disability services
providers and funded private persons in Tasmania. The
Disability Services
has recently been the subject of statutory
comprehensive review of the Act will be undertaken in 2019 once the roll-out of
the NDIS is complete.
17.3.2 As also observed in relation to the
Mental Health Act
individuals may be subject to both the Act and the
Disability Services
. The Issues Paper asked whether there are any issues in relation to the
interaction between the
Disability Services Act
and the Act.
Are there any issues relating to the interaction between the
Services Act
and the Act that need to be resolved? How could these be
17.3.3 Four submissions addressed this question although the Public
Trustee’s submission stated that it held no view. Both the
members of the Elder Law Committee raised matters relating to the regulation of
restrictive practices. This is considered
17.3.4 The OPG commented:
We are unaware of any significant current issues. Consistency in definitions
for terms such as ‘disability’, ‘restrictive
practices’,
‘chemical restraint’ and ‘therapeutic’ should be
17.3.5 As noted, the
Disability Services Act
will be the subject of
review following full implementation of the NDIS in Tasmania in July 2019. The
Institute recommends that the
recommendations made in this Report be considered
as part of that review to provide consistency where possible and appropriate.
Recommendation 17.1
That the recommendations made in this Report be considered as part of the
review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
(Tas) to take place following
full implementation of the NDIS in Tasmania in July 2019.
Regulation of
restrictive practices
17.4.1 Restrictive practices involve the use of interventions and practices
that have the effect of restricting the rights or freedom
of movement of a
person with disability.
NDS’s submission commented that ‘restrictive practices by their
nature reduce a person’s control and choice and
impede a person’s
access to valued roles in community life.’ The UN Human Rights Council has
urged States to review laws,
policies, and practices:
with a view to eliminating all forms of discrimination, stigma, prejudice,
violence, abuse, social exclusion and segregation within
that context, and to
promote the right of persons with mental health conditions or psychosocial
disabilities to full inclusion and
effective participation in society, on an
equal basis with
17.4.2 The Convention Committee has stated that it:
is concerned that persons with disabilities, particularly those with
intellectual impairment or psychosocial disability, are subjected
to unregulated
behaviour modification or restrictive practices such as chemical, mechanical and
physical restraints and seclusion,
in various environments, including schools,
mental health facilities and
It notes that the use of restraint is inconsistent with Article 15 of the
Convention which confirms the prohibition on torture and
other inhumane and
degrading treatment or punishment against people with
disability.
recommends elimination of the use of restraint, consistent with this
The Australian
Human Rights Committee comments that ‘[w]here restrictive practices are
used, strict authorisation procedures
should be in place, and their use
continually
monitored.’
endorses the Queensland legislation as being ‘highly regulated with
significant external oversight
mechanisms.’
17.4.3 The National Framework for Reducing and Eliminating the Use of
Restrictive Practices in the Disability Service Sector (the
Framework’) states that reducing and eliminating the use of restrictive
practices is consistent with the
Convention.
The National
Framework commits each of the states and territories to reduce the use of
restrictive practices. Advocacy Tasmania’s
submission to this review
It is vital that the extensive work which has been undertaken to eliminate
restrictive practices, wherever they occur, continues.
The National Framework
for Reducing and Eliminating the Use of Restrictive Practices in the Disability
Service Sector and the push
for the complete elimination of these practices
needs to inform the drafting of the Act.
17.4.4 EOT also noted that:
the Australian Government ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment
(OPCAT) on December 21 2017 ...
OPCAT provides safeguards for people who are detained in a variety of
settings and establishes mechanisms for inspection and monitoring
facilities including prisons, youth justice facilities, mental health facilities
and immigration detention centres.
17.4.5 Both the
Mental Health Act
Disability Services Act
regulate the use of restrictive interventions/practices, as explained below.
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act
regulates the use of chemical, mechanical
and physical restraint.
These are defined as follows:
chemical restraint
means medication given primarily to control
a person’s behaviour, not to treat a mental illness or physical
mechanical restraint
means a device that controls a
person’s freedom of movement;
physical restraint
means bodily force that controls a
person’s freedom of
17.4.7 Involuntary patients may only be placed under restraint in limited
circumstances.
Chemical or
mechanical restraint must be authorised by the Chief Civil Psychiatrist,
as must physical restraint of a
Physical restraint of an adult must be
authorised by the Chief Civil Psychiatrist, a medical practitioner or an
approved nurse.
authorised to approve the use of restraint must be satisfied that it is
• to facilitate the patient’s
treatment; or
• to ensure the
patient’s health or safety; or
• to ensure the safety of
other persons; or
• to effect the
patient’s transfer to another facility, whether in this state or
17.4.8 The Act then provides a range of safeguards in relation to the use of
authorised restraint.
Chief Civil Psychiatrist has power to intervene in relation to the use of
restraint, including of their own motion, and may give
notice that the use of
restraint is to be
discontinued.
The MHT also
has power to review the use of restraint, including of its own
Disability Services Act
Disability Services Act
regulates the use of restrictive
interventions for people with disability receiving services from disability
service providers and
funded private
Services Act
deals with both physical and medical restrictions, defined as
environmental restriction
, in relation to a person with
disability, means a restrictive intervention in relation to the person that
consists of the modification
of an object, or the environment of the person, so
as to enable the behavioural control of the person but does not include a
restriction;
personal restriction
, in relation to a person with disability,
means a restrictive intervention in relation to the person that consists wholly
or partially
(a) physical contact with the
person so as to enable the behavioural control of the person; or
(b) the taking of an action that
restricts the liberty of movement of the
Restrictive intervention is defined as follows:
restrictive intervention
means any action that is taken to
restrict the rights or freedom of movement of a person with disability for the
primary purpose
of the behavioural control of the person but does not include
such an action that is –
(a) taken for therapeutic
purposes; or
(b) taken to enable the safe
transportation of the person; or
(c) authorised under any
enactment relating to the provision of mental health services or to guardianship
17.4.10 For the purposes of the
Disability Services Act
‘restrictive practice’ is defined to exclude any action authorised
under any Acts relating to
guardianship.
17.4.11 Under the
Disability Services Act
, restrictive interventions
must have prior substitute consent from either the Secretary of the Department
(in the case of environmental
restrictions
Board (in the case of personal
restrictions
17.4.12 The report following the recent review of the
Disability Services
notes that the Board submitted to that review that the
Services Act
should also contain a definition of physical restraint,
detention and seclusion.
The report suggests that consideration be given to adopting the Board’s
suggestion that the
Disability Services Act
list one of the functions of
the Senior Practitioner as being to give advice to
17.4.13 Following full implementation of the NDIS in Tasmania, the NDIS
Quality and Safeguarding Framework will
The Framework
intends to provide a nationally consistent approach to the use of restrictive
Quality and Safeguarding Framework provides that restrictive practices include:
: the sole confinement of a person with disability
in a room or physical space at any hour of the day or night where voluntary exit
is prevented, impeded or not facilitated.
Chemical restraint
: the use of medication or chemical
substance for the primary purpose of influencing a person’s behaviour or
movement. It does
not include the use of medication prescribed by a medical
practitioner for the treatment of, or to enable treatment of, a diagnosed
disorder, a physical illness or physical condition.
Mechanical restraint
: the use of a
to prevent,
restrict or subdue a person’s movement for the primary purpose of
influencing their behaviour. It does not include
the use of devices for
therapeutic or non-behavioural purposes. For example, it may include the use of
a device to assist a person
with functional activities as part of occupational
therapy, or to allow for safe transportation.
Physical restraint
: the sustained or
use or action of
physical force to prevent, restrict or subdue movement of a person’s body,
or part of their body, for the
primary purpose of influencing a person’s
behaviour. Physical restraint is distinct from the use of a hands-on technique
a reflexive
way to guide or redirect a person away from potential
harm/injury, consistent with what could reasonably be considered the exercise
care towards a person.
Psycho-social restraints
: usually involves the use of
‘power-control’ strategies.
Environmental restraints
: restrict a person’s free
access to all parts of their environment.
Consequence driven practices
: usually involve withdrawing
activities or items.
17.4.14 Under the Framework, the role of the NDIS Senior Practitioner will be
to provide clinical leadership in relation to reducing
and eliminating the use
of restrictive practices in the NDIS, make directions and recommendations, and
proactively examine practices
and complete follow-ups in relation to incidents
or concerns.
States will
remain responsible for authorising the use of restrictive practices within its
17.4.15 In relation to the authorisation process for the use of restrictive
practices, the Framework provides:
Commonwealth legislation will set out the key principles around the use of
restrictive practices, including that the intervention
is the least restrictive
response available, is used only as a last resort, and that the risk posed by
the proposed intervention
is in proportion to the risk of harm posed by the
behaviour of concern. Relevant state and territory legislation will specify the
conditions that must be met for the use of a restrictive practice to be approved
in a positive behaviour support plan. This means
that at a minimum, a decision
to include a restrictive practice in a positive behaviour support plan must be
consistent with state
and territory legislation around the approval process.
States and territories may enact (or amend) separate laws that provide
for seeking approval to include restrictive practices in a behaviour
support plan.
17.4.16 The report into the recent statutory review of the
Services Act
states that:
Under the NQSF [NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework] there will be
nationally-agreed standards for restrictive interventions.
The states and
territories retain a central role in the authorisation and administration of,
and education about, restrictive interventions,
and Tasmania will consider the
specific functions needed in a future review of the
It goes on to state that ‘[d]efinitions, and alignment with other
Tasmanian legislation [in relation to restrictive practices],
to be considered
in the future
17.4.17 NDS’s submission made the following comments about changes it
anticipates following full implementation of the NDIS:
Under ADHC policy and best practice, it is important that the
decision‐maker who authorises the use of restrictive practices
independent from the clinician who is drafting the behaviour support plan (BSP)
or who seeks to use restrictive practices. While
independence has always been a
challenge it will potentially become more pronounced under the NDIS.
Operationally under the NDIS
funding model, it will be difficult to understand
how organisations will pay for each other’s time to sit on panels compared
with the currently more flexible ADHC block-funding system.
NDS is concerned about the increased potential for the unregulated use of
restrictive practices. We believe that serious restrictive
interventions require
independent legal authorisation. Clarity is needed on where the responsibility
for seeking authorisation sits
and the level of authorisation required.
17.4.18 As commented elsewhere in this Report, many individuals requiring
decision-making support will not fall under the NDIS.
17.4.19 The Act does not contain special provisions governing the use of
restrictive interventions.
The result is a different level of regulation and oversight depending on the
context in which the restrictive intervention is being
administered. The
Board’s submission commented on this circumstance, stating:
No other legislation covers the regulation of the use of restrictive
practices in non-disability settings, such as aged care facilities,
education, boarding facilities and private dwellings. This means that not all
adults with a disability and decision making
impairment are protected from the
improper use of restrictive practices. Arguably, these adults outside the scope
Disability Services Act 2011
Mental Health Act 2013
are at greater risk of abuse of being arbitrarily deprived of their liberty or
subject to inappropriate or unlawful use of restrictive
17.4.20 The ALRC has noted that ‘given the variety of settings in which
restrictive practices are used, there is a need for
a national or nationally
consistent approach to regulation beyond the disability services sector and the
consistency with the use of restrictive practices outside the scope of the
Mental Health Act
Disability Services Act
, one option for
reform would be to make provision within the Act to confirm who can provide
substitute consent to the use of restrictive
interventions. The Issues Paper
commented that, if the Act contained provisions dealing with the use of
restrictive interventions,
then a decision would need to be made about which
the consent of the Board. One option raised was to extend the definition of
‘special treatment’ to require the Board
to consent to the use
certain restrictive interventions.
17.4.21 The Institute first asked whether the Act should contain special
provisions regulating the use of restrictive practices outside
of the context of
Disability Services Act
Mental Health Act
(i) Should the Act contain provisions regulating the use of restrictive
practices that do not fall under the
Disability Services Act 2011
Mental Health Act
17.4.22 Nine respondents made submissions in response to this question. All
indicated a need for legislative reform in relation to
the use of restrictive
practices in Tasmania. Many observed the impact that the use of a restrictive
practice has upon the rights
of an individual and that there is a need to ensure
that a person’s interests are safeguarded. Four
respondents
submitted that
there needs to be ‘comprehensive consideration of how restrictive
practices should be monitored and regulated
there should be consistency amongst different
submitted that this is necessary to ensure that ‘the interests of all
people with a disability are protected from abuse,
neglect, undue influence or
harm whilst receiving necessary and appropriate treatment.’ NDS
recommended that this could be
achieved by way of ‘an inquiry about the
potential to enact legislation that explicitly deals with restrictive
17.4.23 EOT submitted that:
Concern has been expressed about the misuse of restrictive measures,
including physical, mechanical and chemical restraint by many
stakeholder groups
and we consider that the regulation of use should be extended beyond the
measures included in the
Disability Services Act 2011
Health Act 2013
we consider that the
Guardianship and Administration Act
include provisions setting out responsibility for the approval of restrictive
practices, including monitoring and review arrangements.
17.4.24 The Board, OPG and EOT noted developments occurring nationally to
progress the regulation of restrictive practices, including
under the NDIS. The
Board referred to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal’s submission
to the equivalent review recently
undertaken in New South Wales, which noted
The legislative response at a federal level, if any, to the ALRC’s
Inquiry on ‘Protecting the Rights of Older Australians
from Abuse’
(announced on 24 February 2016) may also have an impact on the regulation of the
use of restrictive practices in
aged care facilities in NSW. We note in this
regard the proposal (at 11-7) of the ALRC Discussion Paper on the chapter
the use and regulation of restrictive
Care Act 1997
(Cth) should regulate the use of restrictive practices in
residential aged care.
That submission went on to state that:
Any proposed legislative reform of the
Guardianship Act
in relation to
restrictive practices should therefore have careful regard to these broader
reforms to ensure consistency. It would
seem to be a very unsatisfactory
position for people with cognitive disability to have applied to them a
different legislative regime
depending on whether they live in a group home
funded by the NDIS and subject to the NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework
(as yet unseen) legislation governing the use of restrictive practices,
whilst residents of aged care facilities that are governed
are potentially subject to a different legislative regime in relation to
the use of restrictive practices.
17.4.25 The OPG’s submission also highlighted work being progressed in
relation to the regulation of restrictive practices nationally:
There is significant work currently being undertaken nationally: the
ALRC’s Equality, Capacity and Disability Report referred
‘patchwork’ of laws and frameworks across the country and in
different sectors and urged harmonised regulation
to cover the use of
restrictive practices in a range of settings including supported accommodation,
aged care facilities, mental
health facilities, hospitals, prisons, and schools;
the NDIS’s quality and safeguarding framework will soon issue national
rules for the oversight of restrictive practices for its participants, with the
states having given in principle agreement to implement
compatible legislation
and policy; and the ALRC report into elder abuse recommended national law reform
to ensure regulation of restrictive
practices in aged care facilities,
particularly to address overuse of chemical restraint or sedation.
17.4.26 EOT also noted:
The ALRC, for example, recommends that binding regulation be developed
governing restrictive practices across a broad range of settings
supported accommodation and group homes, residential aged care facilities,
mental health facilities, hospitals, prisons
The Australian Government and the Council of Australian Governments should
develop a national approach to the regulation of restrictive
practices in
sectors other than disability services, such as aged care and health care
This is a matter that has also been raised in the context of addressing
violence, abuse and neglect against people with
and in relation
to preventing elder
17.4.27 In summary, respondents expressed support for there being a
comprehensive review of the legislative framework governing the
restrictive practices in all contexts within the state. It is apparent that
there are presently gaps and inconsistencies in
approach, resulting in people
subject to restrictive practices having differing levels of protection depending
on the context in
which the practice occurs. The Institute endorses legislative
reform to achieve consistency as an essential component of protecting
individual’s rights.
17.4.28 Noting the appropriateness of there being consistency amongst the
regulation of restrictive practices in different settings
within the state, and
the benefits of a nationally consistent approach, the Institute is not able to
advance proposals for comprehensive
legislative reform as part of this review.
The need for, and approach to legislative reform in relation to the use of
restrictive
practices requires further consideration and broader consultation.
Reforms should be guided by developments at a national level.
This should be
progressed in a coordinated manner, with the potential for this to align with
the further review of the
Disability Services Act
scheduled to occur in
2019 following full roll-out of the NDIS in Tasmania.
Recommendation 17.2
That there be comprehensive consideration of how the use of restrictive
practices should be monitored and regulated in Tasmania.
17.4.29 The Institute also asked, if the Act contained provisions regulating
the use of restrictive practices, who should be able
to provide substitute
(ii) If so, are there any restrictive practices that only the Board should be
able to consent to rather than a person
responsible?
17.4.30 Most responses expressed the view that any substitute consent regime
for the use of restrictive practices must have appropriate
safeguards.
Consistent with the ALRC’s Safeguards Guidelines, Advocacy Tasmania
submitted that those safeguards should ensure
that any use of restrictive
practices are proportional and tailored, apply for the shortest time possible
and are subject to regular
external review. NDS expressed a similar view,
stating that restrictive practices:
should always be used as a last resort and it is critical for clear processes
to be in place before the decision to use restrictive
practices is made ...
Guardianship laws in TAS should include effective safeguards that protect a
person needing decision-making
support from abuse.
NDS went on to state that:
Restrictive practices should only be used to protect the rights or safety of
the person or others. They should be time limited, subject
to review and least
restrictive in the circumstances. A behaviour support plan and clinical
assessment must be in place. There are
some restrictive practices however that
should never be sanctioned, and thus should not form part of any regulatory
framework. Those
include strategies that tend to be punitive in nature, highly
subject to misuse or abuse, and those that have little evidence to
suggest that
they have any long‐term efficacy or impact in their use.
17.4.31 NDS submitted that there either needs to be education of private
guardians about giving substitute consent to the use of restrictive
or a stricter approach considered. Advocacy Tasmania submitted ‘[t]hese
decisions must not be being made by Guardians
without regular external review
and accountability.’ NDS similarly submitted that ‘[r]estrictive
practices require ongoing
monitoring and review not just one off consent from
guardians.’ Members of the Elder Law Committee supported the need for
17.4.32 The OPG supported the role of the Senior Practitioner in performing
an oversight function:
We are particularly supportive of the role of Senior Practitioners to
oversee, monitor, and importantly to provide guidance and education
to minimise
the use of restrictive practices and ensure they are not used improperly or
inappropriately. We would like to see such
a role in the aged care sector. We
see the roles of Senior Practitioners and behaviour support practitioners as
essential in ensuring
best clinical practice – the regime for approval of
or consent for restrictive practices (where they can’t be avoided)
to clarified, but should sit under these functions.
17.4.33 NDS also commented that:
Disability services have developed considerable expertise in positive
behaviour supports that reduce or eliminate the need for restrictive
This expertise must be called upon in situations, while also regulating the
circumstances where it may occur.
17.4.34 As noted above, the details of legislative provisions to regulate the
use of restrictive practices fall outside the scope
of this review aside from
the matter of chemical restraint which is considered in the following section.
The Institute emphasises
that these are important matters which require the
development of immediate, comprehensive strategies and legislative reform.
Chemical restraint
17.4.35 The present review calls for consideration of the role and powers of
persons responsible and guardians. Some restrictive interventions
do not neatly
fit within the Act’s current jurisdiction which governs a person’s
‘person or circumstances’
(proposed to be revised to ‘personal
matters’), and ‘treatment’ (proposed to be revised to
care and treatment’). One matter that currently falls within
the scope of ‘treatment’ is the use of chemical restraint.
OPG’s submission explained:
The current law gives a person responsible very limited authority: to consent
to medical treatment. Regulation 12 sets out the type
of medical treatment that
cannot be given without consent under section 41 of the Act, which includes
‘the administration of
a restricted substance primarily to control the
conduct of the person to whom it is given’. The corollary of this is that
restraint is medical treatment (for which consent must be
17.4.36 The NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework provides that the term
chemical restraint describes:
the use of medication or chemical substance for the primary purpose of
influencing a person’s behaviour or movement. It does
not include the use
of medication prescribed by a medical practitioner for the treatment of, or to
enable treatment of, a diagnosed
mental disorder, a physical illness or physical
Mental Health Act
similarly defines chemical restraint as
‘medication given primarily to control a person’s behaviour, not to
treat a mental
illness or physical
condition.’
Disability Services Act
does not regulate the use of chemical restraint,
dealing only with environmental and physical
restraints.
17.4.37 The Board explained the current regime under the Act as follows:
Regulation 12 of the
Guardianship and Administration Regulation 2017
prohibits the use of chemical restraint without consent ‘under Division 2
of Part 6’. The relevant division of the Act
provides for consent by the
Person Responsible ...
If the chemical restraint is aversive then it is special treatment and a
person responsible can’t give
17.4.38 The OPG submitted:
Our view is that a regime for the regulation of the administration of
medication for the purpose of controlling a person’s behaviour
very careful consideration. Our tentative view is that it should probably be
included in the consent regime for other restrictive
17.4.39 The Board submitted that:
The current regime is problematic in that there is no supervision or
monitoring of chemical restraint beyond the person responsible
as defined in the
Act, who in most cases may not be suitably qualified to consider restrictive
interventions and is dependent on
the advice a medical professional. The person
responsible may therefore too readily acquiesce in the authority of a medical
professional
Whether many individuals acting as person responsible are aware and suitably
skilled to consider whether the chemical restraint is
being done for purposes
other than to ‘promote health and wellbeing’ is not
The Board commented that ‘[c]larity is required to ensure chemical
restraint is not left, in essence, unregulated.’
17.4.40 The Board submitted that the
Disability Services Act
include regulation of chemical restraint, noting that some other Australian
restrictive intervention. The
Review Committee’s report following the recent review of the
Services Act
• GAB regards definition of ‘chemical restraint’ as
‘a significant omission from the current Act’ and
is problematic
under current requirements of the GA Act
• GAB submits that the Secretary should be able to approve chemical
restraint under Section 38
• The Commissioner for Children submits that it is desirable to
regulate chemical restraint to ‘promote the reduction
and elimination of
its use and to uphold the rights of children with disability’ and suggests
Mental Health Act 2013
provides an example of a legislative
The report concludes:
• This issue will be addressed through a nationally-agreed definition
of restraint, including chemical restraint, to be included
in the NQSF rules
under the NDIS.
17.4.41 The Institute considers that regulation of the use of chemical
restraint under the Act should fit within the ALRC’s
Guidelines. The present approach does not fit within the Guidelines. Given that
the use of chemical restraint is a significant
intrusion upon the rights of the
individual, it is proposed that this be a matter of reform.
17.4.42 The Institute considers that issues relating to substitute consent to
the use of chemical restraint are similar to those discussed
in Part 14 when
considering the admission/detention of a patient within a secure
Both impact upon
a person’s right to freedom of liberty and movement. That Part concluded
that a person’s consent to
admission within a secure facility should fall
outside of the scope of a person responsible
recommended due to the importance of providing adequate safeguards for
individuals, including a decision-maker’s suitability
being assessed,
decisions being subject to independent oversight and periodic review, and
providing a right of appeal. Submissions
outlined in previous paragraphs
indicate that there should be similar safeguards for individuals subject to
chemical restraint.
17.4.43 It is proposed that the Act adopt a similar approach to the giving of
consent to the use of chemical restraint. The Institute
reinforces that this
reform is intended as a temporary solution, pending state and national
developments to improve regulation of
the use of restrictive practices including
the outcome of the separate, coordinated review of the regulation of restrictive
recommended by the Institute.
Recommendation 17.3
(1) That substitute consent to the use of chemical restraint be included
within the comprehensive review of the legislative framework
regulation of the use of restrictive practices, proposed in Recommendation
(2) That, pending the outcome of that review:
(i) the Act include a definition of chemical restraint as meaning
‘medication given primarily to control a person’s
behaviour, not to
treat a mental illness or physical condition’;
(ii) the Act enable interested parties to apply to the Board for the review
of any substitute decision to consent to the use of
chemical restraint pursuant
to the Act; and
(iii) the Board and Public Guardian be able to conduct ‘own
motion’ investigations and reviews of any substitute consent
of chemical restraint pursuant to the Act.
17.4.44 The NDS commented that it considers much can be achieved via
education and capacity building to better regulate the use of
restrictive
Some other barriers include a risk management culture rather than positive
approaches to behaviour support, lack of staffing and staff
supervision, lack of
adequate education for staff, and client stigmatisation (a perception that care
of the person requires restraint
based on the person’s characteristics or
diagnosis). Therefore, any discussion of regulation must recognise the
of removing these barriers though capacity-building and education
17.4.45 It submitted that:
• More education on the prevention and use of restrictive practices
needs to be available, particularly for families and the
informal supports and
sectors such as education.
• People with a disability should also be aware of, and be supported to
access, sources of independent advice and advocacy.
17.4.46 The benefits of education are noted and addressed more broadly in
of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
enables a capable adult to appoint
an attorney to make financial decisions for them, if they instruct them to do
so, or if the donor
subsequently loses capacity to make financial decisions
themselves. In effect, these provisions are equivalent to those within the
enabling the appointment of an enduring guardian to make personal decisions. The
appointment of enduring guardians was discussed
17.5.2 Often reforms to the
Powers of Attorney Act
and the Act have
been made concurrently, given similarities between the Acts. At times, however,
not all reciprocal changes have
been made to both Acts, creating
inconsistencies. This Report has made several recommendations aimed at remedying
these differences.
17.5.3 The Institute asked whether stakeholders consider there are any
matters relating to the interaction between the two Acts that
Are there any issues relating to the interaction between the
Attorney Act
that need to be
17.5.4 Six respondents addressed this question. The Public Trustee submitted
that there are not any present issues, commenting: ‘Although
issues arising out of the Acts there is nothing that needs to be resolved at
this stage that causes the Public Trustee’s
functions to be
unworkable.’
17.5.5 The Board and OPG expressed a desire for consistency between the Acts
wherever possible. The Board commented that it had identified
inconsistencies
throughout its submission where relevant.
17.5.6 Two commented on the merits of combining both Acts, with one
respondent not endorsing this approach, whilst members of the
Committee commented that this could be considered as it would ‘create one
place for a member of the public to obtain
their documents and information
from.’ It also noted that ‘[i]t must be confusing for them to have
to seek two separate
documents, registering in two separate places.’
Recommendation 4.2 proposes that there be a separate review into the merits
developing a single enduring document enabling the appointment of
representatives for both personal and financial matters. This
may ultimately
lead to the need for legislative reform.
17.5.7 Members of the Elder Law Committee endorsed the use of a central
registration system for both instruments and enduring powers
of attorney,
including there being an ‘easily searchable free online facility.’
The registration of enduring documents
was considered in
, with it being
recommended that the desirability of establishing a single repository for
enduring documents be considered
In summary, all
issues raised have been addressed elsewhere in this Report.
17.5.8 Respondents expressed a desire for consistency between the Acts
wherever possible. This Report makes a raft of proposals to
reform the Act. It
is appropriate that the
Powers of Attorney Act
be reviewed against these
recommendations to ensure consistency. This includes:
• Recommendation 3.3, dealing with the guiding principles of the
• Recommendations made in Part 4 and 12 in relation to the appointment,
removal and supervision of enduring guardians;
• Recommendations made in Part 6 in relation to the assessment of a
person’s decision-making abilities; and
• Recommendations in Part 7 proposing introduction of a legislated
supported decision-making scheme for personal matters.
Recommendation 17.4
(1) That the
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(Tas) be reviewed in light of
the obligations and principles articulated in the
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities
and recommendations contained in this Report,
noting in particular:
of this Report which deals with the guiding principles of
the Act, including Recommendation 3.3;
• Parts 4 and 12 of this Report in relation to the appointment,
removal and supervision of enduring guardians;
• Recommendations in Part 6 of this Report in relation to the test
and assessment of a person’s decision-making ability;
• Recommendations in Part 7 of this Report proposing introduction of
a legislated supported decision-making scheme for personal
(2) That as far as possible there be consistency between the structure and
provisions of the Act and the
Powers of Attorney Act
and Drug Dependency Act
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act
governs the treatment and
control of persons suffering from alcohol dependency or drug dependency.
17.6.2 This Report proposes reform to the Act to remove the pre-condition of
disability to invoke the Act’s
Instead, it
is proposed that the Act require assessment of a person’s decision-making
ability. It is proposed that the Act
provide that a person is taken to have the
ability to make a decision unless the person or body considering their ability
is satisfied
that they are unable to:
• understand information relevant to a decision;
• retain information relevant to a decision;
• use or weigh information relevant to a decision; or
• communicate the
17.6.3 The Issues Paper noted that, if the Act removed the need for
existence of a disability, then this may have implications for
and Drug Dependency Act
. It was noted that it may be beneficial to confirm
the interrelationship between the two Acts, including confirming when decisions
relating to the treatment of a person with alcohol and drug dependency fall
under the provisions of the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act
and when they
fall under the Act.
17.6.4 With this context, the Institute asked:
(i) Are there any gaps between the Act and the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency
that need to be resolved?
(ii) Is there any overlap between the Act and the
Alcohol and Drug
Dependency Act 1968
that needs to be
17.6.5 The OPG and Advocacy Tasmania responded to this question, both making
similar comments. The OPG submitted:
The OPG is not aware if this Act is ever used. Whilst not an area of
expertise of the OPG, the framework appears outdated and not
in step with
current treatment and rehabilitation practices.
17.6.6 Advocacy Tasmania stated:
Our experience is that the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act
used in practice and is not a rights-compliant piece of legislation. If the Act
needs to continue in operation, it would
be better-served within more modern and
rights-based legislation. However, we have concerns about the usefulness, rights
implications
and appropriateness of involuntary treatment in this context.
17.6.7 As noted, Recommendation 6.1 proposes that the Act not require a
person to have disability for the purposes of establishing
whether they have
decision-making ability. This has the effect of extending the Act’s
should remain separate regulation of
the treatment and control of persons with alcohol or drug dependency, then it
will be necessary
to exclude those matters regulated by the
Alcohol and Drug
Dependency Act
from the Act’s operation. It is outside the scope of
the Institute’s Terms of Reference to consider the need for, or
desirability
of retaining the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act
Recommendation 17.5
(1) That consideration is given to the need to continue operation of the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act 1968
(2) That if the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act 1968
(Tas) continues
in operation, the Act confirm that it does not apply to the treatment and
control of persons suffering from alcohol
dependency or drug dependency dealt
with under the
Alcohol and Drug Dependency Act 1968
legislation
Trustee Act
(Tas) contains provisions about the
powers and duties of trustees in Tasmania. Under the Act, administrators have
power to invest
a represented person’s estate in any manner that trustees
can invest.
Trustee Act
(Tas) deals with the constitution and regulation of
the Public Trustee. Whilst the Institute was not aware of issues relating to
interaction of these Acts and the Act, a question was asked about this, seeking
stakeholder’s advice.
Are there any issues relating to the interrelationship between the Act and
any other legislation that needs to be resolved, for example:
Public Trustee Act 1930
Trustee Act 1898
legislation?
17.7.2 One submission commented that the Commonwealth Charter of Residents
Rights is not given priority. This matter was considered
evaluating the guiding principles of the Act.
17.7.3 In relation to the operation of the
Public Trustee Act
Public Trustee submitted that there were no issues, and that ‘[a]lthough
there are issues arising out of the Acts there
is nothing that needs to be
resolved at this stage that causes the Public Trustee’s functions to be
unworkable.’
17.7.4 The OPG endorsed consistency between legislation where possible.
17.7.5 Noting that no particular issues were drawn to the Institute’s
attention, it has not made recommendations for reform.
reviews of legislation
17.8.1 Both the
Mental Health Act
Disability Services Act
mandate reviews of the respective Acts. Under the
Mental Health Act
review must be conducted every six years, and under the
Disability Services
, every three
The Act does not
mandate a review of the Act. The Issues Paper asked whether there is merit to
(i) Should the Act mandate a statutory review of the Act?
(ii) If so, what timeframe is
appropriate?
17.8.2 There were five responses, with three endorsing the Act providing a
statutory review period. The Public Trustee submitted that
it held no view,
whilst members of the Elder Law Committee commented that there were advantages
and disadvantages to each:
having a set time frame may ensure more timely discussion and change, but if
it has to be done within a certain time frame it may
become unhelpfully rushed
and less conducive to a full review. Having a time frame for review is a good
method to bring about a review
17.8.3 The OPG endorsed the establishment of a mandated review period,
commenting that ‘[t]his is particularly important in
the current
environment of significant change associated with the NDIS and reforms in the
aged care sector.’ Social Work Services
RHH also commented that it was
desirable ‘due to changes in medical practices and changes in the way
humans interact with each
other (e.g. the internet, social media).’
17.8.4 Consistent with submissions received, the Institute recommends that
the Act mandate a statutory review period, in the same
way that the
Disability Services Act
provide. This strategy is
endorsed not only to ensure that the Act remains appropriate and responsive, but
to progress compliance
with obligations under the Convention.
17.8.5 The Convention Committee has stated that the effect of the Convention
is to require the abolition of substituted decision-making
frameworks and the
replacement of those schemes with supported decision-making
arrangements.
It provides
that ‘development of supported decision making systems in parallel with
the maintenance of substitute decision
making regimes is not sufficient to
comply with article 12 of the
Convention.’
17.8.6 It is generally accepted that State parties to the Convention will not
become wholly compliant with the Convention immediately
and that reform to
legislation, policies and practices will take time. A mandated review period
provides opportunity for any reforms
to the Act to be reviewed and revised and
provides opportunity for further reflection upon strategies to achieve
compliance with
the Convention. It also provides opportunity to review the Act
in light of other developments occurring in the disability sector,
notably full
implementation of the NDIS and reforms to the aged care sector.
17.8.7 There were a range of views about the timeframe for review, ranging
between three to 10 years. Noting that the Institute has
proposed a range of
significant reforms as part of this Report, that there are wide ranging
developments occurring nationally in
the disability sector, and the importance
of making continual improvements to legislative approaches to reflect the rights
and interests
of people requiring decision-making support, the Institute
proposes a three year review period, consistent with the
Disability Services
Recommendation 17.6
(1) That the Act mandate a statutory review of the Act.
(2) That the statutory review period be every three years.
and Future Developments
Introduction
18.1.1 This final Part considers options to improve the guardianship
reform. This Part
has been included based on feedback received during the Institute’s public
consultation indicating that many
of the issues or limitations with the
these matters
that are addressed in this Part.
18.1.2 This Part also reviews likely future developments that may impact upon
the operation of Tasmania’s guardianship laws.
It outlines matters that
may need to be addressed and future actions that may be required, noting that
there are presently significant
changes occurring in the disability space
nationally.
18.1.3 Both of these matters address the Institute’s Terms of Reference
which sought advice about ways in which Tasmania’s
guardianship laws can
be more sustainable and responsive.
Sustainability
and responsiveness of the Act
18.2.1 The characteristics of the Tasmanian population, and those involved in
guardianship applications, have changed since the Act
was established. This has,
and will, continue to affect the way in which guardianship law in Tasmania is
applied and experienced.
18.2.2 The Tasmanian population is ageing. At June 2016, 46 per cent of
Tasmanians were over the age of 45
The Board reports
that in 2016–2017, 55 per cent of applications it received related to
people over the age of 65.
Since 2012, the most commonly identified disability has consistently been
The OPG reports
that 49 per cent of represented people it acted as guardian for as at 30 June
2017 were over the age of
The President of the
Board has noted that ‘[a] major challenge into the future will be the
impact on the increasing aging population
on the need for guardianship and
administration orders
18.2.3 The Board managed its largest workload to date in 2016–2017. It
saw an increase in the number of applications by 49 per
cent compared with the
previous financial year.
This is primarily a result of a 107 per cent increase in applications for
emergency administration orders and a 55 per cent increase
in applications for
administration orders. A total of 1772 applications were made to the
18.2.4 The OPG reports a 30 per cent increase in the number of represented
people on its caseload between 2016 and 2017 and a 35 per
cent increase compared
As at 30 June
2017, the OPG had 214 represented people on its
Trustee reports that as at 30 June 2017, it acted as administrator for 682
represented people. This reflected a 19 per
cent increase from 30 June
Similarly, the Legal
Aid Commission of Tasmania reports that it provided 3,383 client services to
people living with disability and
mental health issues in
Its workload in
this area increased by 33 per cent between 2015–2016 and
18.2.5 These statistics demonstrate an increasing workload for the Board, the
OPG, Public Trustee, and Legal Aid. This is a significant
factor in light of the
Institute’s Terms of Reference which required consideration of how the Act
can be responsive and sustainable.
18.2.6 The Issues Paper sought feedback about how the Act could be more
sustainable and responsive.
What improvements would make the Act more sustainable and responsive to the
needs of Tasmanians?
18.2.7 Thirty verbal and written submissions were
Some indicated
that there is no general need for improvement to the Act. Some individuals the
Institute spoke with commented that
the Act has served them well and provided
great support for those caring for a person with a decision-making disability.
Trustee reiterated that ‘it does not hold a general view as to
developments/improvements to the Act.’
18.2.8 Suggestions made to make the Act more sustainable and responsive
• providing adequate education about the Act and related laws,
including ways that the Act can provide clarity about related
legislation, for
example the
Powers of Attorney
• making the Act simple, easy to understand, with language that is
• providing robust complaint mechanisms to deal with allegations of
abuse and that there is adequate investigation and prosecution
addressed in Part 12;
• confirming the rights of people with disability reflected in the
Convention.
addressed throughout this Report;
• development of nationally consistent laws and mutual recognition of
instruments and tribunal
• adequate funding for professionals and bodies working in this area,
including ensuring that the jurisdiction is adequately
resourced to deal with
issues outside of business
• recognising the importance of carer and family supports, including
ensuring that there is consultation with families, carers,
and others close to a
person requiring decision-making
• ensuring that legislation is not overly prescriptive, but rather
outlines broad
principles;
• eliminating situations where it is perceived that invoking the
Board’s jurisdiction is used as a threat or means of
coercion for
non-represented people and those close to
It is considered
that this can be primarily addressed through education and by ensuring that the
appointment of a representative
may only occur a last resort;
• providing clarity in relation to the use of ACDs and withdrawing and
withholding consent to
These matters
were addressed in Parts 5 and
• major changes in practice and service provision in relation to
decision-making
18.2.9 The most common suggestion to make the Act more sustainable and
responsive was the need for education. Seven submissions raised
this issue.
18.2.10 It was observed that there is a lack of understanding amongst the
community about the Act and how it interacts with other
legislation. COTA, for
example, stated that:
The Act should clearly articulate that there are four instruments, governed
by four separate Acts, that contribute to giving effect
to a person’s
rights, will and preferences: wills, enduring powers of attorney, enduring
guardianship, and advanced care directives
COTA Tasmania believes it is essential for the Act to make provision for
education in the duties of administrators and guardians and
the rights of those
who are the subject of enduring instruments. This education should be provided
to both the person making the
appointment and the appointees. This will make the
Act more sustainable and effective by reducing disputes and exploitation, which
will in turn reduce the workload of the state.
18.2.11 PCT made similar observations:
No matter the outcome from this review one of the biggest issues for service
providers and the community is confusion over the role
of the GAB, the Public
Guardian, and the Person Responsible.
18.2.12 Members of Carers Tasmania commented that education needs to be
provided at an early stage. This includes:
• education about the nature and effect of instruments, powers of
attorney and ACDs as tools to record wishes and directions
decision-making; and
• education at the time of making an instrument or ACD, so that both
the donor and enduring guardian understand the role, duties
and powers of
representatives.
18.2.13 Others also stressed the importance of ensuring that any reform to
the Act is accompanied by an effective community education
campaign. EOT
We consider that the introduction of any new legislative framework governing
guardianship arrangements should be accompanied by a
broad based information
campaign aimed at service providers outlining their ongoing responsibility under
discrimination and disability
18.2.14 It was commented that educational materials must be provided in a
range of formats and not limited to web-based information.
18.2.15 The need for education of the rights and responsibilities under
legislation was also recently recommended as a matter requiring
action as part
of the review of the
Disability Services
A three year
elder abuse training strategy is one of the agreed action items under the
2015–18 Elder Abuse Prevention Action
Plan developed by the
The Institute’s view
18.2.16 The Convention requires State parties to adopt awareness raising
strategies to reinforce the rights and dignity of persons
disability.
The Australian
Human Rights Commission has stated that accessible, quality, safeguarding and
oversight mechanisms for people with
disability who have experienced or are
vulnerable to experiencing violence ‘provide information in a variety of
meet people’s different communication needs,’ and
‘disseminate information through a variety of ways, including
face, over the phone, online, and out-reach through advocates and organisations
that provide services and supports to people
disability.’
endorses education as a preventative strategy to prevent the occurrence of
violence, abuse and
18.2.17 Education serves several functions. Primarily, it is a proactive
strategy to seek to reduce the incidence of breaches of the
Act and other
conduct that could amount to abuse, neglect, or exploitation. It was reinforced
to the Institute that most individuals
seek to ‘do the right thing’
and act in accordance with the law but may breach the Act through lack of
understanding.
A reduction in the number of breaches of the Act would reduce the
workload of the Board, the OPG, Public Trustee and police.
18.2.18 Education also has a positive effect upon the represented person and
those close to them, including their representative.
A shift towards greater
emphasis upon support should extend to supporting supporters themselves. One of
the ways this can be achieved
is through education and resources for
representatives and supporters.
18.2.19 Education would assist in raising awareness of people’s ability
to plan for potential future incapacity by completing
an enduring power of
attorney, instrument and ACD. Completing these documents serves three critical
• it enables a person to communicate their views, wishes and
preferences for future circumstances where they may have difficulty
communicating those views, wishes and preferences. In effect, the documents
serve as a communication aid for potential future
decision-making. A person is
able to either ‘decide in advance’, by giving directions to health
practitioners or their
representative, or a person can communicate values to
assist representatives to ascertain the person’s will and preference.
is one means of supporting a person to make their own decisions;
• it enables a person to choose who they want to act as their
representative. This ensures the person retains control of the
decision-making
process and is able to exercise their will and preference in their choice of
representative. In default, the Board
appoints a representative on a
person’s behalf, based where possible on what it understands reflects the
person’s wishes;
• it would likely result in a reduced workload for the Board. It may
reduce the need for applications for orders appointing
guardians and
administrators — necessarily reducing the caseload of the OPG and Public
Trustee. The Board and OPG could then
focus their resources upon the supervision
of representatives and supporters to safeguard the rights of individuals.
18.2.20 The Act historically applied to people with intellectual disability
who may never have had the prescribed capacity to complete
an enduring document.
Now the Act is applying increasingly to individuals with dementia, who have the
ability to put in place enduring
documents. This provides a real opportunity to
ensure that those who are most likely to have some interaction with the Act and
Board have adequately planned and documented their views, wishes and
preferences for future decision-making.
Recommendation 18.1
That there be adequately funded robust and accessible public education about
the Act and any reforms. Educational materials should
be produced in a variety
of formats and include both print and web-based information.
Accessibility
18.2.21 The second most frequent comment made during public consultation was
that the Act, and the law generally, is too difficult
to understand. Six
submissions raised the importance of using simple, easily understood language.
Members of the Elder Law Committee
commented that improving terms used and
definitions ‘may better assist people’s understandings of their
roles and obligations.’
18.2.22 The OPMHS on the other hand, commented that the language of the Act
is one of its current strengths:
One of the outstanding benefits of the current GAA 1995 is its relative
simplicity, the avoidance of excessive, repetitive, unnecessary,
complicated
paperwork ... It is essential that the working of The Act remains understandable
so that, as much as possible, represented
persons and those close to them can
sufficiently understand the legal framework, as well as to avoid
misunderstanding amongst professionals
providing care and services. Excessively
complex requirements, or largely bureaucratic requirements, can add enormous
distraction
from truly relevant issues.
18.2.23 Article 9 of the Convention confirms the right of people with
disability to an accessible
environment.
implementing a shift towards supporting people with decision-making is ensuring
that information is presented in an accessible
format, so that people can
understand it. Legislation is one example of information that needs to be made
as accessible as possible.
It is especially important that laws that apply
directly to people with impaired decision-making ability are easy to understand
the person, their carers, families and broader support
18.2.24 Whilst a commonly expressed view was that the Act is difficult to
understand, the Institute notes the OPMHS’s observations
compared to the
Mental Health Act
, one of the real advantages of the Act
is its relative brevity. There is therefore the need to balance the desirability
with the need to ensure that this is not to the detriment of
readability and accessibility. The Institute has taken this into account
considering and developing recommendations for reform, aiming to ensure that the
Act does not become overly complicated or prescriptive.
18.2.25 With any reform to the Act, the Institute welcomes the development of
Easy-Read information booklets and use of innovative
technologies to ensure that
information about the Act is accessible. The Institute commends the Board and
OPG for its Easy-Read summaries
of the Act available online and endorses further
development and distribution of these in a range of formats.
Recommendation 18.2
That the Act be as accessible as possible, including:
• a logical structure;
• use of plain English;
• clearly defined terms;
• avoiding internal referencing to other sections of the Act; and
18.2.26 One concern expressed during the Institute’s consultations was
the adequacy of resources allocated to those working
within the guardianship
sector in Tasmania. This issue was discussed in Part 16 in relation to the
OPG’s advice that it is
unable to perform the Public Guardian’s
systemic advocacy role due to lack of
Resourcing was
also discussed in Part 4 in relation to the register of
instruments.
community members expressed dissatisfaction with difficulties contacting
professional representatives outside of business hours,
restricting the ability
of a represented person to be spontaneous, particularly in relation to their
spending on incidentals.
18.2.27 This review’s Terms of Reference asked for consideration of
whether the current guardianship and administration framework
sustainable and responsive to the needs of Tasmanians, noting demographic
changes in particular. The most significant demographic
change since the Act was
enacted has been Tasmania’s ageing population and the increasing
prevalence of dementia. As noted
above, in recent years the most frequently
identified disability of people the subject of an application to the Board has
consistently
been dementia. The annual reports of the Board, OPG, Public Trustee
and Legal Aid reveal increasing workloads across the board.
18.2.28 The Institute considers workload
to be an insufficient
reason to justify reform to the Act. As Carney notes, we do not consider
workload within the health care system
to be a satisfactory reason to ‘cut
corners’ and provide a lesser level of service to those requiring
We expect the same service, regardless of demand and expect
that service providers ensure that they are adequately resourced to meet
Carney states:
it might be argued that it is wrong to ‘move the goal posts’ by
diluting present justice entitlements compared to those
available to past
generations, merely because demographic shifts have led to an increase in
demand. For if it is inequitable and
wrong to restrict a public service like
critical health care for such reasons, why should guardianship be treated
differently?
18.2.29 That said, the Institute is mindful that Tasmania is a small
wisely. It has
been cognisant of the importance of considering resourcing when formulating
recommendations about potential reforms
to the Act.
18.2.30 It is the Institute’s view that there is much to be gained from
adopting a proactive approach through education and
planning. Education would
assist to avoid breaches of the Act, which would reduce the burden upon the
resources of the police and
courts, as well as the Board. Support to plan and
document arrangements for future, such as via the creation of an enduring power
of attorney, instrument and ACD, would reduce the workload of the Board, a
matter discussed above. Education is therefore likely
to have a positive impact
upon improving capabilities within the jurisdiction.
18.2.31 The Institute’s Terms of Reference asked for consideration of
the appropriateness of current measures to address poor
conduct of guardians,
administrators and persons responsible. The Board and the OPG are critical to
achieving this objective. Reform
to the law is of little assistance if the Board
and OPG are not properly resourced to carry out the safeguarding functions
to them under the Act.
Recommendation 18.3
That the State Government review and monitor the adequacy of resources
allocated to groups directly involved in administering the
Act, notably the
Board, OPG, Public Trustee and Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania, to ensure that
those bodies are able to perform
their functions, duties and powers effectively.
National developments
Uniform guardianship laws
18.2.32 Another criticism raised during public consultation was the lack of
nationally consistent guardianship laws. Four submissions
raised this matter.
NDS explained the hurdles that people with disability and those close to them
experience as a result of differences
in laws across the country:
There is a need to review cross-jurisdictional arrangements with cross-over
decision-making structures between the commonwealth and
the states clear or
there will be room for confusion. People with disability and their families
could experience additional jurisdictional
hurdles across different areas of
their lives. Our members report both inconvenience and more serious disruption
as a result of inconsistent
approaches to the appointment of guardians,
administrators, nominees or the recognition of enduring powers of attorney or
guardianship.
The experiences of people with disability and their families
should be assessed and ways to maximise recognition of cross-jurisdictional
arrangements should be put forward.
18.2.33 With an increasingly transient population and Tasmanians travelling
interstate for medical treatment, there is a growing need
for legislative
uniformity. One barrier to the system not working as effectively as it might
otherwise is a lack of consistency amongst
automatic recognition of documents and orders made interstate and an apparent
lack of confidence
within the community that arrangements put in place in one
state will be recognised in another jurisdiction. Differences amongst
the variations in legislative provisions when people
may have lived elsewhere,
or have family living elsewhere.
18.2.34 To the extent possible, the Institute has aimed to ensure that its
recommendations align with guardianship laws in other jurisdictions
recommendations of other Australian law reform commissions. But with sometimes
significant variation, it can be difficult
to achieve consistency because there
simply is no consistency from which to work.
18.2.35 It is outside of the scope of this reference to achieve a nationally
consistent approach to guardianship laws. The Institute
understands that there
is already work underway, particularly through the efforts of the AGAC and the
Council of Attorneys-General
(CAG), to progress uniform laws. The Institute
looks forward to this work progressing and suggests that any reform to the Act
as a consequence of this review be made in light of, and subject to, any
future developments at a national level for uniformity.
NDIS and related reforms
18.2.36 There are likely to be a range of other developments that will impact
the future operation of the Act. Notable examples include
the full roll-out of
the NDIS and consequential amendments to the
Disability Services Act
regulation of the use of restrictive practices, and work being progressed in
relation to nationally consistent laws. It is recommended
that government
maintain a watching brief in relation to these matters to ensure that any
necessary or desirable amendments are made
to the Act.
Recommendation 18.4
(1) That the need for reform to the Act be further reviewed upon any
amendments being made to the
Disability Services Act 2011
Mental Health Act 2013
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) to ensure
consistency wherever possible.
(2) That the State Government work with the other state and territory
governments, and the federal government, with a view to developing
consistent guardianship laws, including substitute consent to health care and
(3) That if agreement is reached nationally about the enactment of uniform
guardianship laws, the State Government work to enact uniform
legislation.
(4) That there be clear and streamlined pathways for instruments, enduring
powers of attorney and advance care directives made or
registered in another
Broader reforms needed
18.2.37 It would be misguided to believe that amendments to the Act alone
would achieve greater compliance with the Convention. The
Convention requires a
much broader policy reform and a commitment from all levels of government. With
a shift in focus towards supporting
a person to make their own decisions, there
must be a commitment to developing and enhancing supports available for people
who require
them. It requires education for professionals working with people
with decision-making support needs, including staff of the Board,
Trustee, OPG, Legal Aid, service providers and health practitioners. Broader
community education is also critical to strengthen
and validate the use of
decision-making support.
18.2.38 The OPG commented that it is particularly keen to see supported
decision-making arrangements being formulated and implemented
through policy and
program development. EOT made similar comments, observing that:
a shift to a rights-based framework will require a range of strategies aimed
at improving education across the community, increasing
the availability of
advocacy and supports and improving safeguarding mechanism in situations where
those rights are threatened. Whilst
the National Disability Insurance Scheme
arrangements may have some impact in this regard, the vast majority of this work
to State governments. However it is currently outside the remit and
capacity of State guardianship bodies. This requires both a legal
18.2.39 It is outside the Terms of Reference to consider and make detailed
recommendations about the changes in policy, practice and
resources that may be
required to successfully implement this shift. But, it is noted that:
• the Convention requires all levels of government to ensure that
people who require decision-making support have support available
make, communicate and implement decisions;
• decision-making supports must be of a high-quality, readily available
and accessible; and
• there must be equitable access to supports, taking into account
linguistic and cultural diversity, gender and age diversity,
those in lower
socio-economic groups and those living in rural and remote areas. Supports must
also be available for individuals
who are socially isolated and may not have
others within their social network from which to draw decision-making
Implementation of reforms
18.3.1 The Institute acknowledges that this Report proposes a significant
number of reforms to the Act. To streamline implementation,
the Institute
proposes that legislative reforms be enacted in tranches as follows:
Immediate amendments
Immediate actions
Longer-term actions
18.3.2 The Institute has also listed recommendations not requiring any action
other than for noting within a separate category. These
are outlined in Table
18.1 below.
18.3.3 Recommendations included in Tranche 1 are those where minor revisions
are proposed to ‘tidy’ existing legislative
provisions, or resolve
what appear to be unintended omissions or oversights from the existing
legislation. Whilst individually some
of the recommendations classed in this
category may appear insignificant, these reforms will individually and
collectively create
significant improvement to the operation of the existing
legislative framework.
18.3.4 Recommendations listed under Tranche 2 should be considered for
immediate action concurrent to reforms within Tranche 1. The
Institute has,
however, ranked these recommendations within a separate category with the
intention of ensuring that the number of
legislative reforms proposed does not
inhibit or delay the immediate enactment of the straightforward reforms
categorised in Tranche
1. Recommendations listed in Tranche 2 are those where
there should not be impediment to immediate implementation, but where the
reforms are more substantive in nature compared to those in Tranche 1.
18.3.5 Recommendations within Tranche 3 comprise more substantive legislative
reforms, or recommendations that cannot be addressed
until some future point as
explained in the recommendation. The Institute reinforces that categorising
recommendations within Tranche
3 does not mean that these reforms ought to be
delayed beyond what is necessary or required.
Table 18.1: Reform Implementation Strategy
No action required
All Part 3 Recs
Recs 4.6-4.15
Recs 7.5-7.10
Recs 4.16-4.17
All Part 5 Recs
All Part 6 Recs other than Recs 6.2 and 6.10
Recs 9.1-9.2
Recs 7.1-7.4
Recs 8.1-8.4
All Part 9 Recs other than Recs 9.1 and 9.2
Recs 12.5-12.7
Recs 12.13-12.14
Recs 10.4-10.5
Recs 11.1-11.2
Recs 12.22-12.23
Recs 12.3-12.4
Recs 12.8-12.12
Rec 14.2-14.5
Recs 12.15-12.16
Rec 15.2-15.3
Recs 12.18-12.21
Rec 15.5-15.6
All Part 13 Recs
Rec 14.6-14.7
Rec 16.4-16.5
Recs 17.4-17.5
Recs 18.1-18.3
Recommendation 18.5
That reforms proposed in this Report are progressed in accordance with the
implementation strategy outlined in Table 18.1 of this
Guardianship and
Administration Amendment Act 2015
Guardianship and Administration
Amendment Act 2013
Justice and Related Legislation (Miscellaneous
Amendments) Act 2009
Justice and Related Legislation (Further
Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2006
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature 30 March
2007, 2515 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May 2008) (‘Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities’).
Australian Law Reform
Commission (ALRC),
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws:
Final Report
, Report 124 (2014) [1.29].
Council on the Ageing
Tasmania, Equal Opportunity Tasmania, University of Tasmania, Tasmania Law
Reform Institute,
Symposium on Elder Abuse and Neglect: Report and
Recommendations
(15 November 2017)
http://www.utas.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1056563/Symposium-on-Elder-Abuse-and-Neglect-Report.pdf
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature 30 March
2007, 2515 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May 2008) (‘
Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities
Anna Arstein-Kerslake
describes the Convention as ‘merely the manifestation of a newfound voice
of people with disability’:
A Arstein-Kerslake,
Restoring Voice to
People with Cognitive Disabilities: Realizing the Right to Equal Recognition
Before the Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2017) 1.
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, 3
mtg, UN Doc A/810 (10 December 1948)
http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS
(entered into force 23 March 1976) (‘
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
(entered into force 3 January 1976).
Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment
opened for signature 10 December
1984, 1465 UNTS 85
(entered into force 26 June
1987). The Australian Government ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on 21 December 2017:
Optional Protocol to
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment
, opened for signature 4 February
2003, 2375 UNTS 237
into force 22 June 2006) (‘OPCAT’).
Convention on the Rights
of the Child
, opened for signature 20 November
1989, 1577 UNTS 3
into force 2 September 1990).
Department of Economic and
Social Affairs,
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
United Nations
https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html>.
See United Nations Treaty
<https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-15&chapter=4&clang=_en>.
Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature
2007, 2518 UNTS 283
(entered into force 3 May 2008)
<https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/optional-protocol-to-the-convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html>.
Parliamentary
, House of Assembly, 18 June 2011, Second Reading Speech 2 (Cassandra
Stanwell O’Connor, Minister for Human Services).
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities
Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties
, opened for signature 23 May
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
into force 27 January 1980) art 26.
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities
ALRC, above n
Arstein-Kerslake, above n
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (‘Convention Committee’),
Comment No 1:
Article 12: Equal Recognition before the law
CRPD/C/GC/1 (19 May 2014). See also ibid, Chapter 2.
United Nations Treaty
Collection,
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Declarations and Reservations – Australia
<https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-15&chapter=4&lang=_en&clang=_en#EndDec>.
See also Convention Committee,
Implementation of the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities – Initial Reports submitted by State parties
article 35 of the Convention: Australia
UN Doc CRPD/C/AUS/1 (3
December 2010) 7 (‘Initial report to the UNCRPD Committee’).
Convention Committee,
Concluding observations on the initial report of Australia
the Committee at its 10th session
2–13 September 2013
CRPD/C/AUS/CO/1 (4 October 2013). See also Human Rights Council, United Nations
General Assembly,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons
with disabilities on her visit to Paraguay
, A/HRC/34/58/Add.1 21 (December
ALRC, above n
Guardianship
, Final Report 24
(2012); ACTLRAC,
Guardianship
, Final Report (2016); NSWLRC,
Guardianship Act 1987
, Report 145 (May 2018).
A Review of
Queensland’s Guardianship Laws
, Report 67 (2010).
VLRC, above n
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
Guardianship and Administration and Other
Legislation Amendment Bill 2018
NSWLRC, above n
See ibid Recs
Under the new
Guardianship
and Administration Bill 2018
See Arstein-Kerslake, above
National People with
Disabilities and Carer Council,
Shut Out: The Experience of People with
Disabilities and their Families in Australia
(National Disability Strategy
Consultation Report, 2009) 2.
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Delivery of outcomes under the
National Disability Strategy 2010–2020 to build inclusive and accessible
communities
(November 2017) 1.4.
See Commonwealth of
National Disability Strategy 2010–2020
(2011) Department
of Social Services
<https://www.dss.gov.au/our-responsibilities/disability-and-carers/publications-articles/policy-research/national-disability-strategy-2010-2020>.
Communities, Sport and
Recreation, Department of Premier and Cabinet, Government of Tasmania,
Accessible Island: Tasmania’s Disability Framework for Action
(January 2018).
Department of Premier and
Cabinet, Government of Tasmania,
Accessible Island: Tasmania’s
Disability Framework for Action
http://www.dpac.tas.gov.au/divisions/csr/policy/Policy_Work/accessible_island_tasmanias_disability_framework_for_action_2018-2021_dfa
Communities, Sport and
Recreation, above n
, Action Item
Department of Justice,
Government of Tasmania,
Accessible Island: Tasmania’s Disability
Framework for Action 2018–
2021, Disability Action Plan 2018–2021
(April 2018).
Ibid Action Item 1.19.
Ibid Action Item 1.24.
Ibid Action Item 2.5.
Ibid Action Item 2.7.
Ibid Action Item 3.12.
Department of Justice,
Government of Tasmania,
Disability Justice Plan for Tasmania
(December 2017)
<https://www.justice.tas.gov.au/news_and_events/disability-justice-plan>.
Ibid Action Items 1, 8, 10,
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee, above n
Ibid [3.109].
Ibid [4.41].
Ibid [4.42].
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
s 17A(3)(c).
ALRC, above n
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Violence Against People with Disability in Institutional
, Issues Paper (February 2018) 7.
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
A Future without Violence: Quality, Safeguarding and Oversight to
Prevent and Address Violence Against People in Institutional Settings
Australian Human Rights
Commission, above n
Sean Burke,
‘Person-Centred Guardianship: How the Rise of Supported Decision-Making
and Person-Centred Services Can Help Olmstead’s
Promise Get Here
Faster’ (2016) 42(3)
Mitchell Hamline Law Review
Convention Committee, above
ALRC, above n
Ibid Recommendation
Elder Abuse –
A National Legal Response
, Final Report 131 (2017) [2.109].
Senate Community Affairs
References Committee, Parliament of Australia, report into
Violence, abuse
and neglect against people with disability in institutional and residential
settings, including the gender and age
related dimensions, and the particular
situation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People with disability, and
and linguistically diverse people with disability
Recommendation 6.
ACTLRAC, above n
, Recommendation 3.
Review of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(Tas), Issues Paper No 25
(December 2017) Question 1.1.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney
, on the other hand, allows an attorney to make decisions that are
consistent with a donor’s wishes, or likely wishes, even
where those
wishes are not in the donor’s best interests. It provides that an attorney
has not failed to protect a donor’s
interests if it is ‘an exercise
of a power that the donor would have been likely to make if he or she were not
subject to a
mental incapacity’:
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
Convention Committee, above
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-3(2).
See this approach endorsed
by the ALRC and ACTLRAC: ALRC, above n
Principle 3; ACTLRAC, above n
Recommendation 3; VLRC, above n
Recommendation 21, for example.
See TLRI, above n
, [2.6.2]. See for example
Mental Capacity
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) ss 22(6A), (7).
TLRI, above n
, Question 2.3.
MIGA is a medical defence
organisation and medical indemnity insurer advising, assisting and educating
medical practitioners, medical
students, health care organisations and privately
practising midwives throughout Australia.
See Recommendation 11.2.
Dr Elizabeth Pickup,
General Practitioner.
This section provides that
‘the represented person’s will and preferences should only be
overridden if it is necessary
to do so to prevent serious harm to the
represented person.’ This is incorporated into the Decision-Making
Process: refer to
Recommendation 11.2.
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities
Recommendation 13.2.
Lecturer in law and
medicine at the University of Tasmania, focussing on the law and ethics of
medical research, and Deputy Chair
of the Tasmanian Health and Medical Human
Research Ethics Committee (HREC).
Rebecca Dresser,
‘Dworkin on Dementia: Elegant Theory, Questionable Policy’ (1995)
Hastings Center Report
<https://doi.org/10.2307/3527839>.
This issue is discussed
further at [11.4.20]–[11.4.24].
Jacinta Tan et al,
‘Competence to Make Treatment Decisions in Anorexia Nervosa: Thinking
Processes and Values’ (2006)
Philosophy, Psychiatry, &
David I Shalowitz,
Elizabeth Garrett-Mayer, and David Wendler, ‘The Accuracy of Surrogate
Decision Makers: A Systematic Review’
(2006) 166(5)
Archives of
Internal Medicine
<https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.166.5.493>.
Examples provided included,
for example, where a person seeks to access money for a new pair of shoes, or
wants a chocolate bar
after dinner.
Which uses the phrase
‘personal and social wellbeing’, which is defined in
Guardianship
and Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 4.
Which focusses on promoting
and safeguarding an adult’s rights, interests and opportunities: see for
example, cl 8 Guardianship
and Administration Bill 2018 (Qld).
See for example, NSWLRC,
, Recommendation 5.4.
Chair of the Royal
Australia College of Physicians Tasmanian Regional Committee.
See J Tulloch and D Lupton,
Risk and Everyday Life
(Sage Publications, 2003).
Alex Pearl, ‘Article
12 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and the Legal Capacity
of Disabled People: The Way Forward?’ (2013) 1(1)
Leeds Journal of Law and Criminology
1, 5, 12, 19.
Refer to Recommendation
ACTLRAC, above n
, Recommendation 3.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 2.1.
Disability Inclusion
The general principles are as follows:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the
disability principles
relating to people with disability are the general principles set out in this
(2) People with disability have an inherent right to respect for their worth
and dignity as individuals.
(3) People with disability have the right to participate in and contribute
to social and economic life and should be supported to
develop and enhance their
skills and experience.
(4) People with disability have the right to realise their physical, social,
sexual, reproductive, emotional and intellectual capacities.
(5) People with disability have the same rights as other members of the
community to make decisions that affect their lives (including
involving risk) to the full extent of their capacity to do so and to be
supported in making those decisions if they want
or require support.
(6) People with disability have the right to respect for their cultural or
linguistic diversity, age, gender, sexual orientation
and religious beliefs.
(7) The right to privacy and confidentiality for people with disability is
to be respected.
(8) People with disability have the right to live free from neglect, abuse
and exploitation.
(9) People with disability have the right to access information in a way
that is appropriate for their disability and cultural background,
and enables
them to make informed choices.
(10) People with disability have the same right as other members of the
community to pursue complaints.
(11) The crucial role of families, carers and other significant persons in
the lives of people with disability, and the importance
of preserving
relationships with families, carers and other significant persons, is to be
acknowledged and respected.
(12) The needs of children with disability as they mature, and their rights
as equal members of the community, are to be respected.
(13) The changing abilities, strengths, goals and needs of people with
disability as they age are to be respected.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Disability Services
-(j). The Institute notes, however, that the recent
report into the review of the
Disability Services Act
comments that the
Commissioner for Children submitted that ‘Principles in the Act are high
level, “directional”
statements that may not be specific enough to
deliver safe, quality services to people with disability.’ It thus
that ‘There is no overarching human rights framework in Tasmania
therefore the CRPD needs to be incorporated more transparently
Principles, particularly those pertaining to children and young people in
Article 7.’ The report recommends that this
be achieved by way of adoption
of s 4 of the
(general principles guiding actions under this
Review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
Report of the
Review Committee (29 June 2018) 25–26, Recommendation 1. The Institute has
not recommended a similar approach
on the basis that s 4 of the
is directed towards access to support services.
Mental Health Act
(Tas) sch 1(a).
Communities, Sport and
Recreation, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Adult Guardianship
and Co-Decision-Making Act 2000
(Sask) s 3.
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 8(1).
Guardianship and
Administration and other Legislation Amendment Bill 2018 (Queensland) cl 8.
Primarily Carers
Tasmania, and carers attending consultation meetings, but along with other
individual respondents.
Tasmanian Government,
Tasmania Carer Policy
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 8(1)(c).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
QLRC, above n
, Recommendation 4-2.
See Recommendation
Or the Public Trustee or
Public Guardian.
Or the Public
House of Assembly
Standing Committee on Community Development, Parliament of Tasmania,
into Palliative Care
, No 8 (2017) [6.104] (‘Standing
Committee’).
In Queensland, the ACT,
Victoria, South Australia and the Northern Territory. The NSWLRC has recently
made the same recommendation:
see for example, NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 4.3(3).
Guardianship of Adults
Mental Capacity Act 2005
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 38(2)(b).
TLRI, above n
, Question 4.6.
The Board commented:
‘This is recognised by some differences in the eligibility criteria set
out in the Act for guardians
and administrators.’
Speak Out submitted that
separation of the roles means that ‘people don’t overstep the mark.
Someone can be too much
in charge of your life.’
Speak Out advocates.
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 5-3.
ALRC, above n
, [5.148], citing Alzheimer’s Australia,
Decision Making in Advance: Reducing Barriers and Improving Access to Advance
Directives for People with Dementia
See [4.7] in relation to
the registration of instruments.
See for example the
NSWLRC’s recent recommendations: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 8.1.
ALRC, above n
, [5.16], Recommendation 5-1.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.1(i).
Recommendation 9.2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Advance Personal
Planning Act
(NT) s 15(2).
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.1(ii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
N O’Neill and C
Peisah, ‘Enduring Guardianship’ in N O’Neill and C Peisah
Capacity and the Law
(Sydney University Press, 2011) [9.4.1].
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Powers of Attorney
s 28(1)(d).
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.2(i).
Ibid Question
Ibid [15.3.9].
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
provides that ‘[a]n
instrument of appointment of an enduring guardian under
section 32(1)
who is not the Public Guardian ...’
s 34(1)(b)(i).
Public Trustee Act
The NSWLRC recommended
that the proposed new Public Representative (formerly Public Guardian) not be
eligible to be appointed as
an enduring representative: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 8.3(1).
Public Trustee and
Guardian Act 1985
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.2(ii).
Convention Committee,
See Recommendation
[5.4.3]–[5.4.5] in relation to the difference between a values directive
and an instructional directive. In summary,
an instructional directive gives
directions about matters that they either do or do not give consent to —
for example, ‘I
object to a blood transfusion.’ A values directive,
on the other hand, might make broad statements about views about particular
matters without expressly indicating consent or refusal to consent to any
specific treatment — for example, ‘I want to
comfortable.’ Statements such as ‘keep me comfortable’ may
still require involvement of a representative
to assist to promote the
donor’s stated values and beliefs in relation to a particular decision
— for example, where
the individual is to reside or what treatment they
Public Trustee and
Guardian Act 1985
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See for example
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
This is included in
Victoria and New South Wales:
Medical Treatment Planning and Decisions Act
Powers of Attorney Act 2014
Guardianship Act 1987
ss 6B(1)(b)(ii)
(definition of
‘eligible signer’). The NSWLRC has recently recommended that their
Act permit an eligible signer to sign
for the person in the presence of the
person and at their discretion: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 8.4(2).
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 32(2)(c).
ALRC, above n
, [5.44]. This is part of implementation of
Recommendation 5-1(c) which requires enhanced witnessing requirements.
Ibid [5.44], endorsing
the recommendation of the Law Council of Australia. The requirement for
witnesses to confirm that they have
explained aspects of the document is
included in the
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
s 19(1)(c).
Powers of Attorney Act
Advance Personal Planning Act 2016
10(5). The NSWLRC’s recent recommendations propose retention of eligible
signers: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation
See ALRC, above n
, [5.26]–[5.27].
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.3.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 32(2)(c).
Law Council of Australia,
cited in ALRC, above n
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 10(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 32(2)(c).
s 9(1)(b)(i).
Powers of Attorney Act
s 9(1)(ba).
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.4.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 32(2)(b).
Powers of Attorney Act
Medical Treatment Planning and Decisions Act 2016
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.5(i).
Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Enduring Guardian’s Handbook: Information for
Enduring Guardians in Tasmania
<https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/129438/Handbook-for-Enduring-Guardians.pdf>
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.5(ii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 34(1A)(b).
These include requiring
enduring powers of attorney to comply with the Act in order to be registered,
the ability of the Recorder
to refuse to register enduring powers of attorney
that do not comply with the Act and the ability for the Recorder to exercise
to register an enduring power of attorney that does not comply with
the Act: see
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
See Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Presidential Direction
, (4 September 2012)
<https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/publications_/practice_directions>.
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 45.
Powers of Attorney
Wills Act 2008
This is consistent with
the ALRC’s recommendation that legislation recognise the ability of a
donor to make a document granting
limited or restricted powers, or that are
subject to conditions: ALRC, above n
Recommendation 5-1(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 33(2)(c).
s 32(2)(a).
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship Act 1987
Attorney Act 1998
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
ending of a marriage or relationship also automatically revokes the appointment
of a representative in Queensland and Ireland:
Powers of Attorney Act
Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 40.
Powers of Attorney Act
s 32AE(5)(b)
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
, Recommendation 8.18.
See [12.5] and
Recommendation 12.9.
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.6.
The Board; Members of
the Elder Law Committee.
The Board, OPG, Members
of the Elder Law Committee; Keith Anderson.
Social Work Services
RHH, Keith Anderson.
Social Work Services
Social Work Services.
The Institute notes that an unregistered Power of Attorney may be revoked in
these circumstances by lodging
a notice with the Recorder of Titles:
of Attorney Act 2000
Social Work Services
PCT, Margaret Rolph.
Wills Act 2008
Attorney Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Powers of Attorney Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.
PCT also supported
enduring guardians having the ability to resign without expressing a view about
whether this should be via this
Recommendation 4.6
proposes that the Act confirm that a substitute enduring guardian may also act
upon the resignation of the first
appointed enduring guardian.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
ss 32(2)(d)
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations 2017
(Tas) reg 14 sch 1.
Guardianship and
Administration Board, Annual Report 2016–2017, 20.
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations 2017
(Tas) reg 16.
Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Fees charged by the Board
<https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/new_fee_structure>.
Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Application for Fee Waiver for Instrument Appointing
Enduring Guardian Financial Hardship
(26 June 2018)
<https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/335434/F22-Enduring-Guardianship-Fee-Waiver_Secure_Web.pdf>.
Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Appointment of Enduring Guardian Registration
Application
<https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0016/246103/F19-Enduring-Guardianship-Coversheet_Secure_Web.pdf>.
Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 6 April 1996, Second Reading
Speech (Ron Cornish, Minister for Justice).
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 268.
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.8.
Four respondents
supported the payment of a fee whilst four respondents did not.
Hilda Nilsson.
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 5-3; ACTLRAC, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations 2017
(Tas) reg 13(4).
Land Information System,
Tasmanian Government (2017)
<https://www.thelist.tas.gov.au/app/content/home>.
TLRI, above n
, Question 15.9.
Guardianship Act
This matter is
considered further in
Recommendation 4.11.
Recommendation 12.5.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Although it must also be
acknowledged that a direction can also be verbal.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas)s 32(6).
Ashby observed in 2010
that almost half of the registered instruments sampled contained directions to
enduring guardians about future
treatment: Michael Ashby and Robert Thornton,
An analysis of the specific directions regarding medical care and lifestyle
decisions within completed Enduring Guardianship Forms
(Tasmania, 2010).
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761
(6 August 2009) 40–41. NSW
also presently relies upon the common law in relation to the effect of advance
care directives.
The NSWLRC has recently made recommendations proposing that
legislation confirm that a patient should be able to consent to health
an advance care directive and that health care must not be given if it would be
strictly against a patient’s will and
preference as expressed in an
advance care directive that is clear and extends to the situation at hand. The
NSWLRC recommends that
legislation confirm that an advance care directive can be
made orally: NSWLRC, above n
Recommendation 10.5(3).
Standing Committee, above
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.1(i).
Directors of the
Australian Centre for Health Law Research (ACHLR), a specialist research Centre
within the Queensland University
of Technology’s Faculty of Law. Their
submission is in their personal capacities, rather than on behalf of the
Referring to the
following paper: B White et al, ‘Prevalence and Predictors of Advance
Directives in Australia’ (2014)
Internal Medicine Journal
Standing Committee,
, [6.12], [6.89], [6.90];
Standing Committee, Submission, 16; Clinical, Technical and Ethical Principal
Committee of the Australia
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Framework for Advance Care Directives
(September 2011) (‘National
Framework for Advance Care Directives’); Tasmanian Government, above n
, 23; Specialist Palliative Care Service,
Department of Health and Human Services,
Advance Care Planning Factsheet
(2009); House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Older People and the Law
2007) [3.149].
Legal and Social Issues
Committee, Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into End of Life Choices –
Final Report
(June 2016), 5.4 citing Willmott et al 2011.
The Care and Consent to
Medical Treatment Bill 19 of 2016 contains provisions in relation to the use of
Advance Care Directives.
The Bill was read for the first time by the House of
Assembly in April 2016: see
http://www.parliament.tas.gov.au/bills/Bills2016/19_of_2016.htm
Convention Committee,
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
It is noted, however,
that Recommendation 4.5 makes recommendation for this to be amended to enable
the Public Guardian to be appointed
as an enduring guardian.
Although the NSWLRC has
recently recommended that ACDs be recognised within legislation in New South
Wales, without affecting the
common law: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 10.5.
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.1(ii).
Six out of nine
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.2.
Treatments Planning and Decision Act 2016
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
[5.5.20]–[5.5.28], [5.5.32].
Refer to Recommendation
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 13.
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.3(i).
Older Persons Mental
Health Service and Elder Law and Succession Committee, Speak Out.
Public Guardian,
Palliative Care Tas, Interim Children’s Commissioner.
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.3(ii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Tasmanian Health
Service, Government of Tasmania, ‘Advance Care Directive for care at the
end of life (Tasmania)’ (5
June 2018) <
www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/129455/FT021550_Advanced_Care_Directive_20171213..pdf
Refer to Recommendation
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.3(iii).
Older Persons Mental
Health Service.
It referred the
Institute to the approach adopted by NSW Health for its ROAD project in
developing a template ACD, endorsing this
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 32(2)(a).
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
This is a matter for a
medical practitioner to decide, having regard to the person’s wishes: ibid
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
s 31A(1)(b)
Advance Care Directives Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration
Medical Treatment
(Health Directions) Act 2006
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 41(1), see also s 45.
Ibid s 41(4);
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 41(3);
Advance Care Directives Act 2013
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Advance Care Directives Act
ss 36(2)(b)
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
s 23(b)(ii).
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 41(3)(b).
Ibid s 41(3)(b)(ii).
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
QLRC, above n
, Recommendation 9-3(b)(i).
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
where a medical
practitioner can refuse to comply with an advance care directive on
conscientious grounds.
In Queensland, a
person’s binding directions to stop or withhold life sustaining measures
only operate in limited circumstances:
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 41(3).
TLRI, above n
, Questions 12.3(iv), (v).
The Social Work Services
RHH commented that this should include circumstances where the person was
subject to a mental illness,
for example a depressive episode, that affected the
directions made.
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
Recommendations 7.10,
12.4, and 14.1.
Advance Care
Directive Act 2013
See for example,
Advance Care Directives Act 2013
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) ss 6, 12.
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Medical Treatment Planning
and Decisions Act 2016
The NSWLRC has recently made the same
recommendation: NSWLRC, above n
Recommendation 10.5(7). A similar position applies in South Australia:
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
Medical Treatment
(Health Directions) Act 2006
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
s 31A(1)(a).
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 29(c)(iv).
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.3(vi).
There were 11 responses
to this question.
See [4.5.59].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 4(1)(c)(i).
s 25(2)(e).
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 26.
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.6.
MIGA’s submission
commented that it supported the ability to appoint a medical treatment
decision-maker without explicitly
stating that it endorsed the ability to do
this separate to an enduring guardian for personal matters.
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.3(vii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Note that this debate
already exists in relation to whether it falls within the scope of a person
responsible’s powers to
consent to the admission of a patient within the
Roy Fagan Centre. One view is that this is a decision for a person responsible
the decision is intrinsically linked to the provision of medical treatment
(as admission is necessarily required in order for the
treatment to be
performed). The alternative view is that it is a decision about where the person
is to reside temporarily and falls
outside the definition of ‘medical
treatment’ and is therefore within the scope of a guardian’s
Powers of Attorney
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
ALRC, above n
Standing Committee, above
, [6.79], Recommendation 5.
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.3(viii).
Thirteen submissions.
The Board did not make a
submission in relation to this question.
[12.9.19]–[12.9.21] below, safeguards in relation to access to the
proposed register of ACDs are considered. See also Recommendation
See for example
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act 2006
Care Directives Act 2013
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
Apart from the making of
emergency orders, where proof of a disability is not necessary for the making of
an emergency order, although
the Board must be satisfied that there are grounds
for the making of a guardianship or administration order. This necessarily
the Board to consider whether the person has a disability.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(1). Note that
emergency orders can be made without needing to establish that a person has a
disability.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
arts 4(1), 5.
Convention Committee,
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Advance Personal Planning Act
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Queensland) sch 4, definitions
of ‘impaired capacity’ and ‘capacity’.
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 6.1.
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 52.
Ibid Recommendation
Ibid Recommendation
Ibid Recommendation
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 30(2)(a).
Powers of Attorney
s 39(1)(b).
See for example
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
s 20(1)(b).
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.1(i).
Arstein-Kerslake, above
See for example
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
The standard form
enduring power of attorney included in the Act does not refer to the existence
of a disability as being a trigger
to the operation of the Act — only the
‘mental incapacity’ of the donor.
See [17.6]. See also
Recommendation 17.5(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Mental Health Act
Review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Ronald McCallum,
‘The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities:
Some Reflections’ (Research
Paper No 10/30, University of Sydney Law
School, 2010).
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.1(ii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Note that ‘enduring
guardians’ are called different things across the country, for example,
‘decision-makers’
or ‘attorneys.’
ss 20(1)(a)
Note that a functional
approach to determining application of guardianship legislation has also been
criticized: see Arstein-Kerslake,
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Bill 2018
(Vic), cl 5. Note that
this approach has been criticised as being ‘a relatively high
burden’ and that ‘[i]t is
not the role of the State to regulate the
standard of individual decision-making.’: ibid 92–93.
Adult Guardianship and
Trusteeship Act 2008
(Alberta) s 2(b).
Mental Health Act
Capacity Toolkit
(2008) New South Wales Justice and Attorney General, 8
http://www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/98513/Web_Capacity_Toolkit_Tasmania.pdf
ALRC, above n
, [5.187]; NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 6.1.
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.2.
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Bill 2018
(Vic), cl 5.
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.3.
This approach is
consistent with the NSWLRC’s recent recommendations: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 6.1.
ALRC, above n
, [3.39]; VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 27(e).
Attorney Act 2014
A recommendation to this effect has recently
been made by the NSWLRC: NSWLRC, above n
Recommendation 6.3(2)(e).
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 8(3), see also ss 37, 38;
Mental Capacity Act 2005
(UK) s 1(3).
Guardianship and
Administration and other Legislation Amendment Bill 2018 (Qld) cl 8.
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17.
See, for example,
[2013] TASGAB 21
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
of Attorney Act 2006
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) ss 4, 6, 8.
The NSWLRC has
recommended that the legislative framework in that state provide a single
enduring document dealing with the appointment
of representatives for financial,
personal, health care and restrictive practices. It proposes that the new Act
require a person
to have ‘decision-making ability’ to make an
enduring representation agreement: NSWLRC above n
, Recommendations 8.1, 8.2.
Convention Committee,
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
s 13(a)(ii)
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
Powers of Attorney Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 12.3(i).
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 13.
Capacity Toolkit
Senate Community Affair
References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Involuntary or Coerced
Sterilisation of People with Disabilities in Australia
(2013) Recommendation
8; NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation
ALRC, above n
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
Medical Treatments
Planning and Decision Act 2016
Powers of Attorney Act
, consistent with the recommendations of the VLRC: see
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 26;
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 1
Assisted Decision-Making
(Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 8(2);
Adult Guardianship and Trusteeship
(Alberta) s 2(a).
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.4.
Capacity Toolkit
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 3(2)(b).
Ibid ss 3(4)–(5).
Powers of Attorney Act
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
Mental Capacity Act
(UK) s 2(3).
Guardianship of Adults
Mental Capacity Act
(UK) s 2(3)(a). The NSWLRC has recently made recommendations proposing
similar circumstances where a person should not be assumed
decision-making ability: NSWLRC, above n
Recommendation 6.3(3).
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.5.
Although the OPG stated
that it did not have a firm view but that it could be helpful.
Speak Out submitted
‘[s]ometimes people make bad decisions when they are young. They
shouldn’t look at things we did
when we were young. Everyone grows up and
learns things.’
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
art 8(1)(b).
This approach is
consistent with the NSWLRC’s recommendations: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 6.3(3).
See, for example,
Powers of Attorney Act 2014
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 6.
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 6.3(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations 2017
(Tas) reg 4(1) states that an application
made under the Act in respect of a person, other than an application under s 44,
be supported by a report from a health care professional.
Ibid reg 3.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
ACTLRAC, above n
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, above n
Adult Guardianship and
Trusteeship Regulation 2009
(Alberta) reg 6.
Ibid reg 8.
Ibid regs 9, 10.
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 29.
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.6.
There were five verbal
submissions.
Speak Out advocates, Dr
Elizabeth Pickup, members of Carers Tasmania (Hobart).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations 2017
(Tas) reg 4(3).
A Smith and D Rigby,
Substitute Decision-Making and the Future of Mental Health Laws: Redeveloping
Australian incapacity jurisdictions to remove the stigma
of mental health
, (joint minor LLM Thesis (Tribunal Procedures), Monash University,
2008) 188. The writers do not endorse a particular approach.
Enduring Powers)
[2017] TASGAB 17.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship of Adults
Adult Guardianship and
Co-Decision-Making Act 2000
(Sask) ss 12(2), 38(2);
Adult Guardianship
and Trusteeship Act 2008
(Alberta) s 104.
Adult Guardianship and
Trusteeship Act 2008
(Alberta) s 105.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Mental Health Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.7.
Senate Community Affairs
Reference Committee, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.7(ii).
A general practitioner
in the ACT.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
[12.4.37]–[12.4.48]. See also Recommendation 12.3.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
TLRI, above n
, Question 3.8.
[13.4.28]–[13.4.32].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-2, see [3.29].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
Ibid Question
Thirteen written, four
verbal submissions.
Adopting the same
reasoning put forward by New South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal in
relation to the NSWLRC recent review
Guardianship Act
in New South
TasCOSS and EOT. This is
consistent with observations made by the Office of the Public Advocate in
Victoria that ‘interdependent
decision-making is the way in which most of
us operate.’: Barbara Carter,
Supported Decision-making Background and
Discussion Paper
, Office of the Public Advocate (November 2009)
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.1(ii).
Ten written, five
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.1(iii).
Seven written, four
Members, COTA and
Dementia Australia (Tas).
Carers Tas.
Members of the Elder Law
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.1(iv).
The Board, OPG.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
See forms available on
the Guardianship and Administration Board’s website: Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Application Forms
(26 June 2018)
<https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/forms2>.
Legislated supported
decision-making exists in Victoria:
Powers of Attorney Act 2014
Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland); Sweden:
Martha Nussbaum,
Frontiers of Justice: Disability
, Nationality and
Species Membership (Harvard University Press, 2007) 196, cited in Carter, above
, 15; some provinces in Canada
including Yukon:
Adult Protection and Decision Making Act
SY 2003, c.21
sch A; British Columbia:
Representation Agreement Act 1996
(BC); Alberta:
Adult Guardianship and Trusteeship Act 2008
(Alberta), Saskatchewan:
Adult Guardianship and Co-Decision-Making Act 2000
Supported Decision-Making Agreement Act
, 1357 Estates Code §
1357.002–1357.003, § 1357.051–1357.056; Delaware:
Decision-Making Act
, Delaware Code § 9401A– § 9410A.
Chartres and Brayley,
(2010) cited in G Davidson et al, ‘Supported Decision Making: A Review of
the International Literature’
International Journal of Law
and Psychiatry
Powers of Attorney
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 14.
Powers of Attorney
has recently made recommendations to this effect: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 7.12.
TLRI, above n
, [13.4]–[13.7].
Legislative Council
Standing Committee on Social Issues, Parliament of NSW,
Decision-Making for People Lacking Capacity
, Report 43 (2010)
Recommendations 4, 5; VLRC, above n
ALRC, above n
, ACTLRAC, above n
, NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendations 7.1–7.21.
See for example,
Evaluation Report of the Link and Learn Supported Decision Making
, a Report made to the Community Services Directorate, Office for
Disability, ACT (February 2018) 19.
Office of the Public
Advocate (South Australia),
Annual Report 2013
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.2.
Attendees of a carers
meeting convened by Carers Tasmania Devonport also suggested that carers should
have an official role within
the Act so that their roles as supporters can be
recognised.
Advocacy Tas, OPG.
Advocacy Tas,
Commentators have also
referred to decision-making as a continuum ‘with the decision-making that
best reflects usual decision-making
processes in our society at one end and
fully substituted decision-making at the other.’: Carter, above n
Advocacy Tas, TasCOSS
made similar observations.
MIGA, Speak Out
Convention Committee,
Shih-Ning Then,
‘Evolution and Innovation in Guardianship Laws: Assisted
Decision-Making’
[2013] SydLawRw 6
Sydney Law Review
, 143 referring to
Gordon 2000 and Frolik 2007.
Anita Smith,
Management of a Resident’s Funds in a Supported Accommodation Facility
– A Legal Perspective
(July 2010) 3.
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Note that the Victorian
Act deals collectively with attorneys for financial and personal matters —
in other words, a fused
model to Tasmania’s separate attorneys and
enduring guardians.
Powers of Attorney
This approach is consistent with reforms suggested by
the Office of the Public Advocate on the basis that it ‘would more readily
enable enduring powers of attorney to exist as tools of supported
decision-making’: see Office of the Public Advocate Victoria,
Decision-Making: Options for Legislative Recognition
(January 2010)
6–7. The NSWLRC has also recently made recommendations to adopt the same
approach: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation
The Office of the Public
Advocate Victoria observed that Victoria’s previous legislation, which was
broadly consistent with
Tasmania’s in this context, is fundamentally
different to supported decision-making arrangements which do not permit the
to substitute the donor’s decision: Office of the Public Advocate
Victoria, above n
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
See [12.6.19].
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Recommendation 7.4.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilitie
Convention Committee,
Pilots have been
conducted in Victoria (in addition to legislative reform), New South Wales
(2013–2014), ACT (2013, 2014,
2017), and South Australia
(2010–2012). A useful summary of the pilots and projects is provided by
the ACTLRAC in ACTLRAC above
95–114. See also Bigby et al, ‘Delivering decision making support to
people with cognitive disability – What has
been learned from pilot
programs in Australia from 2010 to 2015’ (2017) 52(3)
Journal of Social Issues
222; NSWLRC,
Review of the Guardianship and
Administration Act 1987
, Question Paper 3, The role of guardians and
financial managers (November 2016) [4.23]–[4.36].
ACTLRAC, above n
, Recommendation 11.
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.3(i).
See [17.5],
Recommendation 17.4.
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.3(ii).
Powers of Attorney Act
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 3.
Office of the Public
Advocate Victoria, above n
Carter, above n
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.3(v).
OPG and MIGA.
Speak Out Advocates.
TasCoss, referring to
the ACT Spectrums of Support recommendations.
TasCoss, referring to
the ACT Spectrums of Support recommendations.
[4.3.17]–[4.3.25].
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.3(iii).
Evaluation Report of
the Link and Learn Supported Decision Making Project
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.3(iv).
Ibid [13.6].
See Then, above n
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 64; ACTLRAC, above n
, Recommendation 7. The NSWLRC, in its recent
draft recommendations, did not propose the establishment of a co-decision-making
in New South Wales: NSWLRC,
Review of the
Guardianship Act 1987
(November 2017).
TLRI, above n
, Question 13.4(i).
PCT, Wallace.
Elder Law Committee,
National Seniors Australia, Tasmanian Policy Advisory Group, OPG.
NSWLRC, above n
, [2.64]–[2.69].
NSWLRC, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Refer to [6.2], [6.4]
and Recommendations 6.1, 6.3.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
VLRC, above n
, [12.120].
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
QLRC, above n
, Recommendation 14-1.
Guardianship of Adults
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 9.3(2).
TLRI, above n
, Question 4.1.
TLRI, above n
, Question 4.2.
TLRI, above n
, Question 4.3.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
[11.4.27]–[11.4.28].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 21(2)(b).
See Recommendation
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
in relation to
guardianship orders.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 182.
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 30(2).
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 9.1.
Annual Report
TLRI, above n
, Question 5.6.
Sandra Taglieri SC.
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 30(2).
TLRI, above n
, [5.2] in relation to guardians, [6.2] in
relation to administrators.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
T Lester, NSW Trustee and
National Standards for Financial Managers
, Final Version
(January 2011).
TLRI, above n
, Question 5.1.
Ibid Question 6.1.
Six responses raised
Four responses raised
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship of Adults
s 22(1)(d).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
By implication, this
duty is also supported by the Public Trustee who submitted that it did not have
any issues with the existing
duties of representatives included in the Act.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 57(2)(a).
By implication, the
Public Trustee also supported maintenance of this duty, noting in its submission
that it did not have any issues
with the existing duties of administrators.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
ss 27(2)(a)
T Lester, above n
submission (one of the two responses listed) stated that it did not object to
this reform.
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 41(1)(e).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship of Adults
s 22(1)(d).
Refer to the
Decision-Making Process detailed at Recommendation 11.2.
Recommendation 3.3.
Recommendation 11.2.
Recommendation 5.8.
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
s 21(1)(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
(SA) s 72. See also
Advance Care Directives Act
Guardianship and
Administration and other Legislative Amendment Bill 2018 (Queensland) cl 11B,
general principle 6.
Mental Capacity Act
(UK) s 20(1). The NSWLRC has recently recommended a similar approach in
New South Wales, proposing that legislation provide that
a tribunal order
appointing a representative only have effect when the represented person does
not have decision-making ability for
that decision: NSWRLC, above n
, Recommendation 9.8(2).
Co-decision-makers, in
this instance.
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 19(4).
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 78(2).
Ibid ss 76(2), 78(4);
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
QLRC, above n
, Recommendation 15-1.
TLRI, above n
, Question 4.4.
Ten out of 14
TLRI, above n
, Question 4.5.
[12.9.22]–[12.9.27].
TLRI, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 20(1)(b).
See for example
of Attorney Act
Advance Personal
Planning Act
(NT) s 16(2). The NSWLRC has recommended that the
term ‘personal decision’ be used: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 4.4.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
The VLRC commented in relation to
this expression that: ‘This characterisation is both demeaning and
unhelpful. It arguably
perpetuates the ‘eternal child’ image of a
person whose decision-making capacity is severely impaired. In addition, the
description of a plenary guardian as a person who has the same powers as those
that they would have if the represented person were
their child is unhelpful
given the fluid nature of the powers that a parent may exercise in relation to a
child who has not yet reached
maturity’: VLRC, above n
, [12.154].
VLRC, above n
TLRI, above n
, Question 5.3.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 2
Guardianship of Adults
Litigation by
Administrators and Guardians – Guidelines for Applicants and Template for
Applications
(2007) Guardianship and Administration Board
http://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/79326/Litigation_by_Administrators_and_Guardians_-_Application_a.pdf
Litigation by Administrators and Guardians – Background Information
(February 2007) Guardianship and Administration Board
http://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/79833/Litigation_by_Administrators_and_Guardians_-_Background_In.pdf
TLRI, above n
, Question 5.4.
[12.9.22]–[12.9.27].
Refer to [14.6] in
relation to admission and detention, and [17.4] in relation to the regulation of
the use of restrictive practices.
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 3.
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
confirms that the term ‘health
care’ includes withdrawing and withholding life sustaining measures. This
is considered
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 2, cl 5. ‘Health provider’ is
to mean a person who provides
health care, or special health care, in the practice of a profession or the
ordinary course of business:
Advance Personal
Planning Act
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 10.4.
practitioner’ is defined to include ‘a registered health
practitioner’, with this term defined as
follows: ‘registered health
practitioner has the same meaning as it has in the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law’:
Medical Treatment Planning and Decision Act
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 5.5.
Ibid Question 10.3.
This matter is addressed
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(Queensland) s 5 definition of ‘health
practitioner’, incorporated by reference in the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (Tasmania) Act 2010
(Tas) s 3(2).
Ibid, definition of
‘health profession’.
Ibid, definition of
‘health service’.
Refer to [14.6].
ALRC, above n
, [5.73], Recommendation 5-1(f).
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 39. The NSWLRC has also recently recommended
that legislation confirm those matters falling outside the scope of a
representative’s
authority: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 8.6(4).
TLRI, above n
, Question 5.8.
Powers of Attorney
TLRI, above n
, Question 5.7.
[12.9.22]–[12.9.27].
TLRI, above n
, Question 5.9.
See Recommendation
See Recommendations 5.6
See Recommendation 4.15.
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
s 34(1)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Carers Tasmania.
Carers Tasmania, with
other submissions also raising this matter.
[18.2.9]–[18.2.20].
Including, for example,
removing a person’s passport or mobile phone — matters that the OPG
also raised in its submission.
See [17.4].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 56(1)(c).
This proposal is linked
to Recommendation 18.2, proposing that the Act be made as accessible as
possible, including through use
of plain English.
See Recommendation
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney Act
s 31(2A)(c)
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
s 56(2)(c).
Powers of Attorney Act
ss 31(2A)(k)
s 31(2A)(i).
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 16(2).
Ibid s 16(2);
of Attorney Act 2014
Guardianship and Administration Act
s 39(2)(h).
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship of Adults Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
s 39(2)(i).
s 39(2)(j).
Ibid 39(2)(q).
Ibid 39(2)(v).
Ibid 39(2)(za).
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, above n
, Recommendation 15.
TLRI, above n
, Question 6.3.
[9.2.6]–[9.2.14].
Five submissions were
received in response to this question.
See NSWLRC,
digital assets upon death or incapacity
, Consultation Paper 20 (August 2018)
[3.22]–[3.25].
Access to digital
assets upon death or incapacity
(16 July 2018) NSWLRC
http://www.lawreform.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/lrc/lrc_current_projects/Digital%20assets/Background.aspx
Powers of Attorney
TLRI, above n
, Question 6.4.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 56(1)(c).
TLRI, above n
, Question 6.5.
Two submissions
[12.9.22]–[12.9.27].
TLRI, above n
, Question 6.6.
[18.2.9]–[18.2.20].
See [12.11.6].
Appeals are discussed
Recommendation 12.1 proposes that there be no adverse costs
orders for a person in respect of whom a decision relates who appeals
of the Board to the Supreme Court.
In this context,
representatives, the Board, and persons responsible.
Factors that
administrators must consider are outlined in
Guardianship and Administration
, factors that guardians must consider are contained in
, factors that persons responsible must consider are outlined in
and factors that the Board must consider in relation to consent to medical
treatment are contained in
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-3(2). The NSWLRC has
recently made recommendations consistent with this approach: NSWLRC,
, Recommendation 5.4.
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 9.
TLRI, above n
, Question 2.2.
The Institute notes that
the Northern Territory legislation also adopts a will and preferences approach,
although those terms are
not used: see
Advance Personal Planning Act 2016
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
See TLRI, above n
Mental Capacity Act
Medical Treatment Planning and Decision Act 2016
See for example
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
For example,
Guardianship and Administration and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2018
TLRI, above n
Guardianship and Trusteeship Act 2008
(Alberta) s 2(d).
The Macquarie Dictionary
defines ‘will’ as including: ‘1. The faculty of conscious and
especially of deliberate
actions. 2. The power of choosing one’s own
actions. 3. The act of using this power. 4. The process of willing, or volition.
5. Wish or desire. 6. purpose or determination, often hearty determination. 7.
The wish or purpose as carried out, or to be carried
out. 8. Disposition (good
or ill) towards another.... 12. To wish or desire. ...’ It provides that
‘preference’
includes: ‘1. The act of preferring; estimation
of one thing above another; prior favour or choice. 2. The state of being
3. That which is preferred; the object of prior favour or choice. 4.
A practical advantage given to one over others:
Macquarie Dictionary
(Macmillan, 2013) 1687 (definition of ‘will’), 1158 (definition of
‘preference’).
See steps 2 and 3 of the
Decision-Making Process: Recommendation 11.2.
The NSWLRC has also
recommended that decisions be made in accordance with a person’s will and
preference ‘wherever possible’,
similar to Victoria: NSWLRC above n
, Recommendation 5.4(a).
See Point 5 of the
Decision-Making Process.
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 23(2).
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-3.
See for example
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
Treatment Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 4(1)(d);
Capacity Act 2005
(UK) s 3(1)(d);
Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act
(Ireland) s 3(2)(d).
Some attendees at
facilitated consultation meetings convened by COTA and Dementia Australia
(Tasmania), and Sandra Taglieri SC.
TLRI, above n
Powers of Attorney
s 32(1A)(c)(iii).
See Step 4 of the
Decision-Making Process: Recommendation 11.2.
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 61(1). See also
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 9(1)(b).
Powers of Attorney
32(1A)(c)(iii).
s 32(1B)(a).
See Step 3.
See for example NSWLRC
, Recommendation 5.4(d).
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 9(1)(d).
Australian Guardianship
and Administration Council (AGAC),
National Standards of Guardianship
ed, 2016) Standard 3.
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 5.4.
The recent Review
Committee report following the review of the
Disability Services Act
notes that the Board also raised this issue as part of that review in relation
to a guardian’s consent to the use of restrictive
practices. That report
proposes that this matter be addressed as part of this review: see
Disability Services Act 2011
See for example
Mental Health Act 2013
ss 25(a)(ii)
See step 5.
Smith and Rigby, above n
, advocate the benefits of alcohol and
drug dependencies falling within the guardianship jurisdiction: at 185.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Ibid art 12(4).
Ibid art 12.4
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Including with leave.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Equivalent provisions apply in the
Mental Health Act 2013
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 76(3)(a).
s 76(3)(c).
the decision related to consent to terminate a pregnancy, then the appeal must
be made within two days of the determination:
s 76(3)(b).
One respondent
commented, in answering a separate question in the Issues Paper, that these
appeal periods are too short.
s 76(3)(d).
Supreme Court (Fees)
(Tas), sch 1
Data extracted from
Guardianship and Administration Board Annual Reports.
JLW v Guardianship and
Administration Board
[2011] TASSC 66
Unless the Court orders
otherwise, costs of an appeal follow the event:
Supreme Court Rules 2000
(Tas) rr 701(1), 693(1), 672(6).
Dr Elizabeth Pickup.
Margaret Rolph.
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 6 April 1996, Second Reading
Speech (Ron Cornish, Minister for Justice).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See for example
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
The Care and Consent to Medical
Treatment Bill 2016 (Tas) incorporates an equivalent provision: see cl 25.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
A decision of the Board not to
authorise publication of a report of proceedings before the Board may not be the
subject of an application
for internal review:
Department of Justice,
Government of Tasmania,
A Single Tribunal for Tasmania
, Discussion Paper
(September 2015). The Discussion Paper recommends that the jurisdiction of the
Guardianship and Administration
Board be included as part of any new single
Civil and Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
The article that the
Discussion Paper refers to suggests that legislation could include a
non-exhaustive list of matters that could
be considered relevant to determining
whether to exercise the discretion including whether an arguable and material
error of law
is raised, whether a materially different order would result if
they were successful, the availability of fresh evidence, findings
of fact based
on no probative evidence, whether an appeal is justified given the value of the
claim, the likelihood of success, and
the interests of justice: K P
O’Connor, ‘Appeal Panels in Super Tribunals’
[2013] UQLawJl 4
[2013] 32(1)
University of Queensland Law Journal
Department of Justice,
, Recommendation 4.7.
It is noted that the
2017–2018 State Budget included provision of $100,000.00 to investigate
accommodation options for the
establishment of a Tasmania Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (TASCAT): Parliament of Tasmania, Government of
Government Services: Budget Paper No. 2 Vol 1
http://www.treasury.tas.gov.au/Documents/2017-18-Budget-Paper-No-2-Volume-1.pdf
There does not appear to be any separate funding allocated to this project in
the 2018–2019 State Budget: Parliament
of Tasmania, Government of
Government Services: Budget Paper No. 2 Vol 1
http://www.treasury.tas.gov.au/Documents/2018-19-Budget-Paper-No-2-Volume-1.pdf
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.1(i).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Board
https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions
Practice Direction – De-identification of statements of reasons for
publication
(31 July 2014) President of the Board:
https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/173272/De-identification_of_decisions_for_publication_web_version.pdf
Practice Direction
– De-identification of statements of reasons for publication
Including with leave.
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.1(ii).
[15.4.28]–[15.4.34].
Parliament of Tasmania,
Government of Tasmania (2018–19), above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
provides a statutory timeframe in which
hearings must be listed following receipt of an application. In 2016–2017,
matters were listed within the statutory timeframe, whilst in
2015–2016, only 75% of matters were: Parliament of Tasmania,
Government of
Tasmania, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Classes of individuals eligible to
appeal a determination are: the person in respect of whom the hearing was held;
the applicant;
the Public Guardian; any guardian or administrator of the person
in respect of whom the hearing was held; if the matter relates to
the provision
of health care and treatment, then the registered health practitioner proposing
to carry out the health care or treatment;
and any other person who appeared
before the Board.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
National Alternative
Dispute Resolution Council, Attorney-General’s Department, Government of
Your Guide to Dispute Resolution
https://www.ag.gov.au/LegalSystem/AlternateDisputeResolution/Documents/Your%20Guide%20to%20Dispute%20Resolution.pdf
Alternative Dispute
Resolution Act 2001
See for example,
Supreme Court Rules 2000
Magistrates Court (Civil
Division) Rules 1998
use of alternative dispute resolution was strongly supported in the Department
of Justice’s Discussion Paper, ‘ADR
(Alternative/Appropriate Dispute
Resolution) must form part of the legislative foundation. The application and
use of ADR within
a Single Tribunal is critical to achieving multiple outcomes
related to speed, efficiency, usability and accessibility’: Department
Justice, above n
, 77. See also House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, above n
, [3.221]; Independent Advisory Council
of the National Disability Insurance Scheme,
How can the NDIS help
participants enhance their personal safeguards in order to experience greater
independence, economic participation
and community inclusion?
Paper, November 2015) 21.
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.2(i).
Fifteen responses
(including two from consultation sessions convened by Carers Tasmania).
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.2(iii).
Department of Justice,
, 77. See also House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, above n
, [3.221]; Independent Advisory Council
of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, above n
For further discussion
participate in negotiations
and arguments against compulsory mediation in the
guardianship jurisdiction, see Robyn Carrol and Anita Smith, ‘Mediation in
Guardianship Proceedings for the Elderly: An Australian Perspective’
Windsor Yearbook of Access to Justice
Smith and Rigby, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 15(1)(j).
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
, (2). An equivalent provision is included
in the Care and Consent to Medical Treatment Bill 2016 (Tas): see cl 19;
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
NSWLRC’s recent recommendations, above n
, Recommendation 13.1(3).
As defined in
Care Directives Act 2013
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.2(ii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 15(1)(j).
See Recommendation
Refer to [12.5]
Powers of Attorney
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.2(iv).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(in relation to offering advice and
directions),
(in relation to removing representatives).
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.2(v).
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney Act
s 33(1)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 34(1)(b).
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
s 33(2)(b).
The Board’s
submission commented, however, that it may use its powers to amend an instrument
to appoint a substitute enduring
s 33(4A)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
The section does not
require the applicant to have ‘a proper interest in the matter’ as
is required for other applications
under the Act.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
The section does not refer to the
Board being able to make ‘any orders or directions that it could make in
relation to hearing
an application for administration or guardianship’, as
is included elsewhere.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
This includes where the
interests of the adult have not been adequately protected, they have neglected
their duties, or abused their
powers, or contravened the Act:
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.3(i).
An attendee at a Carers
Tasmania facilitated meeting commented that doing something contrary to the
represented person’s interests
shouldn’t be as minor as something
like failing to put sugar in their tea.
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) s 117;
Advance Personal Planning Act 2016
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
Currently in
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
provisions are discussed below at [12.8.32]–[12.3.34].
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
ss 37(1)(b)
Powers of Attorney
(Tas) provides that an enduring power of attorney is
automatically revoked if the donor dies, the donor and the attorney cease to
married, or parties to a registered personal relationship under the
Relationships Act 2003
(Tas), or upon an attorney being subject to a
mental incapacity:
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
NSWLRC has recently endorsed this approach: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 8.18.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
[4.6.8]–[4.6.15].
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.3(ii).
Trustee’s submission stated on the other hand that the ‘Public
Trustee takes the view that death does not
constitute revocation but rather
expiration of the order.’
Attorney Act 2006
(ACT) ch 5.
[4.6.8]–[4.6.15].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship Act
Guardianship of Adults 2016
(NT) s 92(1).
Guardianship of Adults
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.3(iii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardian reports that she receives few requests from the Board to investigate
matters, with the Board undertaking that
function. The Public Guardian has
expressed a view
that this function should be one for the Public
Guardian to perform, rather than the Board as practice has developed: OPG, above
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Trustee and Guardian
(NSW) pt 4.5 div 2;
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 58(1);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.4(i).
Related to this point,
Speak Out submitted that ‘[s]ome of us think people who get paid
shouldn’t be administrators.
you shouldn’t pay money for this
service when you don’t have much money.’
In a form approved by the
board and verified by statutory declaration signed by the administrator with
such other evidence as the
board may require:
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
advises that failure to submit receipts and statements within three months of
the first request will trigger an automatic
review hearing: Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.4(ii).
Board, OPG, members of
the Elder Law Committee, Keith Anderson. Four responses to this question did not
directly answer the issue
of the frequency of provision of accounts
[12.6.9]–[12.6.10].
Although this may be
QLRC, above n
ACTLRAC, above n
, Recommendation 8.2. See also VLRC, above n
, [16.123]–[16.125].
ACTLRAC, above n
, Recommendation 8.3.
NSWRLC, above n
Powers of Attorney Act
QLRC, above n
, Recommendation 16-16.
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.5.
Recommendation 18.1.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Ibid sch 3.
It is noted that the
Board’s factsheet about enduring guardianship gives an example of a donor
providing a condition that
‘[w]hen my guardian assumes his or her role, I
direct my guardian to advise my attorney [name] of my condition so that they
arrange for my Enduring Power of Attorney to take effect.’: Guardianship
and Administration Board,
Enduring Guardianship Infosheet
www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/207619/Enduring_Guardian_infosheet_Oct_2014.pdf>.
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.6.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, above n
Ibid [3.106].
Elder Abuse
Discussion Paper 83 (2016) Question 5-2.
ALRC, above n
, 198, [5.177].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 32(2)(d).
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 5-1(g).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 63(3)(b).
In a form approved by the Board,
verified by statutory declaration with any required supporting evidence:
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.7.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
art 12(4). See also ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.8.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
. The NSWLRC recommended that the
tribunal need to consider whether there is still a need for the order, whether
the representative
is still eligible and suitable, and whether the
representative is meeting their responsibilities and carrying out their required
functions: NSWLRC, above n
Recommendation 9.17.
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.9.
Referring to the
decisions of
B (Administration) (Guardianship)
[2009] TASGAB 19
HFO (Review of Administration)
[2012] TASGAB 6.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
art 12(4). See also ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
This is consistent with
the ALRC’s,
Elder Abuse
Final Report, Recommendation 5-1(d): see,
ALRC, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
–(c). This is equivalent to the
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
(Tas) sch 3.
ALRC, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
ss 32C(1)(a)
–(c). This is equivalent to
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
ss 21(1)(b)
(1)(d)(ii).
Guardianship Act
s 17(1)(b).
The NSWLRC has recently recommended that the
assessment should be based upon whether the proposed representative has or may
a conflict of interest in relation to any of the decisions referred to in
the order, and will be aware of and respond appropriately
to any conflicts:
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld)s 15(1)(c).
Adult Guardianship and
Trusteeship Act 2008
(Alberta) ss 28(2), 49(2).
Ibid s 49(3).
QLRC, above n
, Recommendation 14-9.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 288.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.13(ii).
See Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.13(i).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
ss 21(1)(b)
(1)(d)(ii).
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
Guardianship and Administration Act
s 15(1)(c).
Adult Guardianship
and Trusteeship Act 2008
(Alberta) s 49(3).
QLRC, above n
, Recommendation 14-9;
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 32(5)(b).
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 288.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney Act
ss 31(3)(a)
Guardianship of Adults
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 47.
Ibid cl 61(4)(b).
Powers of Attorney Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.14.
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 47.
See Recommendation
See [12.8.3].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Note that the NSWLRC has recently
recommended that a person at or above the age of 16 could be appointed as a
representative where
they are the person’s primary carer, are already
supporting the person or making decisions, and that the proposed functions
consistent with their decision-making abilities: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 9.5(2)(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 54(1)(d).
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.10.
Ibid Question 7.11.
Registration to
Work with Vulnerable People Act 2013
Registration to Work with
Vulnerable People Regulations 2014
(Tas), pt 2. See also Consumer, Building
and Occupational Services, Registering to work with vulnerable Tasmanians,
Tasmanian Government
https://www.cbos.tas.gov.au/topics/licensing-and-registration/registrations/work-with-vulnerable-people/vulnerable-adults
The registration of representatives was not specifically referred to in the
Tasmanian Government’s Consultation Report:
Office of the Deputy
Secretary, Human Services, Department of Health and Human Services, Tasmanian
Government,
A Working with Children and other Vulnerable People Checking
System for Tasmania: Consultation Report
(April 2010).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
The NSWLRC has recently made
recommendations that a person at or above the age of 16 could be appointed as a
representative where
they are the person’s primary carer, are already
supporting the person or making decisions, and that the proposed functions
consistent with their decision-making abilities: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 9.5(2)(b);
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 32(3)(b).
[4.3.10]–[4.3.16].
See Recommendation
BND (Review of
Administration)
[2012] TASGAB 3
HFO (Review of Administration)
[2012] TASGAB 6.
Sixty-eight per cent of all appointments of administrators in
2016–2017 appointed the Public Trustee: Guardianship and Administration
Board, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 179.
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 32(3)(c).
Guardianship Act
The NSWLRC have recently endorsed this approach: NSWLRC,
, Recommendation 9.3(3).
Guardianship of Adults
Public Trustee and
Guardian Act 1985
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.12.
Referring to the
Holt v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, 242 (Kirby
ALRC, above n
Convention Committee,
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Children Young Persons
and their Families Act 1997
(Tas) s 14.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.15.
Supreme Court Rules
(Tas) r 381.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(6)–(7), and
–(3) in relation to
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law sch 5, cl 2(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Mental Health Act
provides that:
‘Evidence given before the Tribunal is not admissible in any civil or
criminal proceedings other than –
(a) proceedings for an offence against this Act; or
(b) proceedings for an offence committed at, or arising out of, a hearing
before the Tribunal; or
(c) any other proceedings under this Act; or
(d) proceedings under the
Criminal Justice (Mental Impairment) Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(e) proceedings where another Act specifically allows or requires the
admission of that evidence.’
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.15.
The Board, the Public
Trustee, members of the Elder Law and Succession Committee of the Law
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
of sch 1 cl 37A.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.15.
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 275.
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.15.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
–(3) in relation to enduring
guardians, ibid
in relation to the Board, Public Trustee and private
administrators. There are no provisions in relation to Board-appointed
For relevant provisions, see Appendix 9 of the Issues Paper (TLRI,
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Refer to the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See, for example,
Criminal Code 1924
(Tas) ch XVI.
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 78(1);
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
(NT) s 78(3);
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
Higher penalties apply if the person does so with the intention of
obtaining a benefit for themselves or others:
Advance Personal Planning Act
(NT) s 79(2);
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Guardianship of Adults Act
ALRC, above n
, [4.20], [4.35]–[4.40].
VLRC, above n
, Recommendations 305–314.
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Powers of Attorney Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.16.
See Council of
Attorneys-General, ‘Communiqué Council of Attorneys-General’
(8 June 2018)
https://www.ag.gov.au/About/CommitteesandCouncils/Council-of-Attorneys-General/Documents/Council-of-Attorneys-General-communique-June-2018.pdf
See also Council of Attorneys-General, ‘Communique Council of
Attorneys-General’ (1 December 2017)
<https://www.ag.gov.au/About/CommitteesandCouncils/Council-of-Attorneys-General/Documents/Council-of-Attorneys-General-communique-December-2017.pdf>.
ALRC, above n
[5.82]–[5.83].
Ibid [5.89].
Ibid [5.88].
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney and Agency Act 1984
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
Guardianship of Adults Act
The ALRC noted that this may not be as easy to implement in Tasmania without
a civil and administrative tribunal: ALRC, above n
, [5.88]. Although, the move to a single
Civil and Administrative Appeals Tribunal in Tasmania is the subject of a
separate review.
The TLRI understands that recommendations are being considered
by Parliament.
Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
, 9. At the
time of writing, an equivalent acknowledgment is being developed for guardians.
ALRC, above n
, [10.16], Recommendation 10-1; VLRC, above n
, Recommendations 295, 296.
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Ireland) s 38(11).
ALRC, above n
TLRI, above n
, Question 7.17.
Council on the Ageing
Tasmania, Equal Opportunity Tasmania, University of Tasmania and Tasmania Law
Reform Institute, above n
Ibid Recommendation
A Charter of
Rights for Tasmania
, Report No 10 (October 2007).
Equal Opportunity
Tasmania, Council on the Ageing Tasmania, University of Tasmania and Tasmania
Law Reform Institute, above n 4,
Recommendation 5.
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 14.1.
2018 TASCD 274
Ibid [186].
Ibid [197].
Review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
See also discussion
at [16.2.2]; Wendy Lacey, ‘Neglectful to the Point of cruelty? Elder abuse
and the rights of older persons
in Australia’ (2014) 34
Further discussion is
contained in the ALRC’s Elder Abuse Final Report, Chapter 14.
Article 10 also
records the right to life:
Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
For example,
Medical Treatment Planning and Decision Act 2016
Treatment (Health Directions) Act 2006
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
In 2016, Madeline
Ogilvie introduced the Care and Consent to Medical Treatment Bill 2016 before
Parliament. The Bill separates the
provisions that are currently in the Act in
relation to consent to treatment into separate legislation. The Bill was read
first time by the House of Assembly in April 2016: see
http://www.parliament.tas.gov.au/bills/Bills2016/19_of_2016.htm
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.1.
Guardianship Board.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
It is also part of
the Supreme Court’s inherent
parens patriae
Mental Health Act
The NSWLRC has recommended that legislation confirm that
it does not limit the Supreme Court’s inherent jurisdiction: NSWLRC,
, Recommendation 15.1.
Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Annual Report
Guardianship
and Administration Board,
Annual Report 2012–2013;
Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Annual Report
Guardianship and Administration Board,
Annual Report
Guardianship and Administration Board,
Guardianship and Administration Board,
Referring to
paragraphs 4, 5, and 6.
In New South Wales,
the provisions apply only to people at or over the age of 16 years:
Guardianship Act 1987
s 34(1)(a).
Family Law Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.2(i).
Note that the Interim
Children’s Commissioner expressed reservations about forming a concluded
view, and that there is a need
to ensure that the outcome is not an inadvertent
lessening of the rights of children, commenting: ‘It is important to
acknowledge
that consideration of important policy issues relating to consent to
medical treatment is complicated by the challenges involved
in gaining a full
picture of the complex legal situation as it relates specifically to children.
It may, for example, be that proposals
I put forward might inadvertently lead to
a lessening of protections for children with disability. As the provision of
legal advice
is not within my functions, I leave it to those with relevant legal
expertise to identify and resolve any potential unintended consequences
...’ He also stated that: ‘In some respects it is difficult to
comment on the current application of the G&A Act
to children and young
people, or on options for reform, without a clear understanding of the way in
which its provisions regarding
consent to medical and dental treatment interact
with the jurisdiction of the Family Court.’
NC (Medical
[2014] TASGAB 15
(21 July 2014).
[1994] HCA 20
(1994) 181 CLR 583.
Recommendations 6.1,
competence’ is where a ‘child achieves a sufficient understanding
and intelligence to enable him or her
to understand fully what is proposed. It
will be a question of fact whether a child seeking advice has sufficient
understanding of
what is involved to give a consent valid in law:
West Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority
[1985] UKHL 7
[1986] AC 112.
[2017] FamCAFC 258
(30 November 2017).
Ibid 164 (Thackray,
Strickland, and Murphy JJ). This altered the prior decision of the Full Court of
the Family Court in the case
[2013] FamCAFC 110
provided that court authorisation was required where a child is not
competent to give informed consent.
See discussion at
ibid 152–163. Note that the
Mental Health Act
excludes treatments
intended to render a person permanently infertile from the definition of
‘treatment’ governed by
the Act: see
Mental Health Act 2013
for definition of mental illness, and
definition of treatment.
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(Tas) therefore applies,
rather than the
Mental Health Act
competence and therefore unable to provide one’s own
consent to treatment
Without the ability
to understand the general nature and effect of the proposed treatment or
indicate whether or not they consent:
Guardianship and Administration Act
NC (Medical
[2014] TASGAB 15
(21 July 2014) 6.
[2013] FamCAFC 110.
[2017] FamCAFC 258
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.2(ii).
Review of the
Disability Services Act
, 25–26, Recommendation 1.
Children Young
Persons and Their Families Act 1997
See for example
Family Law Act 1975
See Recommendations
3.3 and 11.2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Recommendation 6.3.
This approach is endorsed in relation to assessing a person’s
decision-making abilities in relation to
consent to medical treatment in N
Rendina et al, ‘
Substitute consent for nursing home residents
prescribed psychotic medication
’ (2009) 24
International Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry
Mental Health Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.3.
Recommendation
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.4(i).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See [13.6].
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 53(1)(c).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship and Administration
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
s 13(1)(d).
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.5.
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 53(2).
[13.4.11]–[13.4.22].
See [14.6].
[13.3.29]–[13.3.44].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
, definition of ‘medical
treatment’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 41(1)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration
Regulations 2017
(Tas) reg 12.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.4(ii).
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 50(1)(b).
Ibid s 56(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 41(1)(d).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The NSWLRC has recently made a
similar recommendation: NSWLRC, above n
Recommendation 10.17(2)(a).
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship Act
The NSWLRC has endorsed this approach: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 10.16. The tribunal can also
give directions to the person responsible in Queensland:
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 81(1)(d).
Mental Health Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 11.1.
Recommendation
OPG, MIGA, PCT.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
sch 4 – definition of ‘object’.
TLRI, above n
, Question 11.1.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
, definition
of ‘person responsible.’
See [14.5.8].
As at 30 June 2017,
there were 28 844 registered enduring guardians in Tasmania: Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
also Ashby and Thornton, above n
See [14.5.8].
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.7.
The definition of
‘special treatment’ is considered later in this Part.
See [14.6].
See [13.7.43].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) s 63(2).
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 209.
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.10.
Recommendations 3.3,
It should be
acknowledged, however, that on average over the last five years, only 3.8
applications for consent to treatment have
been made to the Board: Guardianship
and Administration Board, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Refer to [15.3]
Refer to [14.4.54]
below and Recommendation 14.6.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Civil Liability Act
provides a duty for medical practitioners to warn of risks.
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
Guardianship Act 1987
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.11.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Note that when the Board gives
consent, it must also be satisfied that the treatment is otherwise lawful.
This is not part of
the test that applies to persons responsible.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 61(1).
Ibid s 61(2).
Ibid s 61(4).
Ibid s 61(3). A
similar approach has recently been endorsed by the NSWRLC which recommend that
persons responsible and the tribunal
need to give effect to a patient’s
will and preference (referring to their Recommendation 5.4) whilst having regard
patient’s condition, courses of health care available, the general
nature and effect of those courses of health care, the nature
and degree of any
significant risks associated with those courses of health care, and the reason
why the health practitioner making
the request for consent considers that the
particular course of health care ought to be carried out: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendations 10.22, 10.23, 10.24.
Ibid s 61(4).
In South Australia, a
person responsible must make a decision that, as far as is reasonably
practicable, reflects the decision that
the patient would have made for
themselves in the circumstances:
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative
Care Act 1995
A similar provision applies in the Northern
Advance Personal Planning Act 2016
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.12.
Ibid Question
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 59.
See [11.4.10].
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.15.
Four supported this
approach, and one expressed views either way noting that the emphasis should be
upon assessing what the patient
would likely do and want.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
definition of ‘special treatment’.
Criminal Code
A person who intentionally or recklessly
performs a termination on a woman without the woman’s consent, whether or
not the woman
suffers any other harm, is guilty of a crime.
Charge: Termination without woman’s consent.
(2) No prosecution is to be instituted
against a medical practitioner who performs a termination on a woman if the
woman is incapable
of giving consent and the termination is –
(a) performed in good faith and with
reasonable care and skill; and
(b) is for the woman’s benefit;
(c) is reasonable having regard to all
the circumstances.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
, definition
of ‘special treatment’.
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations 2017
(Tas) reg 11.
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.13.
National Seniors
Australia, Tasmanian Policy Advisory Group.
See [17.4].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
, definition of ‘special
treatment’.
Defined to mean
female person of any age:
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 178E(1).
Ibid s 178E(2).
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
s 63(3)(b).
Ibid s 62(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
, definition of ‘special
treatment’.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
World Health
Organisation,
Eliminating Forced, Coercive and otherwise Involuntary
Sterilisation: An Interagency Statement
Human Rights
Concluding observations on the sixth periodic report of
, UN Doc CCPR/C/AUS/CO/6 (9 November 2017) 23.
Senate Community
Affairs References Committee, above n
Ibid Recommendation 6.
Ibid Recommendation
Ibid Recommendation 9.
representative should not be their family or carer: Recommendation 13. Legal
representation for sterilisation matters
is provided in the ACT: see
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
Senate Community
Affairs References Committee, above n
Recommendations 14, 22.
Ibid Recommendation
28. Presently, the
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) provides that a person
who takes, or arranges for a child to be taken, overseas with the intention of
performing female genital
mutilation of that child is guilty of a crime:
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 178B. An exception applies where it is for
genuine therapeutic purposes or a sexual reassignment procedure: ibid s
Senate Community
Affairs References Committee, above n
Recommendations 5, 19.
Protocol for
Special Medical Procedures (Sterilisation)
(6 May 2009)
[5.16]–[5.17].
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
, 73 (Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
Recommendation
Guardianship and Administration Council, ‘Australian Sterilisation Data
Report: Report on tribunal and board-approved
sterilisation of adults with
cognitive impairment’ (1 July 2016 – 30 June 2017)
https://agac.org.au/images/stories/agac-sterilisation-data-rep-2016-2017.pdf>
Australian Guardianship and Administration Council, ‘Australian
Sterilisation Data Report: Report on tribunal and board-approved
sterilisation
of adults with cognitive impairment’ (September 2016)
<https://agac.org.au/images/stories/agac-ster-data-rep-2016.pdf>.
NC (Medical
[2014] TASGAB 15
(21 July 2014) 6.
See [13.2.14].
[2017] FamCAFC 258
(30 November 2017).
Ibid 152 (Thackray,
Strickland, and Murphy JJ).
See discussion at ibid
152–163. Note that the
Mental Health Act
excludes treatments
intended to render a person permanently infertile from the definition of
‘treatment’ governed by
the Act: see
Mental Health Act 2013
for definition of mental illness and
for definition of
treatment. The
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(Tas) therefore
applies rather than the
Mental Health Act
[2017] FamCAFC 258
(30 November 2017) 164 (Thackray, Strickland, and Murphy JJ).
This altered the prior decision of the Full Court of the Family Court
[2013] FamCAFC 110
which provided that court
authorisation was required where a child is not
competent to give
informed consent.
[2017] FamCAFC 258
(30 November 2017) 167 (Thackray, Strickland, and Murphy
Human Rights
Committee, above n
Available at Equal
Opportunity Tasmania
http://equalopportunity.tas.gov.au/news_and_events/report_papers_submissions
Senate Community
Affairs References Committee, above n
Ibid Recommendation
Ibid Recommendation
Ibid Recommendation
Recommendation
Australian Human
Rights Commission,
Protecting the Human Rights of People Born with Variations
in Sex Characteristics in the Context of Medical Interventions
, Consultation
Paper (July 2018). This paper draws on earlier reports of the Australian Human
Rights Commission and Senate Community
Affairs References Committee: Australian
Human Rights Commission,
Resilient Individuals: Sexual Orientation, Gender
Identity & Intersex Rights
(2015); Senate Community Affairs References
Committee, above n
See [13.2].
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.14(ii).
Ibid Question
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 163.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.17.
See [15.4.16].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See for example,
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.18.
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 66; N M Ries, K A Thompson
and M Lowe, ‘Including People with Dementia in Research: An Analysis of
Ethical and Legal Rules and Recommendations for Reform’ (2017)
Journal of Bioethical Inquiry
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
NHMRC, Australian
Research Council Australian Vice-Chancellors’ Committee,
Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research
(2007) 65–66.
Guardianship Act
(NSW) div 4A;
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Medical Treatment Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Chair, Tasmania
Health and Medical Human Research Ethics Committee.
Director, The Wicking
Centre, Menzies Centre for Medical Research.
Lecturer in law and
medicine at the University of Tasmania and Deputy Chair of the Tasmanian Health
and Medical Human Research Ethics
Committee (HREC). Submission lodged in Dr
Eckstein’s personal capacity and not on behalf of the HREC.
Associate Professor
Jo Dickinson and Professor James Vickers also gave another example, commenting
that physiotherapy does not currently
fit within the existing definition of
‘medical treatment’ in the Act. It is noted that Recommendation 9.4
would resolve
this, proposing that the term ‘health care and
treatment’ be used, with the term defined to include a range of health
professions including physiotherapy.
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.20.
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
Medical Treatment Planning and Decisions Act
Referring to the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 42T.
In Victoria, a person
responsible can apply to the tribunal for directions:
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
s 75(b)(i).
Recommendation
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
Medical Treatment Planning
and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) s 77.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 11.2(b).
That complies with the
NHMRC guidelines and has ethics approval.
Guardianship Act
QLRC, above n
, Recommendations 13-7(a), 13-2.
See Ries, Thompson and
Lowe, above n
This Act provides a
test of whether ‘the research might help the ward; or if the research
might not help the ward but might
than minimal risk of harm to the ward.’ This is explained to mean that
is evidence ‘that the ward would have elected to participate in such
research; and the proposed research was reviewed and approved
by the research
and human rights committee of the institution conducting the research.’
Exceptions apply where there is evidence
that the individual would never have
consented to the research participation.
Paragraph 4.5.6 of
the National Statement: ‘Where the impairment, disability, or illness is
temporary or episodic, an attempt
should be made to seek consent at a time when
the condition does not interfere with the person’s capacity to give
Paragraph 4.5.11 of
the National Statement: ‘Refusal or reluctance to participate in a
research project by a person with a
disability, or a mental illness should be
respected.’
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 72(3)(a).
Guardianship Act
See [18.2.32].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 2, cl 5(2);
Advance Care Directives Act
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
(ACT) Dictionary
definition of ‘health care’;
Guardianship of Adults Act 2016
definition of ‘health care action’.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
(Qld) sch 2, cl 5(2);
Powers of Attorney Act
(ACT) Dictionary definition of ‘health care’.
NSWLR above
, Recommendation 10.14.
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.21(i).
PCT, MIGA, Professors
Ben White and Lindy Willmott.
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.21(ii), (iii).
See Recommendations
9.4, 13.9, 14.3.
See in particular
Recommendation 5.6.
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.22.
Four submissions
raised the need for education.
Recommendation 5.9
proposes that health care professionals and operators of health facilities have
a duty to make reasonable enquiries
to ascertain whether a patient has an ACD or
instrument.
See [5.5.44].
See [18.2.19].
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Guardianship
and Administration Act 2000
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
See [12.4].
See Recommendation
Recommendation
The Board can deal
with disputes about the activities of a guardian when acting as the person
responsible in the same manner as dealing
with other complaints in relation to
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 15(1)(j).
s 4(1)(c)(i).
Whilst the Board has
power under s 44(4) of the Act to direct that treatment not be started, or be
stopped pending it hearing an
application, this only applies to situations
‘where the treatment cannot be performed without that consent’.
TLRI, above n
, Question 11.3.
Board, OPG, MIGA.
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
A person who is a
guardian can do so.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
TLRI, above n
, Question 11.2.
See [12.8.32].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.8(ii).
Tasmania’s submission is taken as implicit support for this option.
See [14.5.43].
Recommendation
Recommendation
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
BND (Review of
Administration)
[2012] TASGAB 3.
Annual Report
, 11 (‘OPG 2016’).
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Guardianship Act 1987
s 33A(4)(a).
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative
Care Act 1995
(SA), definition of ‘person responsible’
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.9.
The Board, OPG,
OPMHS, MIGA, Keith Anderson.
Referring to
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
, despite the terms of
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See [15.3.30].
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Guardianship Act 1987
s 33A(4)(a).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Relationships Act
have registered their relationship, then that registration is proof of their
relationship:
If they have not registered their relationship, then
whether they are in a significant relationship is assessed in light of a range
of relevant factors:
And not themselves
under guardianship:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
‘spouse’ for the purposes of intestacy (where a person dies without
a valid Will), a spouse must have been in
a relationship with the deceased for a
continuous period of at least two years, or the relationship resulted in the
birth of a child:
Intestacy Act 2010
Definition of
Guardianship Act 1987
Coroners Act
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) s 110ZSD(3).
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
The NSWLRC has recently made the same
recommendation: NSWLRC, above n
Recommendation 10.21.
Definition of
‘prescribed relative’,
Guardianship and Administration Act
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act
Coroners Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.8(i).
Human Tissue Act
ss 26(2)(a)
definition of ‘senior available next of
Treatment Planning and Decision Act
(Vic), adopting the term
‘medical treatment decision-maker’.
Coroners Act
Consistent with the
Coroners Act
Coroners Act 1995
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) s 63(1).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
Powers of Attorney
(Qld) s 63(1);
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
s 110ZD(2)(c)
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 37(1).
Equivalent requirements are imposed for medical treatment decisions makers:
Medical Treatment Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) ss 28(2), 55(1).
The NSWLRC has recently made the same recommendation. They also propose that the
person is the person responsible
only if they have not declined to make a
decision: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation
Coroners Act
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
Guardianship Act
s 33A(5)(a).
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.8(iii).
This alternative has
been considered elsewhere in this report, see [5.5.40].
Dr Rick McAllister,
Clinical Research Coordinator, Department of Critical Care Medicine, Royal
Hobart Hospital.
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decision Act 2016
(Vic) ss 65, 66.
Ibid s 66(2).
Ibid s 66(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.8(iv).
Recommendation
The Roy Fagan Centre
is a secure treatment and care facilities for older persons with dementia,
cognitive disabilities and mental
health issues.
OPG, above n
Anita Smith, former
President of the Board, has commented that: ‘The practice at the Roy Fagan
Centre reflects national, if
not world’s, best practice because it (a)
recognises the residents as being ‘subjects of rights’ rather than
of care’, (b) provides a clear source of lawful authority
for the detention of all residents, (c) gives an opportunity for
scrutiny of the decision to detain, (d) gives the resident and their families
and friends an opportunity to attend a hearing
to put their perspective
regarding the detention and (e) sets in place an automatic system for review and
monitoring by an external
person or agency regarding the ongoing detention of
people with dementia. In other words, it does not take advantage of the
lack of understanding of their detention and it does not
‘take the risk’ that no-one will complain. The practice of the
Fagan Centre is highly consistent with criminal, civil and human rights
laws.’: Anita Smith,
Detention of people with dementia in secure
facilities in State care in Tasmania
, Guardianship and Administration Board,
https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/203967/Detention_of_people_with_dementia_in_secure_facilities.doc_-_Updated_31.8.17.pdf
See Recommendation
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See [15.3].
See discussion at
See discussion at
See Recommendation
Smith, Molly
2017 TASCD 444
(17 November 2017) 30–31.
VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 241.
Ibid Recommendation
Ibid Recommendation
Ibid Recommendation
254, for its rationales, see Chapter 15, 318–348.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
The section enables
an application under the relevant section to be heard at the same time as an
application for the appointment
of a guardian: ibid
Other than a
correctional institution or other place in which persons charged with or
convicted of offences may be detained or any
part of an approved treatment
centre under the
Mental Health Act
TLRI, above n
, Question 10.19.
A Groves et al,
The Oakden Report
(2017) Adelaide, South Australia: SA Health, Department
for Health and Ageing. See also the Hon Bruce Lander QC,
Oakden: A Shameful
Chapter in South Australia’s History
(28 February 2018).
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, General Comment No. 5;
General comment
on article 19: Living independently and being included in the community
Doc CRPD/C/18/1 (29 August 2017) [9].
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Ibid art 14.
Smith, above n
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
See [12.8].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Mental Health Act
ss 25(b)(ii)
See Recommendation
11.2 and discussion at [11.4.31].
Mental Health Act
Corrections Act
Disability Services
The NDIS Safeguarding Framework provides that there
will be an evaluation of the use of community visitor programs considered by
Disability Reform Council in relation to their use under the NDIS: Department of
Social Services, Government of Australia,
NDIS Quality and Safeguarding
(9 December 2016)
https://www.dss.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/04_2017/ndis_quality_and_safeguarding_framework_final.pdf
Review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
Australian Human
Rights Commission, above n
Smith and Rigby,
Australian Human
Rights Commission,
OPCAT in Australia
Consultation Paper: Stage 2
(June 2018) 3 <
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/document/publication/20180618_OPCAT_Stage2_ConsultationPaper_Interim_report.pdf
Ibid 33–34.
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.2.
Mental Health Act
Australian Human
Rights Commission, above n
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 38(2).
Ibid s 38(3).
TLRI, above n
, Question 11.4.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Similar protection applies in the
Northern Territory: see
Advance Personal Planning Act 2016
Medical Treatment
Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Advance Personal
Planning Act 2016
TLRI, above n
, Question 11.5.
See Recommendation
TLRI, above n
, Question 11.6.
Recommendation 13.8(2).
Recommendation 13.8(1).
Parts 8 and 12.
Disability Services
Powers of Attorney Act 2000
(Tas), and the
See for example
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.6.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See [13.3.4].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
When hearing an application for
consent to medical or dental treatment, the Board may also make an emergency
order for the appointment
of a guardian or administrator:
s 65(4)(b).
s 65(4)(a).
2016–2017, the Board extended 97 emergency guardianship orders and 86
emergency administration orders (total 183, or 53
per cent of the emergency
orders made): Guardianship and Administration Board, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
See OPG, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 65(4)(c).
Recommendation
Applying for an
Emergency Guardianship or Administration Order
, Guardianship and
Administration Board,
http://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/176786/What_is_an_emergency_docx_2.pdf
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
See also Guardianship and
Administration and Other Legislative Amendment Bill 2018 (Queensland) cl 34
which proposes amendment to
this section to also require the tribunal to be
satisfied that the proposed represented person has, or may have, impaired
And other formal
requirements outlined in
Guardianship and Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cls 24
(details to be included with application), 26 (the need for notice), 27
(requirements for notices), 29 (for the proposed
represented person to attend
the hearing).
Guardianship and
Administration Bill 2018
(Vic) cl 36(1).
Ibid cl 36(2).
Ibid cl 36(1). See cl
30 for the test to appoint an administrator or guardian.
Guardianship of
Adults Act 2016
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 9.9(1).
Ibid Recommendation
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
This issue was not considered
in the ACT’s recent review: see ACTLRAC, above n
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Guardianship Act
NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 9.9(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Initially, their Act provided a 28
day period, consistent with Tasmania. In 2003, reform provided a combined
maximum period of six
months in which an interim order may be made and renewed.
In 2007, the Act was changed again to provide a three month maximum period,
the tribunal having power to renew an order in exceptional circumstances: QLRC,
, [20.38]–[20.43].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
QLRC, above n
, [20.132], [20.139].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and Administration Bill
(Vic) cl 36(3).
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.7.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
The applicant,
proposed represented person or represented person, the Public Guardian, their
guardian (if any), their administrator
(if any), if it relates to medical or
dental treatment then the registered practitioner proposed to carry out the
treatment, and
any other person that the Board is satisfied has a proper
interest in the matter:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Ibid. Requirements for
notice are provided in s 69(2) of the Act, with notice to be able to be given by
post or any other method
the Board considers appropriate: s 70.
Ibid s 71(b).
Advance Care
Directives Act 2013
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 118(4)(b).
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.1.
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.7(ii).
See discussion at
Recommendation
See [12.8.32].
Practice Direction
– Who is a ‘party’ to an application before the Board
(21 June 2010)
https://www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/173275/Who_is_a_Party_for_GAB_proceedings.pdf
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 60B;
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(Vic) s 59.
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.2.
Practice Direction,
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See [12.9.10].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.5.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Mental Health
(Tas) sch 4,
[8.2.10]–[8.2.17].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
practitioner provided pursuant to a scheme established by the Minister.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.3.
Social Work Services
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.4.
One submission stated
that they considered that it was an ‘absolute imperative’ that where
a person does not have an
attorney acting on their behalf, that the person have
an independent advocate to advocate on their behalf, including having a role
receive and explain information from residential care facilities or the Board.
TLRI, Facilitating
Equal Access to Justice: An Intermediary/Communication Assistant Scheme for
Tasmania, Final Report No 23 (January
Ibid [1.5.2].
See [12.5],
See [12.9.22].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
John Chesterman,
Responding to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect: Improving our
protection of at-risk adults (Report for
the Winston Churchill Memorial Trust of
Australia, 2013) 78.
Office of the Public
Advocate (Victoria),
Submission to the Australian Law Reform Commission in
Response to the Elder Abuse Issue Paper
(August 2016).
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.8.
See [15.2].
See [12.9.22].
See [12.4].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See [18.2.26].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See Recommendation
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.9.
See [12.4.37].
See [16.2.6].
TLRI, above n
, Question 8.10.
See Recommendation
See [15.4.28].
Carers Tasmania
referred the Institute to a Carers Queensland report which reportedly found that
one third of carers had been emotionally
abused, and 15 per cent physically
Queensland describes
this more directly as ‘promoting the protection of the adults from
neglect, exploitation or abuse’:
Guardianship and Administration Act
s 209(1)(b).
In 2016–2017,
the OPG fielded more than 200 telephone and email enquiries from the public:
OPG, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Recommendations 5.7,
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 15(1)(j).
relation to an official visitor scheme,
in relation to the potential use
of intermediaries.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
The OPG did not receive any requests
from the public in 2016–2017: OPG, above n
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
See Guardianship and
Administration Board, above n
See for example
Public Guardian Act 2014
The VLRC recommended that Public
Guardians have power to investigate matters of its own motion: VLRC, above n
, Recommendation 329.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(WA) s 97(1)(c);
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 16(1)(h);
Guardianship and Administration
Public Guardian Act 2014
This is consistent
with recommendations of the Legislative Council General Purpose Standing
Committee No. 2,
Enquiry into Elder Abuse in New South Wales
Recommendation 11. This was recently referred to by the Coroner as an option for
potential reform in the
Findings and Recommendations of Coroner Olivia
McTaggart following the holding of an inquest under the
Coroners Act 1995
the death of:
Janet Lois Mackozdi
2018 TASCD 274
Ibid [201].
For further discussion, see Lacey, above n
Australian Human
Rights Commission, above n
OPG 2016, above n
. See also OPG, above n
OPG 2016, above n
Terry Carney,
‘Australian Guardianship Tribunals: An adequate response to CRPD
disability rights recognition and protection
of the vulnerable over the life
course?’ (2017) 10
Journal of Ethics in Mental Health
See, for example,
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
See, for example,
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
TLRI, above n
, Question 9.1.
Public Trustee
and Guardian Act 1985
TLRI, above n
, Question 9.2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
2018 TASCD 274
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Ibid. The OPG did not
receive any requests from the public in 2016–2017: OPG, above n
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
(Tas), the Public Guardian has
power to do all things necessary or convenient to be done in connection with the
performance of his
or her functions.
Official Visitors are
members of the community whose role it is to visit facilities and check on the
rights and welfare of patients.
They receive and investigate complaints and
review the appropriateness of facilities.
Mental Health Act
Services Act 2011
Public Guardian
TLRI, above n
, Question 9.4.
See Recommendation
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 3-4.
Guardianship
and Administration Act 1995
ALRC, above n
See Recommendation
TLRI, above n
, Question 9.5.
See [15.6.4].
See [18.2.26].
TLRI, above n
, Question 9.3.
illness’ is defined as temporary, repeated or continuous ‘serious
impairment of thought (which may include
delusions)’ or ‘a serious
impairment of mood, volition, perception or cognition’:
Mental Health
For further
discussion of these issues, see Smith and Rigby, above n
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 27 September 2012, 1, 3
(Michelle O’Byrne Minister for Health, Second Reading Speech Mental Health
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.1(i).
Publice Trustee, OPG,
members Elder Law Committee, OPMHS, MHT.
See [6.11.3].
Recommendation
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.1(ii).
The Issues Paper
referenced the Department of Justice’s Discussion Paper,
Tribunal for Tasmania
which refers to one of the potential advantages of amalgamation of tribunals
being the way in which a person’s interaction
with different jurisdictions
can be dealt with more holistically. See for example at 110. For further
discussion of the potential
benefits of amalgamation of the Mental Health
Tribunal and Guardianship and Administration Board within a single Civil and
Administrative
Tribunal, see Smith and Rigby, above n
Similar views are
expressed in Smith and Rigby, above n
More information is
available at:
Disability Services Act 2011
, Department of
Health and Human Services
http://www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/disability/tasmanian_disability_services_act_2011/review
Scoping Paper
– Tasmanian
Disability Services Act 2011
, Department of Health
and Human Services
http://www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/disability/tasmanian_disability_services_act_2011/review/scoping_paper_-_tasmanian_disability_services_act_2011_review
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.3.
ALRC, above n
UN Human Rights
Council, United Nations General Assembly,
Promotion and protection of all
human rights, civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including
the right to development
, UN Doc A/HRC/36/L.25 26 (September 2017) 4.
Convention Committee,
, [35]–[36].
Australian Human
Rights Commission, above n
Queensland’s approach is also endorsed by the Queensland Office of the
Public Advocate: Queensland Office of the Public
Legal Frameworks
for the use of restrictive practices in aged care: An analysis of Australian and
international jurisdictions
(June 2017) 15.
National Framework
for Reducing and Eliminating the Use of Restrictive Practices in the Disability
Service Sector
, Australian Government (May 2013) 1.
Mental Health Act
s 57(1)(b).
ss 57(1)(b)
See for example ibid
Services Act 2011
Environmental
restrictions are modifications to a person’s environment to enable
behavioural control:
Disability Services Act 2013
(Tas) s 34.
Personal restrictions
involve physical contact of the person or other action that restricts the
person’s liberty of movement:
ibid. Note that the National Framework
provides a broader definition of restrictive interventions as including
physical, mechanical,
chemical or seclusion, see:
https://www.dss.gov.au/our-responsibilities/disability-and-carers/publications-articles/policy-research/national-framework-for-reducing-and-eliminating-the-use-of-restrictive-practices-in-the-disability-service-sector>.
Review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
Department of Social
Services, Government of Australia, above n
A device may include
any mechanical material, appliance or equipment.
‘For example, a
physical force or action lasting longer than approximately 30 seconds, that is
not a reflexive manual restraint’:
Department of Social Services,
Government of Australia, above n
citing McVilly (2008).
Review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
The Regulations
include within the class of ‘special treatments’ any treatment
involving the use of an aversive stimulus,
whether that stimulus is mechanical,
chemical, physical or otherwise:
Guardianship and Administration Regulations
(Tas) reg 11.
ALRC, above n
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.4(i).
The Board, OPG, MHT,
The OPG referred
specifically to disability and aged care sectors. NDS stated
‘[l]egislation must occur across settings including
mainstream interfaces
such as health and education, there is potential for it to apply to private
individuals as well’.
The Hon Bruce Lander
QC, above n
. ‘The consumers who
resided at the Oakden Older Persons Mental Health Service (Oakden Facility) were
some of the most frail
and vulnerable persons in our community. They did not
have a voice. They were obliged to live in a facility which could only be
as a disgrace, and in which they received very poor care. The process
and procedures were such that they were forgotten and ignored.
The State did not
provide them with the level of care that they deserved.’
ALRC, above n
, Recommendation 8-2, 256.
Senate Community
Affairs References Committee, above n
ALRC, above n
ALRC, above n
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.4(ii).
Department of Social
Services, Government of Australia, above n
Mental Health Act
Refer to [17.4.9]
Guardianship
and Administration Regulations 2017
(Tas) reg 11.
The Board’s
submission made further comments about the current test that persons responsible
must apply to give consent in
these contexts. These statements are included and
addressed in
as part of formulating the proposed Decision-Making
Review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
Refer to [14.6].
Recommendation
See [18.2.9].
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.7.
Recommendation
Recommendation
Recommendation
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.6.
Smith and Rigby, above n
, advocate the benefits of alcohol and drug
dependencies falling within the guardianship jurisdiction: at 178.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 56(2)(b).
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.7.
Mental Health Act
Disability Services Act 2011
TLRI, above n
, Question 14.5.
Convention Committee,
Australian Bureau of
Statistics, ‘Population by Age and Sex, Regions of Australia, 2016:
Guardianship and
Administration Board
OPG, above n
, 12. Note that this reflected a slight
decrease from 30 June 2016.
Guardianship and
Administration Board,
Annual Report 2015–2016
Guardianship and
Administration Board, n
OPG, above n
Public Trustee,
Annual Report 2016–2017
Legal Aid Commission
of Tasmania,
Annual Reports
https://www.legalaid.tas.gov.au/about-us/annual-reports/
Note that their reports do not provide a breakdown of the division of workload
between the mental health and guardianship jurisdictions.
See Legal Aid
Commission of Tasmania,
Annual Report 2016–2017
; Legal Aid
Commission of Tasmania,
Annual Report
TLRI, above n
, Question 1.3.
Including comments
made in group consultation meetings convened by COTA, Carers Tasmania and
Dementia Australia (Tasmania).
Seven submissions
raised this issue.
Six submissions
raised this issue.
Five submissions
raised this issue.
See for example
Two submissions
raised this issue.
Four submissions
raised this issue.
Three submissions
raised this issue.
Three submissions
raised this issue.
One submission raised
this issue.
One submission raised
this issue.
One submission raised
this issue.
See [5.5.20], [13.5],
Recommendations 5.6, 13.9.
One submission raised
this issue.
Review of the
Disability Services Act 2011
, Recommendation 16.
Protecting Older
Tasmanians from Abuse: Elder Abuse Prevention Action Plan 2015–2018
Department of Health and Human Services, Tasmanian Government.
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Australian Human
Rights Commission, above n
Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
This approach is
consistent with the NSWLRC’s recommendations: NSWLRC, above n
, Recommendation 4.2.
See [16.2.26].
See [4.7.16].
Carney, above n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.89 MB)
PDF format (4.65 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter