URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTLRAC/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
A Report on Suspended Sentences in the ACT [2010] ACTLRAC 1
Terms of Reference
Acknowledgements
Law Reform Advisory Council
LRAC members
Conduct of the reference
Amendments to the suspended sentences regime in the ACT
Suspended sentences in the ACT, in an Australian context
Assessment of the current ACT regime for suspended sentences
Recommendations and observations
Recommendations on data collection and reporting
Observations
Number of judicial officers
Offence type
Mean age of offenders
Sex of the offender
Prior criminal record
Length of sentence
Length of operational period of the suspension
Conditions of sentence
Recognisance
Reparations order
Good behaviour order
Supervision order
Other conditions
Mitigating factors
Guilty plea
Other factors
Breaches of suspended sentences
Statements of significance as to legislation or policy
Policy implications for further inquiry
A. Background to the current ACT regime for suspended sentences
A1. Pre-2006 ACT regime for suspended sentences
A1.1 Legislative provisions
Observations on their operation
A2. The 2005-6 ACT reforms
A2.1 Legislative provisions
A2.2 Breaches of a GBO
A2.3 Changes in policy and court practice
ACT Supreme Court
Table 1: Proportion of sentences which were fully suspended sentences in the ACT Supreme Court, 2001-2009
ACT Magistrates Court
Table 2: Proportion of sentences which were fully suspended sentences in the ACT Magistrates Court, 2001-2009
Imposing the sentence
Conditions and combinations for suspended sentences
Options on breach
A3. The ACT in context: suspended sentences in Australia
A3.1 Policy justification for suspended sentences generally
A3.2 Types of suspended sentencing regimes in Australia
A3.3 Principles for imposing a suspended sentence
Imprisonment as a last resort
Criteria for suspending a sentence
Restrictions on imposing a suspending a sentence
Abolition of suspended sentences
Restrictions on conditions attached to a suspended sentence
Restrictions on the orders which may be imposed in combination with a suspended sentence
Activation of the suspended sentence on a breach
ACT: differences from and similarities with other jurisdictions
B. Recent trends in the imposition of suspended sentences in the ACT
B1. ABS data
B1.1 Accuracy of the ACT data
B1.2 Observations on errors in the ACT data
B1.3 Recommendations on data collection and reporting
C. Assessment of the current ACT regime for suspended sentences
C1. Methodology
C2. Discussion
C2.1 Number of judicial officers
C2.2 Offence type
C2.3 Mean age of offenders
C2.4 Sex of the offender
C2.6 Prior criminal record
No prior record
Significant prior record
C2.7 Length of sentence
C2.8 Length of operational period of the suspension
C2.9 Conditions of sentence
Recognisance
Reparations order
Good behaviour order
Supervision order
Other conditions
C2.10 Mitigating factors cited (multiple factors possible)47
Guilty plea
Other factors
C2.11 Breaches of suspended sentences
C2.12 Statements of significance as to legislation or policy
C3. Observations
C3.1 Number of judicial officers
C3.2 Offence type
C3.3 Mean age of offenders
C3.4 Sex of the offender
C3.6 Prior criminal record
C3.7 Length of sentence
C3.8 Length of operational period of the suspension
C3.9 Conditions of sentence
Recognisance
Reparations order
Good behaviour order
Supervision order
Other conditions
C3.10 Mitigating factors
Guilty plea
Other factors
C3.11 Breaches of suspended sentences
C3.12 Statements of significance as to legislation or policy
C3.13 Policy implications for further inquiry
Appendix A: Legislative provisions governing suspended sentences in Australia53
Appendix B: References
Articles and reports
Legislation
SUSPENDED SENTENCES
ACT Law Reform Advisory Council
October 2010
This Report is current as at 31 October 2010.
© Australian Capital Territory 2010
ACT Law Reform Advisory Council Reference: LRAC 1
The ACT Law Reform Advisory Council was established on 14 October 2008 by
thee ACT Attorney General the Hon Simon Corbell MLA.
c/o ANU College of Law, Australian National University, ACT, 0200,
+61 (0)2 6125 7845
+61 (0)2 6125 0103
c/o simon.rice@anu.edu.au
www.lawreform.act.gov.au
of Reference
On 12 May 2010 The attorney General extended the terms of reference to
include an evaluation the operation of changes to the suspended
sentence regime
in the Act as a result of the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Acknowledgements
Law Reform Advisory
The ACT Law Reform Advisory Council (LRAC) was established by the ACT
Attorney General the Hon Simon Corbell MLA to provide expert
recommendations to the Attorney General on terms of reference dealing with law
reform matters referred to it.
The LRAC operates as a collaborative undertaking between the ACT Government
and the ANU College of Law at the Australian National
University. Between them
the ACT Government and the ANU College of Law provide the funds, resources,
infrastructure and staff necessary
for LRAC’s operation. Academic staff
of the ANU College of Law contribute their expertise to inquiries conducted by
LRAC members
Members of LRAC are appointed by the Attorney General for a period of up to
three years, on the basis of their relevant experience
and expertise. Members
contribute to the work of LRAC on a voluntary basis.
Members of LRAC during the period of the reference on suspended sentences
Ms Carol Benda
Assistant Commissioner Roman Quaedvlieg (from September 2010)
Mr Ron Cahill (to November 2009)
Mr Andrew Crockett
Justice Richard Refshauge
Ms Karen Fryar (from December 2009)
Ms Agata Pukiewicz
Mr John Hinchey (to May 2010)
Professor Murray Raff
Ms Kate McMullan
Mr Simon Rice, OAM (Chair)
Professor John McMillan (to
Mr John Roe (to February 2010)
Mr Athol Opas
Mr Peter Sutherland
Deputy Commissioner Michael Phelan
Ms Helen Watchirs, OAM
Mr Stuart Pilkinton
Ms Veronica Wensing
Mr Jon White
Conduct of the reference
The suspended sentence reference was led by Simon Rice under the oversight of
the Council as a whole.
Principal Research Officer for the reference was Dr Lorana Bartels. Mr
Arjuna Dibley was Research Assistant. Ms Wendy Kukulies-Smith
College of Law provided expert advice and comments. We are grateful to
Professor Kate Warner of the University of Tasmania
and the Tasmanian Law reform
Institute, and Mr Mr George Zdenkowski for their advice.
We received willing and invaluable assistance from Ms Annie Glover, ACT
Supreme Court Registrar; Ms Gaeleen Curley, ACT Supreme Court
List Clerk, and Mr
Rick Clarke, ACT DPP Librarian. We are grateful to Mr Jon White for making
available internal research conducted
by the office of the ACT DPP.
Staff of the ACT Department of Justice and Community Safety, and of the ANU
College of Law, provided administrative and technical
The report was written by Dr Lorana Bartels and Simon Rice.
Amendments to the
suspended sentences regime in the ACT
Further, the regime for suspended sentences in the ACT is relatively recent,
having been the subject of amendment in 2006 as a result
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
(ACT). The nature of those amendments is described in more detail in Part
The terminology used for sentencing has been modernised and simplified,
replacing recognisance with ‘good behaviour order’
legislation requires a GBO to be made for at least the period for which the
sentence is suspended (though it can be longer).
The legislation specifies how
the sentencing option should be applied and what conditions could attach to the
GBO. As well, the
legislation specifies how a court can deal with a breach of a
GBO associated with a suspended sentence.
The rate of imposition of fully suspended sentences in the ACT Supreme Court
declined from 31% in 2001-2 to 21% in 2004-5. It increased
significantly in
2005-6, before the new Act came into effect. That level in the rate of fully
suspended sentences has been maintained
The ACT Magistrates’ Court deals with a large number of minor offences,
and a sentence of imprisonment would be appropriate
in very few such matters.
The rate of imposition of fully suspended sentences in the ACT
Magistrates’ Court almost halved
between 2003-4 and 2004-5 and has been in
gradual but steady decline since.
Suspended sentences in
the ACT, in an Australian context
The regime for suspended sentences in the ACT is different on a n umber of
counts from that in most other Australian jurisdictions.
The ACT regime, and
how it compares to other Australian jurisdictions, is set out in more detail in
The ACT’s approach to suspended sentences is consistent with most
Australian jurisdictions in reflecting the common law principle
imprisonment is a sentence of last resort.
The ACT does not set out any test for the imposition of a suspended sentence.
This is also the case in NSW, Tasmania and Western Australia.
In Queensland,
Northern Territory, South Australia the test is effectively when the court
considers it appropriate. Only in Victoria
are there mandatory factors to which
the court must have regard.
The ACT and Tasmania do not impose any restrictions on the availability of a
suspended sentence. Other jurisdictions limit the length
of the sentence and
the period for which the sentence is suspended (see Appendix A).
Suspended sentences are available for all offences in the ACT. In Victoria,
the Northern Territory and South Australia they are not
available for prescribed
serious offences.
Suspended sentences in the ACT must be accompanied by a good behaviour order
(GBO), as is the case in NSW and South Australia.
The ACT does not limit the conditions which can be attached to the GBO,
except that they must not be inconsistent with the sentencing
legislation. In
Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia, the only condition which can be
attached to a suspended sentence is the
requirement that the offender not commit
a further imprisonable offence during the operational period of the sentence.
In the Northern
Territory, a suspended sentence may be made ‘subject to
such conditions as the court thinks fit’. In Tasmania there
are mandatory
conditions to be attached to all suspended sentences.
The ACT does not limit the orders which may be ordered in combination with a
suspended sentence. In Victoria a fine is the only
sentencing order which may
be combined with a suspended sentence for a single offence, although this
restriction does not apply when
sentencing an offender for multiple offences.
In NSW, a community service order cannot be imposed in combination with a
The ACT does not have a presumption that the originally imposed suspended
sentence will be activated on a breach of the conditions
of the GBO associated
with the suspended sentence. The only other jurisdiction in Australia to not
have such a presumption is Tasmania,
although unproclaimed legislation will
change this. In all other Australian jurisdictions except the Commonwealth
there is a presumption
that the originally imposed suspended sentence will be
activated on a breach of any conditions which were imposed, although the terms
of the legislation differ.
The ABS figures show a return in 2008/9 to the previous rate of suspended
sentences in the ACT: 36%. The rate of 43.7% in 2007/8
may have been anomalous.
To get a better idea of the pattern of suspended sentencing in the ACT, it is
appropriate to wait until
ABS figures are available in early 2011 for
The ABS data is only as accurate as the source data. Our research raises
concerns about the accuracy of the ACT data. We found significant
coding errors
in recording the sentencing data in the Supreme Court Registry. As well as this
miscoding, our analysis of the ACT
sentencing remarks indicates some
inconsistency in how sentences are understood and, therefore, recorded.
Further, it appears that
essential aspects of the court’s decision are not
being recorded at all.
The errors in coding are not surprising in light of a number of factors we
identified in the recording of the data: limited resources,
shortness of time,
dependence on the record made by a judge’s associate, limited access to
judicial remarks on sentence, and
different forms of judicial expression.
Similar inconsistencies apply in other jurisdictions, making it impossible to
conduct any reliable comparison between the rates of
use of fully suspended
sentences as reported by the ABS.
We make a number of recommendations to improve data collection, set out in
the following section.
Assessment of the
current ACT regime for suspended sentences
The researchers obtained sentencing remarks for all cases of fully suspended
sentences imposed by the Supreme Court for two periods
before the legislative
amendments came into effect: January-June 2004 (‘2004a’) and
July-December 2004 (‘2004b’),
and two periods following the
legislative amendments: January-June 2007 and January-June 2010.
The data under discussion are drawn from sample periods, the numbers of cases
in which (especially for 2004a) are small. The sample
periods are snapshots of
activity and not a quantitative representation of any larger period. The
researchers are not aware, however,
of any factors which distinguish the sample
periods from other comparable periods, ie periods before the reforms for the
2004 period,
and periods after the reforms for the 2007 and 2010 periods. The
following discussion proceeds on this basis.
Observations on the data are recorded in the following section.
Recommendations and
observations
Recommendations on data
collection and reporting
For sound policy development within the ACT, it is essential that notice be
taken of the flawed basis on which the ABS sentencing
data are collected and
reported. It should be a matter of priority to rectify this issue in order to
maintain the integrity of the
Accordingly we recommend that
1. The Supreme Court Registry be resourced to take urgent steps to establish
sound administrative systems which ensure that sentencing
data is recorded
accurately and comprehensively, and in manner that is consistent with ABS
reporting requirements. In particular
we recommend the use of a template to
standardise the manner of expression of sentencing, and the collection and
reporting of sentencing
2. The Supreme Court Registry staff and staff of the judicial officers be
resourced to undertake regular training on the accurate
collection and reporting
of sentencing data, including on ABS coding.
3. The Supreme Court Registry be resourced to maintain data collection and
recording software that is compatible with ABS requirements.
4. The Supreme Court Registry be resourced to establish an electronic
available on the
Court website and/or through the AustLI website <www.austlii.edu.au>.
5. The Attorney-General consider taking advantage of the opportunity created
by systematic and reliable collection of sentencing data
to make that data
public on a regular basis.
Observations
Number of judicial
It is not appropriate on the basis of the small number of cases to draw any
inferences about the sentencing practices of judges.
Offence type
In the sample periods, assault dominates as the offence type for which such
sentences are imposed.
Mean age of offenders
The data do not suggest any pattern in an offender’s age as a factor in
imposing a suspended sentence.
In the absence of data on the number of women who were sentenced for
imprisonable and comparable offences in the relevant periods,
a comparison
between the rates at which men and women receive suspended sentences is
inappropriate.
An early plea of guilty is often cited as a mitigating factor in support of
the imposition of a suspended sentence.
The data show that a suspended sentence remains an appropriate sentencing
option for an offender who is convicted at trial.
Prior criminal record
In the absence of data on the number of offenders with no prior record who
were sentenced, it is not possible to say what proportion
of offenders with no
prior record received a suspended sentence. Future research could examine
consistency in the way that first-time
offenders are sentenced and the
appropriateness of the imposition of suspended sentences in the circumstance of
The data suggest that having a significant prior record does not preclude the
imposition of a suspended sentence. The data suggest
that the 2005 reforms may
have led to a significant prior record being a greater obstacle to receiving a
suspended sentence than
was the case previously. Future research could consider
the relevance of prior record to the imposition and effectiveness of suspended
sentences in the ACT.
Length of sentence
Since the 2005 reforms, some shorter suspended sentences (from six months)
are being imposed, although there is no clear pattern in
terms of the mean
length of sentences.
The data suggest that in the absence of a legislative limit on the length of
suspended sentences, ACT courts are assessing a period
of imprisonment
appropriate to the particular circumstances of the offender.
Length of operational
period of the suspension
The data do not suggest any clear pattern in the periods for which sentences
are suspended, although it appears that it would be rare
for a sentence to be
suspended for less than one year or more than five.
Conditions of
Recognisance
The rate of imposition of recognisances has decreased since the reforms,
probably attributable to the mandatory imposition of a GBO
and the greater range
of options available to the sentencing judge.
Reparations
The making a reparations order is very rare. This may be explained by the
random nature of the sampling, a reparations order having
been made in other
periods, and the futility of a making a reparations order in some circumstances.
Good behaviour
Although obligatory, GBOs were recorded as having been made only in the 2007
sample period, and only in relation to three offenders.
The low rate of
imposition of GBOs could be a function of the other types of orders used, and
could be because of the form and the
accuracy in recording the orders made.
Supervision
The data show that most offenders are subject to the supervision of
Corrective Services, and were so prior to the 2005 reforms.
The data show that since the 2005 amendments judicial officers have more
clearly crafted sentences to the circumstances of the individual
although there had been a trend in this direction shortly before the reforms, in
Since the reforms, a fully suspended sentence is almost invariably
accompanied by a range of conditions on the behaviour of the offender
addition to accepting supervision of Corrective Services. Extensive further
research would be needed to report on the rate of
compliance with the conditions
and the recidivism rate among offenders who had been subject to such conditions
(see C3.11 below).
The failure by sentencing judge to consistently state explicitly the factors
taken into account in sentencing make it impossible to
report with certainty on
the rate at which different factors arise in decisions to impose a suspended
Guilty plea
The data show that most suspended sentences follow guilty pleas before trial.
It is not possible to infer, from the data or the judges’
remarks, what
different weighting might be given to the fact that a guilty plea was
‘early’, ie not at or during trial.
Other factors
The data do not suggest any clear pattern in the factors for imposing
suspended sentences. Judicial officers do now, however, usually
cite a broad
collection of factors in each case, which reflects the policy in the 2005
reforms to more readily tailor sentences to
the individual offender.
The data suggest that greater regard is had to factors in the
offender’s current circumstances which indicate a low likelihood
re-offending than is had to factors in the offender’s personal history
which might explain their having committed the current
Breaches of suspended
The data cannot support a breach analysis.
A limited breach analysis undertaken recently within the ACT DPP sheds some
light on the prosecution of breaches of fully suspended
sentences in the ACT.
It provides a partial picture of what actually happens with suspended sentences,
and further research could
more comprehensively investigate this issue.
Statements of
significance as to legislation or policy
ACT judges rarely refer to other similar cases or engage in analysis of the
sentencing legislation, and usually confine their sentencing
remarks to the
facts of the case before them. As a result, there has been no significant body
of jurisprudence on suspended sentences
under the 2005 reforms. A risk
associated with this is that sentencing consistency will reduce over time.
Policy implications for
further inquiry
1. Should suspended sentences be a sentencing
option in the ACT?
Two features of the regime for suspended sentences in the ACT raise the
question of whether suspended sentences should be retained
as a sentencing
option. The two features are that it is mandatory to impose a conditional GBO
with a suspended sentence, and that
the suspended sentences is not automatically
activated on a breach of the GBO. These features combine to suggest that the
or effective sentence is the conditional GBO, not the suspended term of
imprisonment.
2. What should be the consequences of the
breach of a condition of the GBO associated with a suspended sentence?
Related to the previous issue is the question of whether there should be in
the ACT a presumption of activation of the suspended sentence
on breach of a
condition of the GBO. This is the case in NSW, South Australia, Victoria,
Queensland, WA and NT, although the details
of how the presumption operates
vary. Tasmania, ACT and the Commonwealth do not have such a presumption.
However the Tasmanian
Law Reform Institute has recently recommended introducing
a statutory presumption in favour of activation on breach.
3. What can be done to enhance consistency and
predictability in the imposition of suspended sentences?
The research has enabled us to recommend above at Part B1.3, and to comment
at C3.12, that consistency and predictability will be
enhanced through improved
reporting of reasons for and observations on the imposition of suspended
sentences. A further question
is whether the legislature should provide
guidance as to the factors a sentencing court should have regard to in
determining whether
to suspend a sentence, as is currently the case, for
example, in Victoria.
4. Does the terminology that is used
adequately convey the nature of a suspended sentence?
A so-called ‘suspended sentence’ is not the mere suspension of a
sentence. It is the suspension of a sentence of imprisonment,
and is subject to
conditions. It may be that the term ‘suspended sentence’ does not
sufficiently convey the gravity
and conditional nature of the decision. There
has been discussion in Canada and the United Kingdom about other possible
descriptions,
such as ‘conditional sentence’, or ‘suspended
custodial sentence’ or ‘conditional suspension of custody’.
A. Background to the
current ACT regime for suspended sentences
A1. Pre-2006
ACT regime for suspended sentences
Legislative provisions
1. Prior to 2 June 2006, courts in the ACT had a discretion to
‘sentence the [convicted] person to a term of imprisonment’
release an offender on a recognisance, on their giving a security, either
immediately or after having served a specified part
of the sentence (s403(1)(b)
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT)). No term was specified for the maximum term of
imprisonment which could be dealt with in this way, or for the part of the
sentence which had to be served before an offender could be released on
recognisance.
2. The court had a discretion (s 403(1)(a)(ii)) to make the release
conditional on the offender, for the relevant period:
● being of good behaviour
● complying with any specified conditions (except performing unpaid
community work), including that they
▪ be supervised on probation
▪ obey all reasonable directions of the probation supervisor
▪ comply with a reparation order; and
● paying any specified penalty.
3. In deciding whether a suspended sentence was appropriate, the court had
regard to the nature and severity of the conditions that
could be imposed
4. On a breach of the condition of release, the court could activate the
original sentence of imprisonment, or ‘make any order’
court would be empowered to make if the offender was then being sentenced for
the offence with which he or she was originally
charged (s 404(4)(e)).
Observations
on their operation
5. Jon Stanhope, the Chief Minister and then Attorney-General, presented an
exposure draft of the Crimes (Sentencing) Bill 2004 to
the Legislative Assembly
on 3 August 2004. The circumstances surrounding the Bill’s introduction
are discussed further below.
6. When introducing the Bill, he observed,
The terminology used for sentencing is modernised and simplified. For
example, ‘recognisance’ will become ‘good
bond’...An order suspending a sentence currently made under section
403(1)(6) of the
will be called a ‘suspended sentence
7. In his Second Reading Speech on 7 April 2005, Mr Stanhope noted that the
Bill ‘creates good behaviour orders, which will
replace recognisances and
options available currently under section 403 of the
8. The only other mention of suspended sentences or recognisances in the
debates on the Bill were when Bill Stefaniak, then Shadow
Attorney-General,
observed that
People have often asked me why someone got three years for an armed robbery
in New South Wales when, over here for an almost identical
offence, that person
might well get off with a suspended sentence and not go to jail at all. I stress
it is important to ensure that
what our courts do – especially the Supreme
Court – is consistent with other
2005-6 ACT reforms
Legislative provisions
9. According to advice recently provided by the ACT Department of Justice and
Community Safety,
the impetus for
the 2005-6 reforms was that in 2001 the Labor Government had an election
platform to review sentencing procedures
and the criteria used by the judiciary
when setting sentencing. In early 2002, a full sentence review was announced by
the Government,
and a Sentencing Review Working Group was formed in the Policy
and Regulatory Division of the ACT Department of Justice and Community
In 2002, an Issues Paper was released which set out the function of the Review,
which took several years and looked at
all aspects of
sentencing.
10. Suspended sentences were identified as one of 16 different types of
non-custodial sentencing options. The Issues Paper sought
views about the
‘use of non-custodial sentencing options and the purpose of
sentencing’.
11. A large number of written and oral submissions from key stakeholders were
received. Broad stakeholder and community consultation
occurred and
exposure drafts of the proposed legislation were formally tabled and made
publically available for comment. As a result
of the review, a major law reform
project on sentencing was undertaken with a broad purpose of consolidating
existing sentencing
laws, introducing new sentencing options and providing
greater flexibility in existing sentencing options within the ACT in order
maximise sentencing effectiveness.
12. The current
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
reform relevant to suspended sentences, made as part of reforms to sentencing
across the board. For instance, under the old
sentencing legislation, suspended
sentences were dealt with under s 403, which used the terminology
“recognisances”.
This required modernisation and presentation in
language more likely to be understood by defendants – thus the change to
behaviour orders” (GBOs).
13. In addition, all the sentencing options were modernised and streamlined
for consistency with a view to providing greater certainty
whilst providing
greater flexibility simultaneously. Restrictions relating to the combination of
sentencing options were removed.
, and the creation of distinct
suspended sentence orders, also sought to particularise how the sentencing
option should be applied
and what conditions should attach. It had been
identified that, under the previous provisions of s 403, there was no consistent
application
of how the orders would operate; that is, a suspended sentence could
be imposed with or without a GBO, with or without conditions
etc. The new
section requires a GBO to be made for at least the period for which the sentence
is suspended (though it can be longer).
Accordingly, it provides for
greater confidence in the criminal justice system around the expectations and
use of suspended sentence
14. Under the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
, if an order is made for
‘suspension of a sentence of imprisonment’,
governs the
imposition of that suspended sentence. The following are the key provisions of
• A suspended sentence enables a court to sentence an offender to a
term of imprisonment and then suspend the execution of that
imprisonment on the
basis that the offender complies with conditions set by the Court.
• A suspended sentence can be ordered only if the offender is both
convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment.
• The Court may suspend all or part of the imprisonment. The offender
will be imprisoned for the period of time not suspended
by the Court.
• The tool for setting conditions in the Act is the GBO. A GBO imposed
is subject to the provisions governing GBOs in
and Chapter 6,
and imprisonment in Chapter 5, and to Chapter 6 of the
Crimes (Sentencing
Administration) Act 2005
which sets out ‘core conditions’ for a
• The GBO must be made for the period of the suspended sentence, and
can be made for longer if the Court determines.
• In making a GBO in conjunction with the suspended sentence the Court
will impose conditions upon the offender that the Court
requires the offender to
meet to prevent the execution of the sentence.
• If the offender breaches a condition of the GBO, the Court has the
power to impose the original sentence or to re-sentence
the offender.
15. The following is a brief summary, and not an exhaustive account, of the
provisions in
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(Sentence Administration) Act 2005
relating to GBOs.
16. A GBO requires an offender to sign an undertaking to comply with their
good behaviour obligations, and may include one or more
conditions which the
court considers appropriate subject to their not being inconsistent with the
sentencing legislation. Some conditions
are prescribed in
example, giving a surety, undertaking community service, and participating in a
rehabilitation program – and
gives an indicative list of other
possible conditions, such as undertaking medical treatment and supervision,
attending educational
programs or counselling, and not driving or consuming
alcohol. Core conditions of the GBO set out in
Crimes (Sentence
Administration) Act 2005
include such requirements as reporting any change
to home or work address and complying with the lawful direction of a corrections
17. Importantly, although a GBO must be made when a court orders a suspended
sentence, deciding the terms and conditions of a GBO
is a separate exercise from
deciding to suspend a sentence. First the court decides to suspend a sentence of
imprisonment. Having
done so, the court is required by
to impose a GBO,
and the question is what conditions, if any, will be included in that GBO.
Breaches of a GBO
18. A breach of a GBO comes to a court in a number of ways (
(Sentence Administration) Act 2005
● if a corrections officer believes, on reasonable grounds, that an
offender has breached a good behaviour obligation, they
report their
belief to the sentencing court
● if a police officer believes, on reasonable grounds, that an offender
has breached a good behaviour obligation, they
arrest the offender,
and if they do so, they must then bring the offender before the sentencing court
or a magistrate
● if a judge or magistrate is satisfied, by information on oath, that
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the offender
has breached
or will breach, a good behaviour obligation, they
issue a warrant
for an offender’s arrest, or
● if information alleging that an offender has breached a good
behaviour obligation is before the offender’s sentencing
court, that court
issue a summons directing the offender to appear before the court.
19. If the Supreme Court finds an offender guilty of an offence committed
during the term of the offender's GBO, it will deal with
the offender for that
breach of the GBO, whether it was imposed by the Supreme Court or Magistrates
Court. If the Magistrates Court
finds an offender guilty of an offence
committed during the term of the offender's GBO, it will commit the offender to
the Supreme
Court to deal with the breach if the GBO was imposed or varied by
the Supreme Court, but will otherwise deal with the breach itself.
20. If a court is satisfied the offender has breached any of the conditions
of a GBO imposed with a suspended sentence, it must cancel
the GBO. As well, it
must either impose the suspended sentence or re-sentence the offender for the
original offence. As discussed
further below, the legislation does
presume that the originally imposed suspended sentence will be activated on a
breach of the GBO associated with the suspended sentence.
Because the
(Sentencing) Act
applies to re-sentencing in the same way that it applies to
sentencing, the full range of sentencing options are available.
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
gives the following
example of the operation of
The Magistrates Court convicted Desmond of an offence. The court sentenced
Desmond to imprisonment for 6 months for the offence and
made a suspended
sentence order for the entire sentence of imprisonment. The court also made a
good behaviour order for the 6-month
period. Desmond breaches the order. In
re-sentencing Desmond, the court may impose a sentence of imprisonment to be
served by periodic
22. This is not a helpful example. To be clear: the order which Desmond
breaches is the GBO. In re-sentencing Desmond, the court
impose the original sentence of six months imprisonment which had been
impose any other sentence, of which a sentence of
imprisonment to be served by periodic detention is one. So too, for example, is
a fine, or a further suspended sentence.
23. If the conduct which breaches a GBO associated with a suspended sentence
is itself an offence for which a sentence of imprisonment
can be imposed, the
court deals with both the offence and the breach of the GBO.
Changes in policy and court practice
24. There are
procedural and technical differences between the previous and current regimes
for imposing and dealing with suspended
sentences (eg the change of terminology
from ‘recognisance’ to ‘suspended sentence’). We do not
address those differences in this report. This section sets out the
substantive differences in policy and practice between the current
and previous
25. The following tables and figures illustrate the changes in the rate of
suspended sentences over time. The vertical line on the
figures shows the
timing of the reforms.
Supreme Court
1: Proportion of sentences which were fully suspended sentences in the ACT
Supreme Court, 2001-2009
Source: ABS,
Criminal Courts 2008-9
. 4513.0 (2009), Table 2.14
26. The rate of imposition of fully suspended sentences in the ACT Supreme
Court declined from 31% in 2001-2 to 21% in 2004-5. It
increased significantly
the new Act came into effect.
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
came into effect on 2 June 2006.
As offenders were sentenced under the old regime for offences committed up to
the full effect of the
new legislation would not have become apparent until well into 2006-7. It seems,
therefore, that the increase
in the rate of fully suspended sentences in 2005-6,
which has been maintained since, was not due to the legislative reforms,
we can speculate that it may have been to some degree a response to the
prospect of such changes.
Magistrates Court
2: Proportion of sentences which were fully suspended sentences in the ACT
Magistrates Court, 2001-2009
Source: ABS,
Criminal Courts 2008-9
. 4513.0 (2009), Table 3.14
28. The rate of imposition of fully suspended sentences in the ACT
Magistrates’ Court almost halved between 2003-4 and 2004-5
(which was a
period where their use was stable in the Supreme Court). Since 2004-5, the rate
has been relatively constant, with
a gradual but steady decline since 2006-7 to
the current reported rate of 6%. There is no pattern in the rate that is clearly
the implementation of the Act, but a further reduction in the rate for
2009-10 (not reported until about March 2011) might suggest
that the legislation
has been a factor resulting in a persistent decline in the rate of fully
suspended sentences for the Magistrates’
29. It should be remembered that the ACT Magistrates’ Court deals with
a large number of minor offences, and a sentence of imprisonment
appropriate in very few such matters. This explains the lower rate of
imposition of suspended sentences, and suggests as
well that changes in patterns
of offending and charging will affect the rate of imposition of suspended
the sentence
30. Under the current regime, there is no requirement that the court suspend
the sentence only if it ‘thinks fit’. Instead,
the current regime
simply gives the court the power: it ‘may’ make such an order
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
and combinations for suspended sentences
31. Under the previous regime, the court had a discretion whether to order a
GBO when imposing a suspended sentence; under the current
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
significant policy shift, addressing the perception that offenders who receive a
suspended sentence are getting off ‘scot
32. The previous regime was not specific about the period of any GBO. Under
the current regime, if the court makes a suspended sentence
order, it must also
make a GBO for the period during which the sentence is suspended or for any
longer period that the court considers
appropriate.
33. The only conditions which could be imposed under the previous regime were
giving security, accepting probation supervision, obeying
all reasonable
directions, and/or complying with a reparation order. In addition, the court was
not allowed to make an order for
the offender to perform unpaid community work.
Under the current regime, the court may impose a condition of community service
unpaid community work) and/or a rehabilitation program, and may impose a
condition prescribed by the regulation and any other condition
not inconsistent
with the relevant law ‘that the court considers appropriate’
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
The legislation cites
the following as examples which the court might consider appropriate
• that the offender undertake medical treatment and supervision (eg by
taking medication and cooperating with medical assessments)
• that the offender supply samples of blood, breath, hair, saliva or
urine for alcohol or drug testing if required by a corrections
• that the offender attend educational, vocational, psychological,
psychiatric or other programs or counselling
• that the offender not drive a motor vehicle or consume alcohol or
non-prescription drugs or medications, and/or
• that the offender regularly attend alcohol or drug management
34. As at 2 June 2010, the following were listed in the
(Sentencing) Regulation
as rehabilitation programs:
• programs to treat adults and children for sexual behaviour that is
unlawful or inappropriate;
• programs that impart self-management and social skills to enable
offenders to deal with difficult situations in ways that
do not involve the
criminal behaviour;
• programs for people who have committed a domestic violence offence;
• alcohol or drug rehabilitation programs provided by a appropriate
35. Under the current regime, the court may also make a number of orders in
combination with the suspended sentence, including an
order of imprisonment to
be served by full-time or periodic detention in a correctional centre; a fine; a
driver licence disqualification
order; and a non-association or place
restriction order.
36. Under the previous regime, the court had the power to deal with an
offender for breach if it was satisfied that an offender had,
during the period
of good behaviour, failed to comply with a condition specified in the order,
failed to pay the penalty for the
payment of which s/he had given security, or
had been convicted (inside or outside the ACT) of an offence – whether an
imprisonable
offence or not – committed during the period of good
behaviour. At common law the power can be triggered if the offender engaged
other behaviour such as contempt of
The current legislation
provides simply that the court has the power to deal with an offender if it is
satisfied the offender has
breached any of their GBO obligations; conviction for
a further offence is such a breach.
37. When acting on breach under the previous regime, the court had a
discretion to impose a term of imprisonment up to the unserved
balance of the
original sentence, or to make any order that the court could have made when the
offender was originally sentenced
Crimes Act 1900
, s 440(4)(e)). Under
the current regime, the court, when it is satisfied of a breach, must cancel the
GBO and may then either impose
the original sentence which was suspended, or
resentence the offender. If it re-sentences the offender, the
(Sentencing) Act 2005
applies in the same way that it applies to the
sentencing of an offender on conviction for the offence. In addition, the
current legislation
expressly gives the court the power to deal with any
security under the GBO (
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
38. The previous regime envisaged the offender serving a term not exceeding
the balance of the sentence; for example, if the offender
had completed five
months of a six month suspended sentence before breaching, the most the court
could have ordered was that the
person serve the remaining month in prison. The
current regime appears to permit this only if it resentences the offender.
ACT in context: suspended sentences in Australia
Policy justification for suspended sentences generally
39. The following reasons are commonly cited in support of suspended
• they have a symbolic effect, as they enable the seriousness of the
offence to be recognised through the formal imposition
of a prison sentence,
while allowing the court to deal with the offender in merciful way;
• they provide a useful sentencing tool and have an important place in
the sentencing hierarchy, especially for first time offenders
who have not
committed serious offences;
• they are an effective specific deterrent against the further
commission of crime; this argument has been supported by recent
• they enable offenders to avoid prison sentences, especially short
sentences, which is expected to have a protective effect
against reoffending;
• their availability may reduce the size of the prison population and
associated expenditure on corrections, as well as providing
an incentive for
offenders to plead guilty.
40. The principal arguments against suspended sentences are that
• they are seen as not amounting to ‘real’ punishment, and
are regarded as a ‘let-off’ by the public
and offenders;
• there are difficulties with the process for imposing the sentence and
dealing with breaches;
• they cause net-widening and violate the proportionality principle;
• they favour middle-class
41. Appendix A sets out the principal features of the legislation governing
how suspended sentences currently operate in each Australian
Principles for imposing a suspended sentence
42. The leading common law Australian authority in relation to suspended
sentences is the High Court case of
Dinsdale v The Queen
, where Kirby J,
with whom Gaudron and Gummow JJ agreed, emphasised the need to
recognise that two distinct steps are involved. The first is the primary
determination that a sentence of imprisonment, and not some
lesser sentence, is
called for. The second is the determination that such term of imprisonment
should be suspended for a period set
by the court. The two steps should not be
elided. Unless the first is taken, the second does not
43. This two-stage test has usually been followed by the ACT
, Kirby J considered what factors will determine
whether a suspended sentence will be imposed, noting that ‘the same
considerations
that are relevant for the imposition of the term of imprisonment
must be revisited in determining whether to suspend that term’.
it ‘necessary to look again at all the matters relevant to the
circumstances of the offence as well as those personal
to the offender’,
notwithstanding the fact that this necessitates the attribution of ‘double
weight’ to all of
the factors relevant to the offence and offender which
may influence the decision to suspend the
Imprisonment
as a last resort
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
, an ACT court may
sentence an offender to imprisonment if satisfied, ‘having considered
possible alternatives, that no other
penalty is appropriate’. A sentence
of imprisonment must be served by full-time detention at a correctional centre,
‘the court orders otherwise’, and the
Crimes (Sentencing)
cites a suspended sentence order as an example of where ‘the court
orders otherwise’.
46. It is widely accepted that the principle of ‘last resort’
refers to a sentence of imprisonment even though it is to
be suspended;
legislation in Victoria, Western Australia and the Northern Territory spells out
this principle of last resort, stating
that a suspended sentence can be imposed
only when the sentence of imprisonment, if unsuspended, would be otherwise
appropriate.
47. The ACT’s approach to suspended sentences is consistent with most
Australian jurisdictions in reflecting the common law
principle that
imprisonment is a sentence of last
for suspending a sentence
48. In company with the legislation in NSW, Tasmania and Western Australia,
the legislation in the ACT does not set out any test for
the imposition of a
suspended sentence. In Queensland, a court may impose a suspended sentence if
‘satisfied that it is appropriate
to do so in the circumstances’ and
in the Northern Territory, ‘the court may suspend a sentence where it is
that it is desirable to do so in the circumstances’. In South
Australia, the test for imposing a suspended sentence is whether
‘thinks that good reason exists for doing
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), a court, if ‘it
thinks fit’, may make a ‘recognisance release order’, a term
which the Australian
Law Reform Commission has recommended be replaced with
‘terminology that reflects its nature as a conditional suspended
50. In Victoria, the court must be ‘satisfied that it is desirable to
[impose a suspended sentence] in the circumstances’,
but the court must
have regard to the following factors in making this decision:
(a) the need, considering the nature of the offence, its impact on any victim
of the offence and any injury, loss or damage resulting
directly from the
offence, to ensure that the sentence—
(i) adequately manifests the denunciation by the court of the type of conduct
in which the offender engaged; and
(ii) adequately deters the offender or other persons from committing offences
of the same or a similar character; and
(iii) reflects the gravity of the offence; and
(b) any previous suspended sentence of imprisonment imposed on the offender
and whether the offender breached the order suspending
that sentence; and
(c) without limiting paragraph (b), whether the offence was committed during
the operational period of a suspended sentence of imprisonment;
(d) the degree of risk of the offender committing another offence punishable
by imprisonment during the operational period of the
sentence, if it were to be
Restrictions
on imposing a suspending a sentence
51. The legislation in the ACT and Tasmania does not impose any restrictions
on the availability of a suspended sentence. There do
not appear to be any
legislative restrictions on the availability of suspended sentences in NSW,
Western Australia or Queensland
on the basis of offence type, but there are
limitations as to the length of the sentence and operational period, that is,
for which the sentence is held in suspense, which can be imposed, as
set out in Appendix A. There are also limitations as to the
length of sentence
and/or operational period in the Northern Territory, South Australia, Victoria
and the Commonwealth (see Appendix
52. In Victoria, a court must not fully suspend a sentence for a serious
offence unless it is satisfied, having regard to the factors
cited above, that
making such an order is appropriate because of the existence of exceptional
circumstances and in the interests
offence’ includes murder, manslaughter, intentionally causing serious
injury, and certain sexual
As well, a court may
not partly or wholly suspend a sentence imposed on a person who carried a
firearm when committing an indictable
offence or carried an offensive weapon
when committing a sexual
53. In the Northern Territory, wholly suspended sentences are not available
for offenders convicted of sexual offences or of violent
offences where the
offender has previously been convicted of a violent offence, and when an
offender is convicted of an aggravated
property offence, the court may only
impose a wholly suspended sentence if the offender enters into a home detention
54. In South Australia, suspended sentences are not available for murder or
treason or when an Act expressly prohibits a reduced sentence,
and suspended
sentences are generally not available where the sentence is to be served
cumulatively on another term or concurrently
with another term currently being
served or about to be
55. Only for federal offences is there a statutory presumption
of making an order for a suspended sentence. When the court imposes
a sentence of between six months and three years, it must
‘recognisance release order’ (as opposed to setting a non-parole
period) unless satisfied that it is not appropriate
to do so, having regard to
the nature of the offence and the offender’s
antecedents.
The Australian Law
Reform Commission has recommended that this provision be repealed and that
instead the court should have a ‘discretion
to suspend a federal
offender’s sentence of imprisonment either wholly or partially, regardless
of the length of the
of suspended sentences
56. Suspended sentences were abolished in NSW in 1974, and were reintroduced
57. In May 2010, the Victorian Government announced that it will abolish suspended sentences and that, as an interim measure, it
will abolish suspended sentences for serious crimes (including murder, rape and armed robbery) from July 2011. Abolition was recommended
in a 2002 Sentencing Review Report,
but the Government rejected the recommendation and the Attorney-General was vehemently opposed, arguing that courts should have more,
not fewer, sentencing options.
In 2005, the Victorian Sentencing Advisory Council recommended restricting the availability of suspended sentences, which was implemented
through legislative amendments. Monitoring indicates that the amendments have not reduced the rate of imposition of suspended sentences,
suggesting that they are an option that the courts like to have available to them. The Opposition and Government have both announced
they will abolish suspended sentences if elected at the next election, to be held in November 2010.
Restrictions
on conditions attached to a suspended sentence
58. Suspended sentences in the ACT, as in NSW and South Australia, are
accompanied by a GBO. The ACT legislation does not, however,
conditions which can be attached to the GBO, except that they must not be
inconsistent with the sentencing legislation.
59. In Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia, the only condition which
can be attached to a suspended sentence is the requirement
that the offender not
commit a further imprisonable offence during the operational period of the
60. In the Northern Territory, a suspended sentence may be made
‘subject to such conditions as the court thinks fit’.
A similarly
broad discretion has applied to date in Tasmania, but recent changes to the
Sentencing Act 1997
introduced mandatory conditions to be
attached to all suspended sentences, namely, that the offender:
• not commit another offence punishable by imprisonment;
• report to a probation officer;
• remain in the State unless given permission to do otherwise; and
• give notice of change in residence or employment.
61. Provisions enabling the discretionary imposition of a requirement to
perform community service have not yet come into effect.
Restrictions
on the orders which may be imposed in combination with a suspended
62. The ACT does not limit the orders which may be ordered in combination
with a suspended sentence. Some jurisdictions do. In Victoria,
for example, a
fine is the only sentencing order which may be combined with a suspended
sentence for a single offence, although this
restriction does not apply when
sentencing an offender for multiple offences. In NSW, a community service order
cannot be imposed
in combination with a suspended
of the suspended sentence on a breach
63. The legislation in the ACT does not have a presumption that the
originally imposed suspended sentence will be activated on a breach
conditions of the GBO associated with the suspended sentence. The only other
presumption is Tasmania, however
this will be amended if and when amendments under the
Justice and Related
Legislation (Further Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2009
, which received
royal assent on 11 December 2009, come into effect. The amendments create a
statutory presumption of activation
on breach, although the court will retain
the discretion to decide whether it would be unjust to activate a suspended
sentence in
view of any exceptional circumstances which have arisen since the
order suspending the sentence was made. The provisions essentially
reflect the
current position in
64. In all other Australian jurisdictions except the Commonwealth, there is a
presumption that the originally imposed suspended sentence
will be activated on
a breach of any conditions which were imposed. In South Australia, if an
offender breaches a condition of his
or her GBO, the court must activate the
original sentence unless satisfied that the breach was trivial or there were
good reasons
for the offender failing to comply with the bond,
although the court has the power to reduce the term where there are
special reasons for doing so.
NSW, the court must revoke the GBO (on which basis the sentence is suspended)
unless satisfied the breach was trivial or there
was good reason for the
65. The provisions on breach in Western Australia, Queensland and the
Northern Territory require the court to activate the suspended
sentence unless
it would be unjust to do so, taking into account all the circumstances that have
arisen or become known since the
suspended sentence was
66. The provisions in relation to recognisance release orders for federal
offences do not create a presumption in favour of activation,
but do prevent the
court from substituting a shorter sentence of imprisonment or ordering only part
of the sentence to be served.
The ALRC has made recommendations to enhance the court’s options on
differences from and similarities with other jurisdictions
67. If and when the Tasmanian amendments creating a statutory presumption of
activation on breach come into effect, the ACT will be
the only state or
territory which does not have such a presumption.
68. The ACT is similar to NSW, Tasmania and Western Australia in that it does
not set out any legislative test for imposing a suspended
sentence; it is also
like these jurisdictions, and Queensland, in that it does not impose any
legislative restrictions (eg in relation
to offence type), on the availability
of a suspended sentence.
69. The ACT and Tasmania are the only two jurisdictions which set no
restrictions as to the length of sentence which can be suspended
or operational
period for which the sentence can be suspended. As set out in Appendix A, South
Australia and the Commonwealth do
not set any limits on the maximum term of
sentence which can be suspended.
70. The only restriction in the ACT on the type and combination of conditions
of the GBO which must be imposed when ordering a suspended
sentence, is that the
conditions not be inconsistent with the
Crimes (Sentence Administration)
. This leaves the courts a very wide discretion as to the conditions to
be imposed. In this respect, it is similar to South Australia,
suspended sentence is accompanied by a GBO, which may be subject to conditions,
and the Northern Territory, where a suspended
sentence may be subject to such
conditions as the court thinks fit. The ACT differs, however, from Queensland,
Victoria, Western
Australia where the only condition which can be ordered is
that the offender not commit a further imprisonable offence, and NSW and
Victoria which limit the combination of orders which may be imposed.
trends in the imposition of suspended sentences in the ACT
71. The ABS figures below show a return in 2008/9 to the previous rate of
suspended sentences in the ACT: 36%. In light of the pattern
of figures in the
ACT since the reforms to suspended sentences came into effect in 2006, it
appears that the rate of 43.7% in 2007/8
may have been anomalous. To get a
better idea of the pattern of suspended sentencing in the ACT, it is
appropriate(subject to what
we say below about accuracy of the data) to wait
until ABS figures are available in early 2011 for 2009/2010.
Figure 1: Proportion
of sentences which were fully suspended sentences in the ACT Supreme Court,
2001-2009 as reported by the Australia
Bureau of Statistics
Commencement of
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Accuracy of the ACT data
72. The ABS data replicates data provided to it by the ACT. The ABS data is
only as accurate as the source data. Our research raises
concerns about the
accuracy of the ACT data.
73. We examined the judicial sentencing remarks and/or court order in 125 of
the 126 cases for 2007-8 (one could not be located) ,
to check for accuracy of
coding according to the ABS categories. We discovered a consistent inaccuracy
in the way data are recorded.
Table 3 below sets out the ABS coding for all
cases and our assessment of what the correct coding should have been. It is
that if the only additional condition is that the offender enter into a
recognizance/surety/security, this is still correctly coded
as a fully suspended
sentence, not an intensive corrections order.
74. As the cases have actually been coded, the numbers are broadly correct
for: non-custodial orders, orders of imprisonment with
a determined term,
partially suspended sentences, and periodic detention. However the cases which
have been coded as ‘fully
suspended sentence orders’ are almost
entirely comprised of what should properly have been coded as intensive
corrections orders
(ie, ‘custody in the community’). Our
examination of the physical files, retrieved for us by the Supreme Court
showed that instead of there being 54 fully suspended sentences as was
recorded, there were in fact only six such orders made, and
instead of there
being ‘nil or rounded to zero’ intensive corrections orders made,
there were in fact 50 such orders.
75. The ACT has not been not alone in making this coding error, as attested
by the published annotations in the ABS report 4513.0
Table 3: Principal
sentences in ACT higher courts 2007-8: actual and correct ABS coding
Order (ABS code)
Number of orders as actually coded
Number of orders if correctly coded
Imprisonment with a determined term (1121)
Imprisonment with a partially determined term (1122)
Periodic detention (1130)
Juvenile detention with determined term (1141)
Intensive corrections order (1210)
Fully suspended adult sentence (1310)
Community services order (2110)
Fine (2210)
Good behaviour bond/recognisance order (2910)
Nominal penalty (2940)
76. As well as this miscoding, our analysis of the ACT sentencing remarks
indicates some inconsistency in how sentences are understood
and, therefore,
recorded. When offenders receive a custodial sentence which is backdated to
take into account time spent on remand,
and the offender is released immediately
on being sentenced, this appears usually to have been coded as a fully suspended
but at times is coded as a partly suspended sentence.
77. Further, as we note below at [114] in relation to the recording of the
imposition of GBOs, it appears that through oversight,
essential aspects of the
court’s decision are not being recorded at all.
Observations on errors in the ACT data
78. This report is not critical of the ACT Supreme Court, and we are indebted
to the Court Registry for its assistance in this research,
even when it became
clear that the research would reveal errors in the Court’s data. The
errors in coding are not surprising
in light of a number of factors we
identified in the recording of the data.
79. The Court has limited resources for managing the data, and little time in
which to ensure that an offender’s order has been
accurately recorded. To
determine the actual order made, Court staff are dependent on the record made on
the file by a judge’s
associate, but it was at times difficult even for
the experienced research team to determine what the actual order was.
80. Referring to judicial remarks on sentence can help clarify the orders
made. The Supreme Court does not currently have an electronic
sentencing remarks. In several cases, we were not able to access the judicial
remarks on sentence because there
were none on the court file; in such cases
judicial remarks on sentence were kindly provided to us by the library of the
Public Prosecutions. As we observe below at [141], there is a risk
that the ACT will fail to develop jurisprudence, with the associated
consistency
in sentencing, unless reasons for sentencing are recorded and reported.
81. We note that different forms of judicial expression may have unintended
consequences in the collection of data. Where Judge A
might order a suspended
and then say ‘in addition, I order that you get treatment for your
drinking problem’, this would
correctly be coded as a fully suspended
sentence. The counselling order would be coded as a treatment order (ABS code
2130), which
falls under fully suspended sentences in the coding hierarchy and
therefore would not be included (given that only the
is reported to the ABS). If Judge B, by contrast, imposed a fully suspended
sentence and then said ‘and as a condition
of that sentence, I order that
you get treatment for your drinking problem’, this should be coded as an
intensive corrections
82. It is known that similar inconsistencies apply in other jurisdictions,
making it impossible to conduct any reliable comparison
between the rates
– as reported by the ABS – of use of fully suspended sentences in
the ACT and other Australian jurisdictions.
Recommendations on data collection and reporting
83. For sound policy development within the ACT, it is essential that notice
be taken of the flawed basis on which the ABS sentencing
data are collected and
reported. It should be a matter of priority to rectify this issue in order to
maintain the integrity of the
84. Accordingly we recommend that
1. The Supreme Court Registry be resourced to take urgent steps to establish
sound administrative systems which ensure that sentencing
data is recorded
accurately and comprehensively, and in manner that is consistent with ABS
reporting requirements. In particular
we recommend the use of a template to
standardise the manner of expression of sentencing, and the collection and
reporting of sentencing
2. The Supreme Court Registry staff and staff of the judicial officers be
resourced to undertake regular training on the accurate
collection and reporting
of sentencing data, including on ABS coding.
3. The Supreme Court Registry be resourced to maintain data collection and
recording software that is compatible with ABS requirements.
4. The Supreme Court Registry be resourced to establish an electronic
available on the
Court website and/or through the AustLI website <www.austlii.edu.au>.
5. The Attorney-General consider taking advantage of the opportunity created
by systematic and reliable collection of sentencing data
to make that data
public on a regular basis.
C. Assessment
of the current ACT regime for suspended sentences
C1. Methodology
85. In order to conduct this assessment, the researchers obtained sentencing
remarks for all cases of fully suspended sentences imposed
by the Supreme Court
for two periods before the legislative amendments came into effect: January-June
2004 (‘2004a’)
and July-December 2004 (‘2004b’), and two
periods following the legislative amendments: January-June 2007 and January-June
2010. The assistance of the Supreme Court and Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions in providing access to this information
is gratefully
acknowledged.
86. There were five cases in 2004a, 14 in 2004b, 19 in 2007 and 15 in 2010.
The following data were extracted from the sentencing
1. date of sentence
2. name of offender
3. offences committed (by name and Australian Standard of Classification code
as set out by the ABS)
4. judicial officer
5. age at date of sentence
8. prior criminal record
9. conditions of suspended sentence imposed
10. whether any sentence other than the fully suspended sentence was
11. sentence length (months)
12. operational period (months)
13. whether the sentence was the original sentence or imposed on appeal
14. whether the matter was a resentence for a breach of a previous suspended
15. mitigating factors cited
16. any comments on suspended sentence policy, law or practice
17. any other relevant factor.
87. In determining the seriousness of an offender’s prior criminal
record, an assessment was made on the basis of the number
of prior offences, the
seriousness of those offences and any relevant comments by the sentencing judge.
It is acknowledged that this
is something of a subjective assessment and what
one judicial officer regards as significant might be regarded by another as
88. The data under
discussion are drawn from sample periods, the numbers of cases in which
(especially for 2004a) are small. The
sample periods are snapshots of activity
and not a quantitative representation of any larger period. The researchers are
however, of any factors which distinguish the sample periods from
other comparable periods, ie periods before the reforms for the
2004 period, and
periods after the reforms for the 2007 and 2010 periods. The following
discussion proceeds on this basis.
C2. Discussion
Number of judicial officers
1. The sentences in 2004a were imposed by three different judges, the 2004b
sentences by four judges, those in 2007 by six and those
in 2010 by four. Due to
the small number of cases it is not appropriate to draw any inferences about
each judge and their likely
sentencing practices.
Offence type
89. The most common offences for which a suspended sentence was imposed in
the sample periods were:
• in 2004a, assault and theft equally (two offenders each)
• in 2004b, burglary (five out of 14 offenders) and assault (four
• in 2007, assault (seven out of 19 offenders) and robbery (four
• in 2010, assault (three out of 15 offenders) and burglary (four
offenders).
90. It is not possible on the basis of these small numbers to determine
whether the kinds of cases for which suspended sentences are
being imposed are
more or less serious since the reforms, but it is clear that assault dominates
as the offence type for which such
sentences are imposed.
Mean age of offenders
91. The ages of offenders in the sample periods ranged from
• 24-51 years in 2004a (5 offenders)
• 20-63 years in 2004b (14 offenders)
• 19-50 years in 2007 (19 offenders)
• 18-71 years in 2010 (15 offenders).
92. The mean age of offenders was 36 in 2004a, 30 in 2004b, and 31 in both
2007 and 2010. The incidence of one offender aged 71 in
2010 has slightly
inflated the mean age for that period.
93. It is not possible on the basis of these small numbers to determine the
extent to which an offender’s age was a factor in
imposing a suspended
Sex of the offender
94. Women accounted for one out of five offenders (20%) who received a fully
suspended sentence in 2004a, none of the 14 offenders
finalised in 2004b, and
one out of 19 (5%) in 2007. In 2010, there were 14 men and one offender whose
sex was not recorded, suggesting
that women comprised either 0% or 7% of
offenders who received a fully suspended sentence in 2010.
95. In the absence of data on the proportion of women who were sentenced for
imprisonable and comparable offences in the relevant
periods it is not possible
to state the e extent to which an offender’s sex was a factor in imposing
a suspended sentence.
96. In 2004a, 2004b and 2007, all of the suspended sentences followed guilty
pleas. In 2010, 13 of 15 did, while two of the 15 sentences
followed guilty
verdicts after trial.
97. As noted below, an early plea of guilty is often cited as a mitigating
factor in support of the imposition of a suspended sentence,
but the data from
2010 demonstrates that a suspended sentence is still regarded as an appropriate
sentencing option for an offender
who is convicted at trial. It is not possible
to say whether this represents any general shift in policy or practice in
to the imposition of suspended sentences since the reforms. It could
be that the ‘individualised’ nature of suspended
sentencing as a
result of the reforms has created more scope for the court to consider imposing
a suspended sentence after conviction
Prior criminal record
prior record
98. In 2004a and 2004b, none of the offenders who received suspended
sentences was a first offender. In 2007, by contrast, four offenders
received suspended sentences (24%) are known to have had no prior record, and in
2010 two offenders who received suspended sentences
(15%) are known to have had
no prior record.
99. It is unsurprising that first offenders receive a suspended sentence,
although it can at times be
controversial.
If the suspended
sentence was properly regarded as a serious punishment, just short of
incarceration, then it could be inferred
that the offence for which the
first-time offender was being sentenced was serious. It is not possible to say
without further research
what proportion of all offenders with no prior record
received a suspended sentence. It would be a different but worthwhile exercise
to examine consistency in the way that first-time offenders are sentenced and
the appropriateness of the imposition of suspended
sentences in the circumstance
of each case.
Significant
prior record
100. In 2004a, four offenders (80%) had significant prior records, while nine
offenders (64%) did so in 2004b. In 2007, there were
11 offenders (66%) known to
have had moderate or significant prior records and in 2010, four offenders (30%)
are known to have had
a significant prior record.
101. On the basis of these data, it would appear that having a significant
prior record does not preclude the imposition of a suspended
sentence. The data
suggest that
the reforms may have led to a significant prior record being
a greater obstacle to receiving a suspended sentence than was the case
previously. Future research could consider the relevance of prior record to the
imposition and effectiveness of suspended sentences
in the ACT.
Length of sentence
102. In 2004a, four out of five sentences were for 12 months and one was for
36 months, with a mean of 17 months. In 2004b, sentences
ranged from nine to 48
months, with a mean of 18 months. In 2007 sentences ranged from six to 36
months, with a mean of 19 months,
and in 2010 the range was from six to 24
months, with a mean of 14 months.
103. It would appear that since the legislative amendments, some shorter
suspended sentences (from six months) are being imposed,
although there is no
clear pattern in terms of the mean length of sentences.
104. In this sample, there was only one instance (out of 53 sentences) of
sentences in excess of three years being imposed. This
is an interesting
finding, given that the ACT does not set any legislative limit on the length of
a sentence which can be suspended.
This parallels research findings in
Tasmania, which similarly does not set a maximum and where suspended sentences
very rarely exceed
NSW, by contrast, suspended sentences are not permitted to exceed two
and a very high proportion
of all such sentences are for exactly two
suggesting that judicial
officers in NSW are consciously or subconsciously fettered by this restriction,
tend to impose the longest possible period of imprisonment when
suspending the sentence.
105. A legislative limit on the maximum term of a sentence which can be
suspended seems to affect judicial behaviour. The data from
the sample periods
suggest that in the absence of such a limit in the ACT, the courts are assessing
the appropriate period of imprisonment
in the particular circumstances of the
offender. Accordingly, there is no need for legislative amendment to prescribe
legislative
maximum terms.
Length of operational period of the suspension
106. In 2004a, the period for which the sentence was suspended – the
operational period – ranged from 18 to 48 months,
with a mean of 35
months. In 2004b, operational periods ranged from six to 48 months, with a mean
of 25 months. In 2007, the range
was 12 to 60 months, with a mean of 25 months,
while in 2010 the range was 18-36 months, again with a mean of 25 months.
107. The data from the sample periods suggest that operational periods in the
ACT are generally just over two years. There is no
clear pattern in the periods
for which sentences are suspended, although it appears that it would be rare for
a sentence to be suspended
for less than one year or more than five, with such
an instance occurring only once in the 53 cases studied.
108. As we noted above at [32], the court may make a GBO for a longer period
than the period for which the sentence is suspended,
if it considers it
appropriate to do so. Ordinarily the period of the GBO is co-extensive with the
period of suspension of the sentence.
There is however an unresolved issue as
to what would transpire if a GBO was imposed for a longer period than the period
of suspension,
and that order was breached at a time after the period of
suspension of the sentence expired.
Conditions of sentence
Recognisance
109. A recognisance attempts to reduce re-offending by threatening a
sanction; the imposition of conditions, by contrast, attempts
re-offending by dealing with possible causative factors (eg drug use).
110. In the 2004a period, each offender was placed on a recognisance, as were
11 out of 14 offenders in 2004b. In the 2007 sample,
a recognisance was ordered
for only four of 19 offenders (21%), and for only two of 15 offenders (13.3%) in
the 2010 sample.
111. Clearly the rate of imposition of recognisances has decreased since the
reforms, probably attributable to the mandatory imposition
of a GBO and the
greater range of options available to the sentencing judge.
Reparations
112. A reparations order was made against two of the five offenders in the
2004a sample period, but not at all in the 2004b, 2007
and 2010 samples.
113. This is a surprising result, as there is no necessary connection between
reforms to the suspended sentencing regime, and the
extent to which regard would
be had by the sentencing court to the victim’s need for reparation. The
data may be explained
by the random nature of the sampling, a reparations order
having been made in other periods, and the futility of a making a reparations
order in some circumstances.
behaviour order
114. Under the 2005 reforms,
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
requires the imposition of a GBO when a sentence is suspended. Despite this,
GBOs were recorded as having been made only in the
2007 sample period (and then
only in relation to three offenders) and not at all in relation to the 15
offenders in the 2010 period.
It is unlikely but possible that a sentence was
suspended but no GBO was imposed. More likely is that the fact of the
of the GBO was not recorded, raising questions about data recording,
collection and management discussed in Part B above.
Supervision
115. In the 2004a period, all five offenders (100%) were subject to the
supervision of Corrective Services, as were 11 out of 14 offenders
2004b. In the 2007 sample, of the 17 offenders known to have been subject to
conditions other than or in addition to a
GBO, 12 (71%) were subject to the
supervision of Corrective Services, and in 2010 were 14 out of 15 offenders
(93%)were subject to
supervision. The order to be under the supervision of
Corrective Service at times included the explicitly stated requirement that
offender submit to all reasonable directions.
116. In 2007, sentencing judges imposed a broad range of conditions on the
offender, including that they undertake urinalysis (for
four offenders),
undertake counselling (one), undertake drug treatment (one), undertake an anger
management course (one), receive
mental health treatment (two), undertake a
cognitive skills program (one) undertake a men’s program (one), abstain
use (one), take medication (one), and/or register as a sex offender
(one), with multiple conditions imposed in the majority of cases.
117. Similarly in 2010, a broad range of conditions was imposed: abstain from
drug use (for four offenders), participate in drug screening
and/or programs
(four), undertake urinalysis (four), undertake a community service order
(three), undertake a cognitive skills program
(one), undertake a sex offenders
program (one) and/or undertake counselling (one).
118. Part of the rationale for the 2005 amendments was a desire to make
explicit to judicial officers their powers in relation to
crafting sentences
tailored to the individual offender. The legislation certainly appears to have
met its objectives in this regard.
There had however been a trend in this
direction shortly before the reforms: in 2004b, which was the period during
which the reforms
were introduced as a Bill to parliament, the Court imposed
number of conditions particular to the offender’s circumstances:
counselling/treatment (for seven offenders), urinalysis (for three offenders),
and abstaining from drugs, undertaking education,
and receiving residential
treatment (one each).
119. The data make clear that the imposition of a fully suspended sentence in
the ACT is rarely an instance where the offender simply
without some ‘bite’ to the sentence. In only two of the 51 sentences
for which the conditions
of sentence could be determined was the offender
required only to submit to a GBO. In the significant majority of cases after the
2005 amendments, offenders were required to meet a range of conditions in
addition to accepting supervision of Corrective Services.
120. The likely intention in imposing conditions such as these is to assist
the offender in dealing with factors in their lives that
may lead them into
future criminal conduct (criminogenic factors). At the same time, it has been
suggested that imposing a number
of conditions on offenders can set them up for
Extensive further
research would be needed to report on the rate of compliance with the conditions
and the recidivism rate among
offenders who had been subject to such
conditions.
Mitigating factors cited (multiple factors
121. In the ACT, a sentencing judge will usually make explicit reference to
some of the factors that have informed their decision
to impose a suspended
sentence (or any other sentence). Although the assessment of an appropriate
sentence is not a mechanical
calculation,
a sentencing judge
should explicitly state the factors taken into account in sentencing. Unless
they do so there is no transparency
to the sentencing discretion.
It is then almost impossible for an
appellate court to determine if the exercise of the discretion miscarried.
Further, the lack
of transparency makes it impossible to report with certainty
on the rate at which different factors arise in decisions to impose
a suspended
sentence, only on the rate at which sentencing judges volunteer such
information.
122. The fact of an ‘early’ guilty plea was cited as a factor for
imposing a suspended sentence for four of the five offenders
in the 2004a sample
period, three of the 11 offenders for whom mitigating factors were cited in
2004b and for three of 15 offenders
in 2010. The fact of a guilty plea, without
describing it as ‘early’, was cited as a factor for one of 19
in the 2007 sample period. As we noted above, among all 53 suspended
sentences in the sample periods, only two (in 2010) followed
guilty verdicts
after trial; it is likely therefore that a guilty plea was a relevant factor in
imposing a suspended sentence, but
simply not remarked on. It is not possible
to infer, from the sample periods or the judges’ remarks, what different
might be given to the fact that a guilty plea was
123. An effect of the 2005 reforms was to enable the court to better tailor a
sentence to the circumstances of the offender. In the
2007 and 2010 sample
periods there was a increase over 2004a in the rate at which factors were
referred to by the sentencing judges,
although by 2004b, when the proposed
reforms had been introduced into parliament, the Court was already citing a
greater number of
subjective factors when imposing a suspended sentence.
124. It is usual in sentencing to group sentencing factors as follows:
• factors relevant to the offender (eg good character or youth), which
usually ‘carry the most weight in determining whether
a sentence should be
• factors relevant to the offence (eg whether the offence was committed
in company, impact on victim);
• offender’s response to the charges (eg remorse, guilty
• effect of offence and sanction (eg hardship to offender or
125. In the 2004a period, factors referred to by the sentencing judges were
mental health problems (for two offenders), the relative
lack of seriousness of
the offence (two), remorse (one), evidence of rehabilitation (one) and the
potential adverse impact on family
of actual incarceration (one). In 2004b, the
most commonly cited factors cited were the offender’s (relatively) good
(for five offenders), evidence of rehabilitation (four), family support
(four), the offender’s youth (three), mental health
problems (three).
Other factors included that the offence was relatively minor (two) or the
offender played a minor role in it (two)
and (one each) evidence of cooperation
with authorities or restitution, the offender’s old age, employment and
observation
of the totality principle.
126. In the 2007 sample period the most common factors cited were evidence of
rehabilitation (for six offenders), evidence of good
character (five), having
undertaken or currently undertaking drug/alcohol treatment (five), difficult
childhood (four), family responsibilities
(four), evidence of remorse (three),
low level of seriousness of the offence (three), being in stable employment
(two), being a first
offender (two), mental health problems (two),and (one each)
having pleaded guilty, having made restitution, presenting with a low
reoffending, being young, having been under the influence of co-offenders, and
having lost employment as a consequence of
the offence.
127. In the 2010 sample period the most common factors cited were: evidence
of remorse (for six offenders), evidence of rehabilitation
(five), the low level
of seriousness of the offence (four), having pleaded guilty (three), having
undertaken or undertaking drug/alcohol
treatment (three), in stable employment
(two), had been a delay in sentencing (two), had a stable family (two), had
cooperated with
police (two), and (one each) being a first offender, evidence of
good character, studying, being young, being old, and having physical
128. In light of the observations made above concerning the discretionary
manner in which sentencing judges cite reasons for their
decision, it is
difficult to extrapolate from the foregoing any clear pattern in the factors for
the imposition of suspended sentences.
It is possible however to say that
judicial officers now usually cite a broad collection of factors in each case,
which would appear
to reflect a policy to more readily tailor sentences to the
individual offender. As well, the samples suggest that greater regard
factors in the offender’s current circumstances that indicate a low
likelihood of re-offending than to factors in
the offender’s personal
history which might explain their having committed the current offence. As a
principal objective of
suspended sentences is the offender’s
rehabilitation, it is perhaps not surprising these factors are commonly
Breaches of suspended sentences
129. Quite apart from being concerned about consistency and certainty in the
practice of imposing suspended sentences, as the 2005
reforms were, it is
possible to ask about the effectiveness of suspended sentences as a sentencing
option. This question was not
asked by the Sentencing Review Working Group in
its 2002 Issues Paper, and was not said by the Government to have been a
consideration
in its reforms.
130. The effectiveness of suspended sentences as a sentencing option is a
current issue in Victoria, and has been in other jurisdictions:
see discussion
of the abolition of suspended sentences at [56]-[57] above. A common way to
attempt to evaluate suspended sentences
is to conduct a ‘breach
analysis’, asking how often a suspended sentence order is breached,
indicating thereby its effectiveness
in giving the offender what is often
perceived as a ‘second chance’.
131. The data collected for this evaluation cannot support a breach analysis.
Furthermore, we have reservations about whether a breach
analysis can be
usefully undertaken on the basis of the data currently available in the ACT, as
we do not have sufficient data on
reoffending patterns. A limited breach
analysis was undertaken recently within the ACT DPP by an officer of the DPP,
and the DPP
has generously agreed to share that analysis.
132. The Supreme Court doe not keep records on breaches of suspended
sentences. It is notable that the ABS itself does not collect
such data. The
officer obtained data by searching:
1. a Supreme Court sentencing database for records in 2009 where suspended
sentences came before the court for 'breach'; the officer
acknowledges that
alone, this method is flawed due to known errors and omissions in the
2. 2009 transcripts of ‘remarks on sentence’ for term 'breach',
then reading the identified transcript to locate those
which actually dealt with
a suspended sentence coming before the court for 'breach', and
3. 2009 "completed files" at the ACT DPP.
133. This did not take account of breach charges before the Magistrates
Court. The breaches which were identified occurred in 2009,
but the date of the
imposition of the original suspended sentence is not known.
134. On the basis of this research, the officer reports that in 2009, 23
breaches of fully suspended sentences came before the Supreme
Court. Among
those cases:
1. the original suspended sentence was activated, in whole or part, in 26% of
2. the original suspended sentence was not activated in 74% of cases
3. a further suspended sentences was imposed in 56% of cases
4. there was no action for the breach in 13% of cases.
135. The analysis is limited to those cases where the offender breached the
terms of the suspended sentence and was not prosecuted
for breach. It does not
report on cases where the offender was
prosecuted for breach, either
because of an exercise of discretion by the police or prosecutors or because of
a failure in administrative
processes for identifying breaches. In a recent
breach analysis in Tasmania, these factors were found to account for a
significant
failure to bring breached sentences back to
Accordingly, we cannot
say what proportion of all suspended sentences imposed in the Supreme Court over
a specific period of time,
or what proportion of all apparently breached
sentences, is represented by the 23 cases reported on.
136. In addition, there are further considerations which would need to be
identified and taken into account in analysing the breaches:
the nature of the
breaching conduct (for example, whether the offence was breached by further
offending or by a failure to comply
with conditions of supervision); the number
of breaches (for example, whether the action was taken following a single
instance of
reoffending or after numerous such instances); and the times frames
for reoffending or action (for example, did the offender breach
early or late in
the operational period? How long did it take for prosecution action to be
137. The ACT DPP analysis sheds some light on the prosecution of breaches of
fully suspended sentences in the ACT. It provides only
a partial picture of
what actually happens with suspended sentences, and further research could more
comprehensively investigate
this issue.
Statements of significance as to legislation or policy
138. In light of reforms to the legislative regime for imposing suspended
sentences in 2006, we looked for any relevant comments by
sentencing judges.
139. In 2004a and 2010, there were no judicial statements as to the
legislation or policy supporting suspended sentences. In 2004b,
in one case it
was observed that
It is clearly the law, as understood by the Court of Appeal of New South
Wales, that fully suspending a sentence of imprisonment for
supply of a drug of
dependence should only occur in what that court has described as exceptional
circumstances. Now, our Court of
Appeal has taken something of a different view
in relation to exceptional circumstances and has reminded sentencing judges in
court that we must look at the full circumstances of every offender and go
through the process that is set out in the
, and that it would be
wrong to limit circumstances warranting mercy to some sort of mathematical
formula to say we can only apply
them in exceptional circumstances, meaning a
minority of cases. We need to look in every case at every circumstance.
140. In 2007, fairly soon after the reforms came into effect, remarks of this
nature were made in three cases. In one case, the sentencing
judge commented on
how the reforms required the imposition of a GBO, but noted that they would have
imposed one in any event. In
the other two cases, there was a reference merely
to ‘the law’ and to common sentencing practice.
141. As is the case with sentencing remarks noted above, a sentencing judge
in the ACT is not obliged to comment on the legislative
or policy context in
which a sentence is imposed, or on the jurisprudence of sentencing. From the
researchers’ examination
of sentencing decisions more generally (not just
in suspended sentence cases), it appears to be the case that ACT judges rarely
to other similar cases or engage in analysis of the sentencing
legislation. Compared with the practice in some other jurisdictions
example, NSW and Victoria
judges are more likely in their sentencing remarks to confine themselves to the
facts of the case before them. A consequence
of this is that no significant
body of jurisprudence on suspended sentences under the 2005 reforms has
developed; the absence of
such jurisprudence has the potential to reduce
sentencing consistency over time.
C3. Observations
C3.1 Number
of judicial officers
It is not appropriate on the basis of the small number of cases to draw any
inferences about the sentencing practices of judges.
Offence type
In the sample periods, assault dominates as the offence type for which such
sentences are imposed.
Mean age of offenders
The data do not suggest any pattern in an offender’s age as a factor in
imposing a suspended sentence.
Sex of the offender
In the absence of data on the number of women who
were sentenced for imprisonable and comparable offences in the relevant periods,
a comparison between the rates at which men and women receive suspended
sentences is inappropriate.
An early plea of guilty is often cited as a mitigating factor in support of
the imposition of a suspended sentence.
The data show that a suspended sentence remains an appropriate sentencing
option for an offender who is convicted at trial.
Prior criminal record
In the absence of data on the number of offenders with no prior record who
were sentenced, it is not possible to say what proportion
of offenders with no
prior record received a suspended sentence. Future research could examine
consistency in the way that first-time
offenders are sentenced and the
appropriateness of the imposition of suspended sentences in the circumstance of
The data suggest that having a significant prior record does not preclude the
imposition of a suspended sentence. The data suggest
that the 2005 reforms may
have led to a significant prior record being a greater obstacle to receiving a
suspended sentence than
was the case previously. Future research could consider
the relevance of prior record to the imposition and effectiveness of suspended
sentences in the ACT.
C3.7 Length
of sentence
Since the 2005 reforms, some shorter suspended sentences (from six months)
are being imposed, although there is no clear pattern in
terms of the mean
length of sentences.
The data suggest that in the absence of a legislative limit on the length of
suspended sentences, ACT courts are assessing a period
of imprisonment
appropriate to the particular circumstances of the offender.
C3.8 Length
of operational period of the suspension
The data do not suggest any clear pattern in the periods for which sentences
are suspended, although it appears that it would be rare
for a sentence to be
suspended for less than one year or more than five.
C3.9 Conditions
of sentence
Recognisance
The rate of imposition of recognisances has decreased since the reforms,
probably attributable to the mandatory imposition of a GBO
and the greater range
of options available to the sentencing judge.
Reparations
The making a reparations order is very rare. This may be explained by the
random nature of the sampling, a reparations order having
been made in other
periods, and the futility of a making a reparations order in some circumstances.
behaviour order
Although obligatory, GBOs were recorded as having been made only in the 2007
sample period, and only in relation to three offenders.
The low rate of
imposition of GBOs could be a function of the other types of orders used, and
could be because of the form and the
accuracy in recording the orders made.
Supervision
The data show that most offenders are subject to the supervision of
Corrective Services, and were so prior to the 2005 reforms.
The data show that since the 2005 amendments judicial officers have more
clearly crafted sentences to the circumstances of the individual
although there had been a trend in this direction shortly before the reforms, in
Since the reforms, a fully suspended sentence is almost invariably
accompanied by a range of conditions on the behaviour of the offender
addition to accepting supervision of Corrective Services. Extensive further
research would be needed to report on the rate of
compliance with the conditions
and the recidivism rate among offenders who had been subject to such conditions
(see C3.11 below).
C3.10 Mitigating
The failure by sentencing judge to consistently state explicitly the factors
taken into account in sentencing make it impossible to
report with certainty on
the rate at which different factors arise in decisions to impose a suspended
The data show that most suspended sentences follow guilty pleas before trial.
It is not possible to infer, from the data or the judges’
remarks, what
different weighting might be given to the fact that a guilty plea was
‘early’, ie not at or during trial.
The data do not suggest any clear pattern in the factors for imposing
suspended sentences. Judicial officers do now, however, usually
cite a broad
collection of factors in each case, which reflects the policy in the 2005
reforms to more readily tailor sentences to
the individual offender.
The data suggest that greater regard is had to factors in the
offender’s current circumstances which indicate a low likelihood
re-offending than is had to factors in the offender’s personal history
which might explain their having committed the current
C3.11 Breaches
of suspended sentences
The data cannot support a breach analysis.
A limited breach analysis undertaken recently within the ACT DPP sheds some
light on the prosecution of breaches of fully suspended
sentences in the ACT.
It provides a partial picture of what actually happens with suspended sentences,
and further research could
more comprehensively investigate this issue.
C3.12 Statements of
significance as to legislation or policy
ACT judges rarely refer to other similar cases or engage in analysis of the
sentencing legislation, and usually confine their sentencing
remarks to the
facts of the case before them. As a result, there has been no significant body
of jurisprudence on suspended sentences
under the 2005 reforms. A risk
associated with this is that sentencing consistency will reduce over time.
C3.13 Policy
implications for further inquiry
In Part A.3.1, ‘Policy justification for suspended sentences
generally’, we recorded common arguments for and against
suspended sentences, and in [56] and [57] we report on moves to abolish
suspended sentences in other jurisdictions. The
current regime for suspended
sentences in the ACT was introduced in 2005, and the research undertaken for the
current reference does
not support an analysis of the desirability of suspended
sentences. We report at Part C2.11 on the type of research that could support
such an analysis. Consequently this report does not discuss or make
recommendations regarding the future use of suspended sentences
as a sentencing
option in the ACT.
In the course of its deliberations the Council noted a number of policy
issues that are raised by the research, and we record them
as possible matters
for future inquiry:
1. Should suspended sentences be a sentencing
option in the ACT?
Two features of the regime for suspended sentences in the ACT raise the
question of whether suspended sentences should be retained
as a sentencing
option. The two features are that it is mandatory to impose a conditional GBO
with a suspended sentence, and that
the suspended sentences is not automatically
activated on a breach of the GBO. These features combine to suggest that the
or effective sentence is the conditional GBO, not the suspended term of
imprisonment.
2. What should be the consequences of the
breach of a condition of the GBO associated with a suspended sentence?
Related to the previous issue is the question of whether there should be in
the ACT a presumption of activation of the suspended sentence
on breach of a
condition of the GBO. This is the case in NSW, South Australia, Victoria,
Queensland, WA and NT, although the details
of how the presumption operates
vary. Tasmania, ACT and the Commonwealth do not have such a presumption.
However the Tasmanian
Law Reform Institute has recently recommended introducing
a statutory presumption in favour of activation on breach.
3. What can be done to enhance consistency and
predictability in the imposition of suspended sentences?
The research has enabled us to recommend above at Part B1.3, and to comment
at C3.12, that consistency and predictability will be
enhanced through improved
reporting of reasons for and observations on the imposition of suspended
sentences. A further question
is whether the legislature should provide
guidance as to the factors a sentencing court should have regard to in
determining whether
to suspend a sentence, as is currently the case, for
example, in Victoria.
4. Does the terminology that is used
adequately convey the nature of a suspended sentence?
A so-called ‘suspended sentence’ is not the mere suspension of a
sentence. It is the suspension of a sentence of imprisonment,
and is subject to
conditions. It may be that the term ‘suspended sentence’ does not
sufficiently convey the gravity
and conditional nature of the decision. There
has been discussion in Canada and the United Kingdom about other possible
descriptions,
such as ‘conditional sentence’, or ‘suspended
custodial sentence’ or ‘conditional suspension of custody’.
A: Legislative provisions governing suspended sentences in
Legislation
Operational period
Can the ‘suspended sentence’ order be subject to
conditions?
Presumption of activation on breach
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
‘not exceeding the term of the sentence’
Yes. The offender must enter into a good behaviour bond, which, subject to
some restrictions, may contain ‘such other conditions
as are specified in
the order by which the bond is imposed’
Yes – unless the breach was trivial or there were good reasons for
the offender failing to comply with the bond.
Sentencing Act 1991
, ss 27, 29, 31
3 years (higher courts); 2 years (Local Court)
Suspended term of imprisonment or 3 years (higher courts) or 2 years (Local
Court), whichever is longer
No – only a general condition that the offender not commit another
offence punishable by imprisonment during the operational
period of the
Yes – unless unjust to do so in view of any exceptional
circumstances.
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
, ss 38, 40, 42, 58
None specified
3 years (term of bond under s 40)
Yes. Suspension is conditional on the defendant entering into a bond, which
may include conditions
Yes – unless the breach was trivial or there were good reasons for
the offender failing to comply with the bond.
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Not less than the term of imprisonment imposed; not more than 5 years
No – only a general condition that the offender not commit another
offence punishable by imprisonment during the operational
period of the
Yes – unless unjust to do so, taking into account all the
circumstances since the suspended sentence was imposed.
Sentencing Act 1995
No – only a general condition that the offender not commit another
offence punishable by imprisonment during the operational
period of the
Yes – unless unjust to do so, taking into account all the
circumstances since the suspended sentence was imposed.
Sentencing Act 1997
None specified
No period specified
Yes. A suspended sentence may be made subject to such conditions ‘as
the court considers necessary or expedient’.
No, but legislation has been enacted which will introduce a
presumption.
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
None specified
No period specified
Yes. A suspended sentence order is subject to a good behaviour bond which
may contain one of a range of conditions.
Sentencing Act 1995
Not more than 5 years from the date of the order (if fully suspended) or a
specified date (if partly suspended)
Yes. A suspended sentence may be made ‘subject to such conditions as
the court thinks fit’.
Yes – unless unjust to do so, taking into account all the
circumstances since the suspended sentence was imposed.
Crimes Act 1914
ss 20(1)(a)
None specified
Not more than 5 years
Yes. The offender is released upon giving a security and agreeing to abide
by prescribed conditions and any other conditions imposed
by the court.
B: References
and reports
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time,
Report 103,
Canberra (2006).
Lorana Bartels,
Suspended sentences in Tasmania: Key research
, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice No 377, Australian
Institute of Criminology, Canberra (2009).
Lorana Bartels,
‘An Examination of the Arguments For and Against
the Use of Suspended Sentences’,
Flinders Law Journal
Lorana Bartels, ‘The Weight of the Sword of Damocles: A Reconviction
Analysis of Suspended Sentences in Tasmania’
Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Criminology
Lorana Bartels, ‘To Suspend or Not to Suspend - A Qualitative Analysis
of Sentencing Decisions in the Supreme Court of Tasmania’
[2009] UTasLawRw 2
University of Tasmania Law Review
Lorana Bartels,
Sword or Feather: The Use and Utility of Suspended
Sentences in Tasmania
, Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Tasmania,
Hobart (2008), 187. http://eprints.utas.edu.au/7735/
Lorana Bartels, ‘The Use of Suspended Sentences in Australia:
Unsheathing the Sword of Damocles’
Criminal Law Journal
Georgia Brignell and Patrizia Poletti,
Suspended Sentences in New South
Sentencing Trends and Issues, No 29, Judicial Commission of New South
Wales, Sydney (2003).
Arie Freiberg,
Pathways to Justice: Sentencing Review,
Department of
Justice, Melbourne (2002).
Justice Bulletin no. 136. Sydney: NSW Bureau of Crime and Justice
Statistics.
George Mair, Noel Cross and Stuart Taylor,
The Use and Impact of the
Community Order and Suspended Sentence Order,
Community Sentence Series,
Centre for Crime and Justice Studies, London (2007).
Rohan Lulham, Don Weatherburn and Lorana Bartels,
The Recidivism of
Offenders Given Suspended Sentences: A Comparison with Full-time
Imprisonment
, Crime and Nicole Mayo, Senior Manager, Criminal Law Group,
Legislation and Policy Branch, 7 June 2010, Personal communication.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
, Discussion Paper
33, Sydney (1996);
, Report 79, Sydney (1996).
Reid Sexton, ‘Brumby in Backflip on Suspended Sentences’,
, 14 May 2010
http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/brumby-in-backflip-on-suspended-sentences-20100513-v1rh.html.
Patrizia Poletti and Sumitra Vignaendra,
Trends in the Use of Section 12
Suspended Sentences,
Sentencing Trends and Issues, No 34, Judicial
Commission of New South Wales, Sydney (2005).
Jon Stanhope, Legislative Assembly for the ACT,
2004), p3293.
Jon Stanhope, Legislative Assembly for the ACT,
2005), p1506.
'Sentencing in the Dock',
Lawyers Weekly
, 24 August 2001, 1.
Sentencing Review Working Group,
Sentencing Review ACT: Issues Paper,
Australian Capital Territory, September, 2002.
Bill Stefaniak, Legislative Assembly for the ACT,
November 2005), p 4092.
Tasmania Law Reform Institute,
, Report 11, Hobart
Victorian Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Discussion Paper: Suspended Sentences
, Melbourne
Victorian Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences in Victoria
– A Preliminary Information Paper
, Melbourne (2005).
Victorian Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences in Victoria:
Monitoring Report
, Melbourne (2010).
Victorian Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended sentences: Discussion
, Melbourne (2005) .
Don Weatherburn and Lorana Bartels, ‘The Recidivism of Offenders Given
Suspended Sentences in New South Wales, Australia’
Journal of Criminology
Legislation
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act 1995
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
Sentencing Act 1997
Crimes Act 1958
Sentencing Act 1991
Sentencing Act 1995
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321.
Kennewell v Rand
[2006] ACTCA 10
Lukatela v Birch (No 2)
[2008] ACTSC 148
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 215 ALR 213
Moore-McQuillan v Registrar of The Supreme Court
[2009] SASC 265
[2001] NSWCCA 229
R v Taylor (No 2)
[2008] ACTSC 97
Ryan v The Queen
(2001) 206 CLR 267
Znotins v Heazlewood
[2008] ACTSC 35
Jon Stanhope, Legislative
Assembly for the ACT,
(3 August 2004), p3293.
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/HANSARD/2004/week08/3293.htm
Jon Stanhope, Legislative
Assembly for the ACT,
, (7 April 2005), p1506.
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/hansard/2005/week05/1506.htm
Bill Stefaniak, Legislative
Assembly for the ACT,
, (15 November 2005), p 4092.
http://www.hansard.act.gov.au/HANSARD/2005/week13/4092.htm
Personal communication with
Nicole Mayo, Senior Manager, Criminal Law Group, Legislation and Policy Branch,
7 June 2010.
Sentencing Review Working
Sentencing Review ACT: Issues Paper,
Australian Capital Territory,
September, 2002.
Sentencing Review ACT:
Issues Paper
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
(ACT), s 140(2), which provides that the old sentencing law continues
to apply to an offender in relation to an offence if the offender
was charged
with the offence before the commencement of this section.
Moore-McQuillan v Registrar
of The Supreme Court
[2009] SASC 265.
For a fuller discussion,
including analysis of the strength of these arguments, see Lorana Bartels,
‘An Examination of the Arguments For and Against the Use of Suspended
Sentences’,
Flinders Law Journal
(in press). See also Victorian
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences in Victoria – A
Preliminary Information Paper
, Melbourne (2005).
See Don Weatherburn and
Lorana Bartels, ‘The Recidivism of Offenders Given Suspended Sentences in
New South Wales, Australia’
British Journal of
Criminology
; Lorana Bartels, ‘The Weight of the Sword of Damocles:
A Reconviction Analysis of Suspended Sentences in Tasmania’
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
; Rohan Lulham, Don
Weatherburn and Lorana Bartels,
The Recidivism of Offenders Given Suspended
Sentences: A Comparison with Full-time Imprisonment
, Crime and Justice
Bulletin no. 136. Sydney: NSW Bureau of Crime and Justice Statistics.
See further Lorana
‘An Examination of the Arguments For and Against the Use
of Suspended Sentences’,
Flinders Law Journal
(in press).
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
, [79]. For discussion, see Lorana Bartels, ‘The Use
of Suspended Sentences in Australia: Unsheathing the Sword of Damocles’
Criminal Law Journal
Kennewell v Rand
[2006] ACTCA 10
Znotins v Heazlewood
[2008] ACTSC 35
, [12]-[13];
R v Taylor (No 2)
[2008] ACTSC 97
Lukatela v Birch (No
[2008] ACTSC 148
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), s 27(3),
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1995
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321.
For the relevant legislation in each jurisdiction, see
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
(SA), s 11;
Sentencing Act 1991
Penalties and Sentences
s 9(2)(a)(i)
Sentencing Act 1995
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(Sentencing) Act 2005
There is no comparable provision in
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1997
further discussion see Lorana Bartels, ‘To Suspend or Not to Suspend - A
Qualitative Analysis of Sentencing Decisions
in the Supreme Court of
[2009] UTasLawRw 2
University of Tasmania Law Review
Bartels, ‘The Use of Suspended Sentences in Australia: Unsheathing the
Sword of Damocles’
Criminal Law Journal
Penalties and Sentences
Sentencing Act 1995
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
(SA), s 38(1); for commentary on the
meaning of these standards, see Lorana Bartels, ‘The Use of Suspended
Sentences in Australia:
Unsheathing the Sword of Damocles’
Criminal Law Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time,
Report 103, Canberra (2006) [7.45],
Sentencing Act
(Vic), s 27(1A). For discussion of the background to this provision,
which was introduced in 2006, see Victorian Sentencing Advisory
Suspended Sentences in Victoria: Monitoring Report
, Melbourne (2010).
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), s 27(2B).
Sentencing Act 1991
Crimes Act 1958
ss 31A(2)(b)
, 60A(2)(b).
Sentencing Act 1995
(NT), ss 78BA, 78BB,
Criminal Law (Sentencing)
(SA), ss 37(1), 38(2), 38(2a).
Crimes Act 1914
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time,
Report 103, Canberra (2006), Rec
See New South Wales Law
Reform Commission,
, Discussion Paper 33, Sydney (1996);
, Report 79, Sydney (1996).
Arie Freiberg,
to Justice: Sentencing Review,
Department of Justice, Melbourne (2002).
'Sentencing in the Dock',
Lawyers Weekly
, 24 August 2001, 1.
Victorian Sentencing
Advisory Council,
Suspended Sentences in Victoria: Monitoring Report
Melbourne (2010).
Reid Sexton, ‘Brumby
in Backflip on Suspended Sentences’,
, 14 May 2010
http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/brumby-in-backflip-on-suspended-sentences-20100513-v1rh.html
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic), s 31;
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 1995
Cf the Conditional Sentence of
Imprisonment available in the Perth Drug Court pursuant to
Sentencing Act 1995
Sentencing Act 1991
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW), s 13.
Sentencing Act
(Vic), s 31(5A).
Criminal Law
(Sentencing) Act 1988
(SA), ss 58.
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
(SA), s 58(4). The
court may order the sentence to be served cumulatively: s 58(4)(c).
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Sentencing Act
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
Sentencing Act 1995
respectively.
Crimes Act 1914
s 20A(5)(c).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time,
Report 103, Canberra (2006), Rec
For discussion, see Lorana
Sword or Feather: The Use and Utility of Suspended Sentences in
, Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Tasmania, Hobart (2008),
187. http://eprints.utas.edu.au/7735/
See Lorana Bartels,
Suspended sentences in Tasmania: Key research findings
, Trends and Issues
in Crime and Criminal Justice No 377, Australian Institute of Criminology,
Canberra (2009).
Tasmania Law Reform
, Report 11, Hobart (2008).
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW), s 12(1).
Patrizia Poletti and Sumitra
Vignaendra,
Trends in the Use of Section 12 Suspended Sentences,
Sentencing Trends and Issues, No 34, Judicial Commission of New South Wales,
Sydney (2005).
See George Mair, Noel Cross
and Stuart Taylor,
The Use and Impact of the Community Order and
Suspended Sentence Order,
Community Sentence Series, Centre for Crime
and Justice Studies,
London (2007), 31.
For discussion of the
factors cited here and other relevant factors cited in mitigation in suspended
sentence cases, see Lorana Bartels,
‘To Suspend or Not to Suspend - A
Qualitative Analysis of Sentencing Decisions in the Supreme Court of
[2009] UTasLawRw 2
University of Tasmania Law Review
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 215 ALR 213 at [52] per McHugh J;
Ryan v The Queen
CLR 267, 294 per Kirby J.
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 215 ALR 213 at [39] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan
, [30] (Badgery-Parker AJ
See Lorana Bartels,
‘Sword or butter knife? A breach analysis of suspended sentences in
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
See for example Georgia
Brignell and Patrizia Poletti,
Suspended Sentences in New South Wales,
Sentencing Trends and Issues, No 29, Judicial Commission of New South Wales,
Sydney (2003); Victorian Sentencing Advisory Council,
Suspended sentences:
Discussion paper
, Melbourne (2005); Lorana Bartels, ‘The Use of
Suspended Sentences in Australia: Unsheathing the Sword of Damocles’
Criminal Law Journal
Adapted from
Lorana Bartels, ‘The Use of Suspended Sentences in Australia: Unsheathing
the Sword of Damocles’ (2007) 31
Criminal Law Journal
113; Victorian
Sentencing Advisory Council,
Discussion Paper: Suspended Sentences
Melbourne (2005); 23-34; 37-39.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.29 MB)
PDF format (758 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter