URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCIntroP/1998/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Introductory Pamphlet 2 - Commonwealth legislation relating to forfeiture of the proceeds of crime [1998] ALRCIntroP 2
Introductory Pamphlet 2 - Commonwealth legislation relating to forfeiture of the proceeds of
introduction to the inquiry
What is this inquiry about?
Overview of current proceeds of crime regime
Threshold issues
Issues relating to specific terms of reference
How to make Submissions
TERMS OF REFERENCE
ALTERATION OF TERMS OF REFERENCE
An introduction to the inquiry
__________________________________
The Australian Law Reform Commission (the ALRC) has been asked to inquire
into and report on the Commonwealth legislative scheme relating
forfeiture of the proceeds of crime. A copy of the terms of reference together
with a recent alteration to them are at pages
16 to 18. The focus of the
inquiry is on the effectiveness of the existing proceeds of crime scheme
* enhancing Australia's capacity to counter serious crime domestically;
* permitting Australia to meet its multilateral and bilateral international
obligations; and
* fulfilling Australia's domestic and international obligations to maintain
human rights and civil liberties, drawing an appropriate
balance between
those rights and the community interest in ensuring effective law enforcement.
This pamphlet introduces the inquiry and some of the issues identified
in preliminary consultations with the major stakeholders whose
perspectives
have ranged from those of law enforcement and business to civil liberties
and defence counsel. As well as inviting your
views on the issues identified
here, we would welcome your views on any other issues that you consider
merit our consideration in
the inquiry. We would also appreciate submissions
on how those issues might be treated and resolved.
The remainder of this pamphlet addresses the following matters:
* what is this enquiry about?
* overview of current proceeds of crime regime
* threshold issues
* issues relating to specific terms of reference
* invitation to make submissions.
Further information can be obtained from the ALRC's Deputy President,
Mr David Edwards, who is the lead commissioner for this reference,
Mr Herman Woltring, lead consultant on the reference, both of whom may
be contacted at the Canberra office of the ALRC, details
of which are set
out at the end of this pamphlet.
What is this inquiry about?
The inquiry will look into and report on the operation of th
of Crime Act 1987
(Cth) and the related forfeiture of employer funded
superannuation benefits pursuant to the
Crimes (Superannuation Benefits)
Australian Federal Police Act
(Cth). The impact of other closely related federal legislation
will also be considered -- in particular, Division 3 of
Customs Act 1901
. Also to be examined are proceeds forfeiture laws
of the States and Territories, together with the experience of the operation
those laws. In addition, the experiences of a number of overseas jurisdictions
will be considered, along with relevant international
law and practice.
While the ALRC does not see it as its role to re-open the primary question
whether there should be a proceeds of crime forfeiture
law, it will be
considering such questions as the perceived harshness of the operation
of the law, particularly -- but not exclusively
-- on innocent third parties.
Such third parties could include joint owners of property as well as finance
or other companies with
recognised legal rights and interests in assets
which might be exposed to forfeiture. So seen, the reference addresses
not only issues
relevant to the administration of criminal law but also
to commercial risk management. Also to be assessed is the impact of the
regime on business generally, as well as in areas such as record
retention requirements.
Overview of current proceeds of crime regime
The principal Commonwealth legislation dealing with the forfeiture of
criminally obtained assets is the
Proceeds of Crime Act
. The scheme is
conviction based in that forfeitures and pecuniary penalties can only follow
conviction for a criminal offence. In
addition, Division 3 of
Customs Act
permits a pecuniary penalty order to be made in respect
of `prescribed narcotic dealings ` (as defined) whether or not the person
against whom the order is sought or made has been convicted of, or even
charged with any offence. Both Acts provide regimes which
permit property
to be located and enable dealings with the property to be restrained pending
the making of a final forfeiture or
pecuniary penalty order.
Some provisions of the
Proceeds of Crime Act
are used to fulfil Australia's
international obligations to maintain a capacity to trace, freeze and forfeit
proceeds of crime, including
crime committed overseas. These obligations
arise from Australia's accession to the
1988 United Nations Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
the Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation
of Proceeds of Crime
. Additionally, proceeds clauses are contained
in Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Treaties entered into bilaterally.
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
The principal objects of this Act as set in sub-section 3(1) are:
* to deprive persons of the proceeds of, and benefits derived from, the
commission of offences against the laws of the Commonwealth
or of the Territories;
* to provide for the forfeiture of property used in or in connection with
the commission of such offences; and
* to enable law enforcement authorities effectively to trace such proceeds,
benefits and property.
Depriving persons of proceeds and other benefits has a twofold purpose.
The first is to give practical meaning to the adage that `crime
pay'. The second, and possibly more important, purpose is to render such
proceeds unavailable for re-investment in criminal
enterprise and to preclude
organised crime from infiltrating legitimate business. Under the Act, assets
cannot be forfeited until
the person has been convicted of a criminal offence
although assets can be located and restrained pending conviction.
The scheme of the Act is set out below.
Forfeiture orders
The Act provides for two forms of forfeiture, namely court ordered forfeiture
following conviction of an indictable offence, and statutory
which occurs only after conviction of one or more defined serious offences.
The effect of forfeiture under either of the
two forms is to vest ownership
of the relevant property in the Commonwealth. While the Act does not expressly
provide for the protection
of legitimate interests secured over such vested
property, its administration generally achieves that result.
Such relevant property includes tainted property which is widely defined.
As well as proceeds of crime, it includes any property used
in or in connection
with the commission of the offence. Proceeds of the offence is defined
to mean any property that is derived or
realised, directly or indirectly,
by any person from the commission of the offence.
Automatic forfeiture
Automatic statutory forfeiture of restrained assets follows conviction
of a `serious offence'which is defined to mean:
* a drug offence involving a trafficable quantity;
* an organised fraud offence (as created by section 83 of the Act); or
* a money laundering offence in relation to the proceeds of either of the
above two offences.
Under this regime all property of a convicted person which is still
the subject of a restraining order six months after the date of
is automatically forfeited to the Commonwealth without any necessity for
an order from the court. In other words, forfeiture
occurs by effluxion
of time once the conditions precedent are met. There are, however, provisions
for the convicted person, and any
innocent third parties with a bona fide
interest in the property, to have certain property or interests in it excluded
from an automatic
forfeiture.
Pecuniary penalty orders
If satisfied that a person derived benefits from an offence, a court
may assess the value of those benefits and order the person to
value to the Commonwealth. Such orders may be made either independently
of, or in conjunction with, forfeiture orders, for
example in cases where
no tainted property, or an inadequate amount of such property, can be located.
In assessing the value of benefits the court is to have regard to
* the value of the property that came into the possession or under the
control of the defendant, or another person at the request
or direction
of the defendant, by reason of the commission of the offence or any of
the offences;
* the value of any other benefits provided to the defendant by reason of
the commission of the offence;
* in relation to offences relating to narcotic substances, the market value
at the time of the offence of similar, or substantially
similar , narcotic
substances;
* the amount that was, at the time of the offence, ordinarily paid for
a substantially similar act or thing;
* the value of the defendant's property before and after the commission
of the offence (or, in the case of offences committed over
a period of
time, the value before, during and after the period in question). This
is a `betterment' exercise similar to that which
may be employed by the
Australian Taxation Office in raising a tax assessment; and
* the expenditure and income of the person before and after the commission
of the offence (or, in the case of a number of offences,
before, during
and after the period in question).
To more effectively assess the value of benefits derived, the court
may treat as property of the person any property that, in the
the court, is subject to the `effective control' of the person. The expression
`effective control' may apply whether or
not the person has any:
(a) legal or equitable estate or interest in the property; or
(b) right, power or privilege in connection with the property.
As well as the more obvious forms of control such as company shareholdings
and directorships, a court may also have regard to less
overt, and more
subtle, forms of control, such as those referred to in s 9A(2)(e)
family, domestic and business relationships between persons having an
interest in the property, or in companies ... or trusts ...
and other persons.
These provisions are designed to prevent criminal assets being concealed
behind a corporate veil or in the name of a nominee. In addition,
of property under the effective control of the defendant may be included
in the calculation of the value of any benefits
derived from the commission
of an offence or offences. The court can also order such property to be
made available to satisfy a pecuniary
penalty order.
Pecuniary penalty orders create civil debts which may be enforced as
if they were judgment debts. Upon the making of a pecuniary penalty
where property is restrained, a statutory charge is imposed on that property
to secure payment.
Customs Act 1901
Customs Act
, also makes provision for forfeiture in
Division 1, and for pecuniary penalty orders in Division 3. The latter
are restricted to
prescribed narcotic dealings.
The pecuniary penalty regime under Division 3 is similar to that under
Proceeds of Crime Act
in that the court may make restraining orders
against property, including property under a person's effective control,
pending determination
of the pecuniary penalty order proceedings. Once
a pecuniary penalty order is made it is again a civil debt which can be
as a judgment debt and, where property is restrained, the making
of the order imposes a statutory charge on that property to secure
It can thus lead to a dispossession of the restrained property.
One significant difference from the
Proceeds of Crime Act
is that, under
Customs Act
, the pecuniary penalty proceedings are instituted in the
Federal Court of Australia as opposed to State Supreme Courts, and a conviction
is not a condition precedent. The proceedings are civil in nature and the
Court needs only to be satisfied that the person has engaged
in a particular
prescribed narcotics dealing or in such dealings during a particular period.
The evidence needed to establish this
is less than the criminal standard
of beyond reasonable doubt but, given the High Court's decision in
v Briginshaw
, is probably higher than the mere balance of probabilities
civil standard.
The Division 1 forfeiture regime is administrative in nature and has
greater implications for innocent third parties. Although in
a warrant must be obtained from a judicial officer to seize `forfeited'
goods, thereafter there may be no further judicial
intervention. A seizure
notice must be issued to the owner setting out a number of matters identifying
the goods seized, the date
of seizure and ground or grounds thereof, and
a statement that if no action is taken within 30days the goods will be
taken to be
condemned as forfeited to the Crown. Condemnation vests title
in the Commonwealth to the exclusion of all other interests in the
including the interests of secured creditors.
Crimes (Superannuation Benefits) Act 1989
Australian Federal
Police Act 1979
These two Acts operate to disentitle Commonwealth employees and members
of the Australian Federal Police who are convicted of a corruption
in relation to their office and who are sentenced to more than 12 months
imprisonment. In these cases, a `superannuation
order' may be sought and,
when made, has the effect of depriving the convicted offender of all government
funded rights and benefits
that would otherwise be payable by virtue of
the person's membership of superannuation schemes. The rationale of the
legislation
is that superannuation orders are not penalties for the commission
of an offence. Rather, corruption of office is considered a failure
fulfil a condition of employment so fundamental that it would be wrong
for the offender to remain entitled to employer funded
superannuation.
These Acts provide mechanisms to:
* prevent the payment of Commonwealth funded superannuation benefits where
a relevant employee has been convicted of a corruption
* allow the recovery of such payments where the person has already received
Commonwealth funded superannuation benefits and has subsequently
been convicted
of a corruption offence which took place when the person was still in office;
* restrain property of an employee convicted of a corruption offence or
who may be convicted of a corruption offence where that person
has already
been paid a Commonwealth funded superannuation benefit.
As in the case of both the
Proceeds of Crime Act
and Division 3 of
Customs Act
, property under the effective control of the person
can be restrained.
The loss of all publicly funded superannuation benefits is in addition
to any confiscation order that might be made under the
Proceeds of Crime
or other legislation. Furthermore, both Acts direct courts not to take
into account the possibility that a superannuation order might
when sentencing a person convicted of a corruption offence.
Threshold issues
Before dealing with the specific terms of reference, a number of threshold
issues has been raised in preliminary consultations. Some
relate to matters
relevant to more than one of the specific terms of reference, others to
the fact that the
Proceeds of Crime Act
cannot be looked at in isolation,
but rather as part of a wider matrix of legislation. Principal among these
issues are the following:
Uniformity or consistency
Given the range of forfeiture regimes in Commonwealth legislation --
not to mention State and Territory laws -- the question arises
extent to which there should be consistency in:
* forfeiture regimes and processes -- would this render compliance easier,
better and more cost effective for the business community
and assist law
enforcement?
* rights of innocent third parties, particularly, but not exclusively,
in the case of
forfeitures;
* the investigative tools available to law enforcement, including rules
relating to access to business records;
* record retention and production requirements;
* evidentiary provisions -- eg various Evidence Acts permit the use of
electronic documentation, but the
Proceeds of Crime Act
requires retention
and production of some original documentation.
An associated question is whether the record retention provisions of
Proceeds of Crime Act
-- sections 76 and 77 -- would be more appropriately
placed in the
Financial Transaction Reports Act
Conviction or non-conviction based forfeiture
Proceeds of Crime Act
requires conviction of a predicate offence
before forfeiture and pecuniary penalties can occur or be imposed. The
provisions of Division
Customs Act
, which are restricted
to drug trafficking, do not require a conviction. As well as its conviction
based scheme, New South Wales has
a non-conviction based scheme, the
Assets Recovery Act 1990
, relating to drug trafficking and a range
of other offences carrying a penalty of 5years imprisonment or more. Other
States are going
down the same path, raising the issue of whether the Commonwealth
should do likewise.
If a Commonwealth non-conviction based scheme were to be introduced
* What should be the threshold to trigger applications?
* What should be the range of offences to which it might be applicable?
* Should it extend to large profit making `quasi criminal' conduct such
as that involved in customs prosecutions?
* Should the present statutory forfeiture regime of
of Crime Act
be varied to take account of such a new scheme?
* Should negotiated settlements be available and, if so, should there be
a mechanism to re-open proceedings in the event of a subsequently
ascertained
non-disclosure, or only partial disclosure, of assets?
* Are there public interest concerns that point to the need to limit the
availability of such negotiated settlements?
* Should preliminary steps such as search warrants, monitoring and restraining
orders be common to both schemes, enabling election
at a later date when
better informed decisions can be made as to which scheme to invoke?
* In what other respects might both schemes need to be integrated so as
to take account of one another?
If only a conviction based scheme is to be retained, should the
of Crime Act
be extended to permit a court to take into account the totality
of the picture in making forfeiture or pecuniary penalty orders?
example, the assets appear to indicate more offences than those for which
the person was charged, should the court be able
to go beyond the offences
of which the person is convicted?
* What should be the relationship between forfeiture and pecuniary penalties
and other Commonwealth legislation dealing with, for
example, bankruptcy,
family law, taxation and customs?
* Can these other areas of law be used or misused to defeat forfeiture
and pecuniary penalty orders and, if so, what can be done
to prevent this?
* Does the range of forfeiture provisions and schemes create scope for
unseemly competition and `asset grabbing' by different law
enforcement
bodies such as by the use of other legislation when actions under the
of Crime Act
might be deemed more appropriate?
Money laundering avenues
Reports generated under the
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
are frequently the trigger for criminal investigations.
* Given new banking services, do relevant definitions -- for example, of
financial institutions -- need to be revisited?
* Are all transactions covered which could be used for money laundering
-- for example international funds transfers per medium of
credit card
facilities, or via the INTERNET?
In relation to the
Proceeds of Crime Act
* Are the definitions of `tainted property' and `proceeds of crime' too
wide, too narrow or too imprecise?
* Does the offence-based definition of `proceeds of crime' defeat the intention
of section 82 which is to penalise dealing in property
which is reasonably
suspected of being such proceeds and, if so, how should section 82 be amended?
Proceeds of Crime Act
, applications for restraining orders
and variations thereto, as well as for search warrants and production orders
must be made to
the Supreme Courts of the States and Territories although,
subject to limitations, final forfeiture or pecuniary penalty orders may
be made by the trial court. This leads to questions such as:
* Given increases in jurisdiction of State and Territory courts, is it
appropriate that some orders can be sought only from Supreme
* Are the current limitations on the ability of lower courts, including
magistrates' courts, to make final orders appropriate?
Time restraints
Given the complexities and the time taken to complete the criminal justice
process from charging to acquittal or conviction
* is the duration of 6 months for restraining orders appropriate or should
they remain in force pending completion of the criminal
proceedings and
* should either party have the right to re-open the case?
Administration of restrained assets
Restrained assets may, subject to the order of the court, be taken into
custody and control by the Official Trustee. Does the Act
adequately address
the powers of the Official Trustee:
* to ensure that all appropriate assets are under its control;
* to deal with property in cases where the cost of securing, protecting
and maintaining an asset outweighs its realisable value;
* to destroy, as opposed to sell, property in cases where the public interest
or public safety so require;
* where the income on the restrained assets is taxed in the hands of the
person whose assets are restrained, to require provision
of tax file numbers
to ensure that the top marginal rate of tax (which may be recouped by the
person when lodging a tax return) is
not levied by the Australian Taxation
* to deal with unsaleable assets such as one joint tenant's interest in
real property,
should there be a power in such a case, with or
without an order from the court, to sell the property and pay out the other
* to recover its costs of administration;
* to make the necessary decisions in relation to the functioning of a business,
in relation to a horse stud, what horses to run and when and
to be protected from the consequences of those decisions (factual example);
* to lease property?
Issues relating to specific terms of reference
(1) The need for appropriate recognition of rights of third parties,
including on forfeiture of jointly owned property, and the relationship
of forfeiture of assets to rights of secured creditors including, in event
of bankruptcy of a person charged with or convicted of
a serious Commonwealth
offence, and the effect of such bankruptcy on the forfeiture process.
* Any innocent third parties whose interest may be affected by a restraining
or forfeiture order may have to either adduce evidence
at the hearing of
the restraining order or institute court action to have those interests
excluded once the order is made. This raises
the question whether the statute
should expressly protect the rights of bona fide holders of charges and
other interests in restrained
property? If so, what criteria, if any, would
need to be met to establish the bona fide nature of such charges and interests?
should bear the onus of satisfying those criteria?
* Property forfeited under the
Proceeds of Crime Act
and Division 3 of
Customs Act
is said to `vest absolutely' in the Commonwealth
and no mention is made of the interests of mortgagees' and other creditors'.
the ALRC understands that, in practice, account is taken of such
legitimate third party interests, the question arises whether the
should expressly recognise such interests as, for example, does
Confiscation of Proceeds of Crime Act 1989
* Where a person whose property is forfeited becomes bankrupt, innocent
third parties could include bona fide creditors. What should
be the balance
in such cases between the interests of the Commonwealth in retaining proceeds
and of those creditors? Should the `relation
back' powers under the Bankruptcy
Act enable the Official Trustee to claw back payments to the Commonwealth?
* `Deodand' type in rem forfeitures are available under some Commonwealth
legislation such as the
Customs Act
and the Fisheries Management Act. Such
forfeitures extinguish the rights of innocent third parties with a legitimate
interest in
property, leaving them with only a civil action against the
person causing the forfeiture -- eg the hire purchase company financing
a motor vehicle which, unbeknown to it, is used by the hirer to transport
heroin. The question is whether this law is appropriate
in contemporary
* Some other issues relevant to this term of reference have already been
dealt with in the
Threshold issues
(2) The relationship of forfeiture of proceeds to the possibility
of compensation of, or restitution to, a victim of the same crime
and whether
Commonwealth legislation should make provision for such compensation or
restitution where forfeiture of proceeds is sought?
* The only`victims' to which compensation may be paid under the
of Crime Act
are Government business enterprises in relation to financial
losses suffered by them consequent upon the criminal conduct. Is this
appropriate?
* With limited exceptions, other recovered proceeds are ultimately paid
into the Consolidated Revenue Fund. This raises an ancillary
question whether
there is a risk that organisations other than government business enterprises,
government departments, may seek to recover civilly in cases
where prosecution would be more appropriate as they can then claim credit
for recovering monies or property -- even though such monies would still
go to Consolidated Revenue. Are there public interest implications
* Should the question of `victims' be revisited? The Act would appear to
presuppose that the victim is normally the Commonwealth.
Given the expanding
ambit of Commonwealth criminal law , is this always the case -- eg victims
of conduct prohibited by the
Crimes (Child Sex Tourism) Amendment Act
* What should be the effect upon proceeds actions of compensation such
as criminal injuries compensation or restitution ordered by
the court pursuant
to other legislation? Should this relationship be explicitly set out?
(3) The control of restrained assets and the prevention of unreasonable
dissipation of restrained assets on legal expenses.
Proceeds of Crime Act
permits a court to make provision for meeting
reasonable living expenses and reasonable expenses in defending a criminal
of restrained property.
Section 243E(4)(c)
Customs Act
on the other hand, provides only that a court may make provision for reasonable
living expenses. However in
Kirk & Ors v AFP
(1988) 81 ALR 321
it was held that the expression `reasonable living and business expenses'
includes legal expenses. Thus the position under the two
Acts is effectively
There has been judicial criticism of this function being conferred on
courts, probably best encapsulated by the words of then Kirby
Crime Commission v Fleming & Heal
the prospect of judges of the court before relevant proceedings resolving
as issues of fact and opinion the reasonableness or otherwise
expenses where these are in contest is an unwelcome one.
The attention of the ALRC has been drawn to at least one case where
restrained property of substantial value was totally expended
costs and thereafter the accused pleaded guilty to the offence.
* Should restrained funds be released for legal expenses? If not, should
there be a right to legal aid subject to normal legal aid
* Who should authorise the release of funds? Courts? A specialised agency?
Legal Aid Commissions? Should the process be divided by,
for example, one
body determining `reasonableness' and the court authorising release?
* What criteria should apply to any release of funds?
-- merely lack of unrestrained assets?
-- a merits test in relation to the proceedings sought to be funded?
-- a means test based on full disclosure of assets?
-- should any release be limited to `non-tainted' assets?
-- should funds be available only for committal and trial proceedings
and not collateral proceedings?
-- should legal costs be `capped'?
* Who should monitor the spending of released assets to ensure that they
are used for the payment of lawyers?
-- the defendant,
-- a specialist agency,
-- Legal Aid Commissions?
* If access to legal aid should be the preferred option, how should the
legal aid be recovered?
-- repayment from the Confiscated Assets Trust Fund?
-- by a charge on the restrained assets in favour of the Legal Aid Commissions?
(4) Existing provisions in Commonwealth law for non-conviction
based (in rem) forfeiture and whether Commonwealth law should be modified
in that regard, and whether the civil forfeiture regime of Division 3 of
Customs Act 1901
should be integrated into the
of Crime Act 1987
* Some issues have already been identified in the
Threshold issues
section, particularly under the headings `Uniformity or Consistency' and
`Priorities'.
* The remaining issue relating to the effect of
on the rights of third parties has been dealt with under
Specific Reference
(5) Possible legislation to cover `literary proceeds'.
There have been cases where perpetrators of crimes have indirectly profited
from their crimes by contracting to tell their stories
to the press, making
films or videos or by publishing books. In a notable Victorian case, a
prison warder helped her lover and another
inmate escape from prison. This
led to a shoot-out with police in which the other inmate was killed. The
warder contracted to tell
the story of her role for $52500. The proceeds
were subsequently confiscated under the
Crimes (Confiscation of Profits)
(Vic) which makes specific provision for the confiscation
of benefits derived from `literary proceeds' of criminal activity. Two
other States, Queensland and South Australia, make specific provision for
the confiscation of profits derived from media exploitation
of criminal
* Should literary proceeds be regarded as indirect proceeds of crime?
* Would a law providing for forfeiture of such literary proceeds amount
to an unreasonable inhibition on free speech?
* Would such a law detract from the basic underlying policy of confiscation,
namely to combat major crime by removing the incentive
to engage in criminal
activity or is it in the public interest to give full force and effect
to the adage that `crime does not pay'?
* If enacted, should the legislation confer on the courts a discretion
as to the proportion of media profits which should be confiscated
out criteria which the courts should take into account?
* To what extent, if any, should literary proceeds be regarded as derived
from the creative talent or business acumen of the person?
(6) The adequacy of, and need and justification for expansion
of police powers to obtain information from financial institutions for
the purpose of locating proceeds.
The background to this term of reference is that, when originally enacted,
Proceeds of Crime Act
contained a provision whereby the banks could,
under certain circumstances, give information to a police officer or to
the National
Crime Authority. This was section 79, which further provided
that no action would lie -- for example, for breach of confidentiality
-- against any institution or officer for providing such information. In
addition, section 80 provided that, in respect of information
under section 79, the relevant institution should not be liable for money
laundering.
These sections were repealed when the
Cash Transaction Reports Act
Financial Transaction Reports Act
) was passed. This
Act contains its own reporting requirements in relation to `suspect' and
other defined transactions. The policy
underlying the repeal of sections
79 and 80 in the
Proceeds of Crime Act
was that AUSTRAC would be the appropriate
interface between financial institutions and the law enforcement community.
According to some law enforcement officials, the scope of information
which could be obtained under the now repealed sections 79 and
80 was wider
than currently obtainable from AUSTRAC. For example it is said that information
account at a particular bank and,
if so, the account number, used to be obtainable by law enforcement agencies
under section79 of
Proceeds of Crime Act
. Such information is now not
readily available.
* Would the re-enactment of sections 79 and 80 have any deleterious effect
on the working relationship between AUSTRAC and the financial
given that AUSTRAC information is available to all law enforcement agencies?
* Would such a provision impose unreasonable burdens on financial institutions?
* Is there a danger that information obtained by one police force which
is not immediately available to others will lead to inefficiencies
overlapping investigations?
* If sections 79 and 80 were to be re-enacted, what protections would need
to be provided to financial institutions and what provisions,
if any, would
need to be made to ensure non-disclosure of the request to the institution's
* If not to be re-enacted, should another mechanism, for example, an administrative
notice issued by a senior police officer or a
request by AUSTRAC, be provided
to enable the obtaining of information at an early stage in an investigation
before a case sufficient
to support an application for a search warrant
(7) Existing provisions for loss of Commonwealth superannuation
entitlements and benefits following conviction for a `corruption offence'
and whether there is any need for a change in the existing law.
As mentioned in the introductory section, on application after conviction
of corruption offences for which a sentence of more than
12 months imprisonment
is imposed, Commonwealth employees and members of the Australian Federal
Police stand to lose their entire
government funded superannuation benefits.
Such a disentitlement can occur after a proceeds of crime order has been
Again, although the ALRC does not see it as part of its task to question
the basic policy underlying the legislation, the following
issues seem
to arise for its consideration.
* Once the application for a superannuation order is made, the court has
no discretion but must make the order if satisfied that
the conditions
precedent are met and that the offence was a `corruption offence'. Given
the rationale underlying the legislation
earlier referred to, should there
be a discretion and, if so, to what factors should the court have regard?
* The order has the effect of depriving the convicted person of all government
funded benefits regardless of how large or small the
gain from the predicate
criminal offence. In contrast, the
Queensland Public Officers' Superannuation
Benefits Recovery Act
confers on the court a discretion to determine
the proportion of the employer funded benefit to be forfeited. Should a
similar discretion
be granted under Commonwealth legislation or does the
public interest in ensuring corruption free government administration militate
against this?
Submissions
The ALRC welcomes submissions on any of the issues raised above and
on any other matters relevant to recovery and forfeiture of proceeds
We particularly welcome submissions which detail experiences, including
cases supporting the comments made in the submission and identify
articles and other research that is relevant to the inquiry.
The final date for written submission is 19 June 1998. Submissions should
be sent to: The Secretary, Australian Law Reform Commission,
GPO Box 1995,
Canberra City ACT 2601 AUSTRALIA. Telephone (61-2) 6257 7029 Facsimile:(61-2)
6257 7505 TTY: (61-2) 9284 6379 E-mail:
poc@alrc.gov.au.
Confidentiality
Unless a submission is marked confidential, it will be made available
to any person or organisation on request. If you want your submission,
or any part of it, to be treated as confidential, please indicate this
clearly. A request for access to a submission marked `confidential'
be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
The ALRC will include in its final report on this project a list of
submissions received in response to this pamphlet. It may also
those submissions in the text of the report and other ALRC publications.
It may decide to publish them. If you do not want
your submission or any
part of it to be used in any one of these ways please indicate this clearly.
TERMS OF REFERENCE
PROCEEDS OF CRIME
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
I, DARYL WILLIAMS, Attorney-General of Australia, HAVING REGARD
(a) the importance of effective provision for forfeiture of
the proceeds of crime to Australia's efforts to counter serious crime;
(b) Australia's obligations under international law, including under
* The 1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances; and
* bilateral treaties dealing with mutual assistance in criminal matters.
(c) the proposed ratification by Australia of the Council of Europe
Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of
the Proceeds
from Crime;
(d) the need for proceeds laws in Australia that enable reciprocal assistance
to be granted on request by other countries with respect
to the tracing,
restraining and forfeiture of proceeds;
(e) the responsibility of the Commonwealth to respect and maintain human
rights and civil liberties and the need to maintain a proper
balance between
those rights and liberties on the one hand and protection of the community
by effective and appropriate law enforcement
measures on the other hand;
(f) the need to make provision for the fair, prompt and effective resolution
of disputes and other issues arising in the course of
the restraining and
forfeiture process without imposing time limits that create difficulties
in relation to the continuing workload
of the courts;
(g) the operation since enactment of the
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
Crimes (Superannuation Benefits) Act 1989
Federal Police Act 1979
(h) the various laws of the Australian States and Territories with respect
to the forfeiture of the proceeds of crime and any relevant
of the operation of those laws.
IN PURSUANCE of
Australian Law Reform Commission
, HEREBY REFER to the Australian Law Reform Commission for
inquiry and report the
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
(Superannuation Benefits) Act 1989
Federal Police Act 1979
The Commission is to have regard the matters set out above, and, in
particular, is to inquire into and report on:
(1) the need for appropriate recognition of rights of third parties,
including on forfeiture of jointly owned property, and the relationship
of forfeiture of assets to rights of secured and unsecured creditors, including,
in event of the bankruptcy of a person charged with
or convicted of a serious
Commonwealth offence, and the effect of such bankruptcy on the forfeiture
(2) the relationship of forfeiture of proceeds of a crime to the possibility
of compensation of, or restitution to, a victim of the
same crime and whether
Commonwealth legislation should make provision for such compensation or
restitution where forfeiture of proceeds
(3) the control of restrained assets and the prevention of unreasonable
dissipation of restrained assets on legal expenses;
(4) existing provisions in Commonwealth law for non-conviction-based
(in rem) forfeiture, and whether Commonwealth law should be modified
that regard; and whether the civil forfeiture regime of Division 3 of
Customs Act 1901
should be integrated into the
of Crime Act
(5) possible legislation to cover "literary proceeds";
(6) the adequacy of, and any need and justification for expansion of,
police powers to obtain information from financial institutions
for purpose
of locating proceeds; and
(7) existing provisions for loss of Commonwealth superannuation entitlements
and benefits following conviction for a "corruption offence"
and whether there is any need for change in the existing law.
IN PERFORMING its functions in relation to the reference, the Commission
is to consult widely among the Australian community, with
the Australian
Federal Police, the Director of Public Prosecutions, the National Crime
Authority and other relevant Commonwealth,
State and Territory authorities
and with relevant non-government organisations.
THE COMMISSION IS REQUIRED to report not later than 31 December 1998.
Dated 7 December 1997
Daryl Williams
Attorney-General
PROCEEDS OF CRIME
ALTERATION OF TERMS OF REFERENCE
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
I, DARYL WILLIAMS, Attorney-General of Australia, HAVING REGARD TO:
* the reference entitled "Proceeds of Crime" (the reference)
given to the Australian Law Reform Commission on 7 December 1997; and
* the desirability of the reference including a consideration of the impact
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
on business;
IN PURSUANCE of
subsection 20(2)
Australian Law Reform Commission
hereby alter the reference as follows:
(a) the Commission is also to inquire into and report on the additional
matter of the impact of the
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
on business;
(b) in performing its functions in relation to that additional matter,
the Commission is to have regard to
(i) the requirements for legislation reviews set out in the Competition
Principles Agreement; and
(ii) the requirements for regulation assessment as outlined in the statement
by the Prime Minister, the Hon John Howard MP, "More
Time for Business"
(24 March 1997) and the document "A Guide to Regulation" (October
NOTING that the reporting date of the reference issued on 7 December
1997 is and remains 31 December 1998, I direct that the Commission
is required
to report in respect of the additional matter listed above not later than
31 December 1998.
Dated 14 April 1998
Daryl Williams
Attorney-General
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter