URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTLRC/2001/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Report on the Laws Relating to Bail [2001] ACTLRC 19
REPORT ON THE LAWS RELATING TO BAIL
INTRODUCTION
OBTAINING BAIL – RIGHTS & PROCEDURES
BAIL FOR MINOR OFFENCES
BAIL FOR OFFENCES OTHER THAN MINOR OFFENCES
BAIL WHEN NO OFFENCE IS ALLEGED
CONDITIONS OF BAIL
THE INTERESTS OF VICTIMS
CONTINUATION AND EXTENSION OF BAIL
VARIATION AND REVOCATION OF BAIL
ENFORCEMENT OF BAIL UNDERTAKINGS
REVIEWS AND APPEALS
PROVISIONS IN OTHER STATUTES
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
ACT Law Reform Commission
Report No 19
REPORT ON THE LAWS RELATING TO BAIL
This report reflects the law as at July 2001
Commission Reference: ACTLRC No 19
The ACT established the Law Reform Commission, formerly known as the Community
Law Reform Committee, in July 1990. The purpose of the Commission is to: help the Government to identify areas in need of reform;
anticipate emerging social and legal issues; and assess the practical impact of various proposals and laws on the people of the
The Commission's Secretariat is at 2nd floor, GIO Building, City Walk, Canberra City, ACT 2601 (Tel (02) 62070546 fax (02) 62070538).
Internet address:
http://www.jcs.act.gov.au
Australian Capital Territory, Canberra 2001
of the source should be made.
Published by Publishing Services for the ACT Law Reform Commission. Publishing No
Telephone Canberra 13ACT1 or 132281
Participants
Law Reform Commission Members
Justice Kenneth J Crispin QC
Ms Mary-Ellen Barry (until 2000) Professor John Braithwaite (until 1999) Ms Lisbeth Campbell
Professor Richard Campbell Mr Peter Hohnen (until 1999) Mr David Hughes (until 1999)
Ms Jennifer Kitchin (until 1999) Mr Ian Nichol
Mr Philip Walker
Special adviser: Professor Charles Rowland
1. The Terms of Reference in this matter were signed by the Attorney- General on 30 December 1997 and received by the Commission
in January 1998.
They obviously reflected concerns that bail had sometimes been obtained in circumstances in which the continued liberty of the accused
was perceived to involve an unjustified risk to the safety of other people or was otherwise contrary to the public interest. They
may also have reflected concern that the relevant provisions of the existing legislation were too inflexible in some respects and
too uncertain in others.
2. In response to the reference the Commission formed a working group comprising representatives from the Magistrates Court, Supreme
Court, Legal Aid Office (ACT), the Australian Federal Police and the Director of Public Prosecutions. The working group held several
meetings which provided valuable insight into the operation of the
Bail Act 1992
and problems created by the inflexibility of its provisions. The proposals ultimately adopted by the Commission emerged largely
from the discussions with that group and the suggestions of individual members.
3. A discussion paper was prepared and suggestions for reform were subsequently referred to the Criminal Law Consultative Committee
which includes representatives from the Bar Association, the Law Society, and others concerned with criminal law and procedure as
well as representatives from those government agencies which were also involved in the working party. A further rigorous examination
of the proposals ensued. A proposal that the statutory presumption in favour of bail be reversed in the case of certain serious
proved quite contentious. However, despite some initial expressions of concern, the Committee ultimately supported the main thrust
of the proposals now reflected in the recommendations contained in this report.
4. Some further delay was occasioned by the need to review conclusions and/or consider further issues in the light of legislative
changes such as the introduction of the
Children and Young People Act 1999
and the need to consider the implications of successive appellate decisions relating to bail, some of which were apparently conflicting.
5. The report is intended to provide an overall account of the law relating to bail in the Australian Capital Territory and, where
appropriate, to refer to apparent deficiencies and suggest reforms. The more significant provisions of the
Bail Act 1992
have been quoted in full so that the discussion may be followed more easily.
6. A number of statutory definitions are mentioned when relevant but some of the terminology employed in the report should be explained
at the outset:
“accused person” is not defined by the Act but has been used in this report to refer to any person who has been charged
with a criminal offence, irrespective of whether that person has pleaded guilty or not guilty.
“authorised officer” is defined by section 3 mean the Commissioner of Police, a Deputy Commissioner of Police of the
Australian Federal Police or a police officer specified by one of those officers, in writing, as an authorised officer for the purposes
of this Act.
“child” is defined by section 3 to mean anyone under eighteen years of age. However, in the
Children and Young People Act
“child” means a person under twelve and a person between twelve an eighteen is referred to as a ‘young person’.
This is potentially confusing because when considering whether to grant bail to a person who is a ‘child’ for the purposes
a judge or magistrate must also consider provisions of the Children and Young People Act which may apply to that person not as a
‘child’ but as a ‘young person’. To minimize the risk of confusion, the Commission has adopted the practice
of referring to people under eighteen years of age as ‘children and young people’.
“court” is defined to mean the Supreme Court or the Magistrates Court of this territory.
“surety” may refer either to money paid or agreed to be paid or the provision of security by a person other than the
accused or to the person who has provided such money or security.
However, it is used in the
in the latter sense
and the term ‘security’ has been used in this report in lieu of relying upon the word in the former sense.
7. The Commission wishes to record its gratitude to those who have raised problems arising under the existing law, suggested changes
or otherwise contributed to the general debate concerning issues discussed in this paper. Ultimately, of course, the Commission is
charged with the duty of forming its own conclusions and offering its own recommendations. The conclusions expressed in the report
reflect the considered views of the present members of the Commission formed after carefully weighing those issues and considering
the various submissions.
INTRODUCTION
8. In recent years there have been a number of cases which have generated considerable public concern about the grant of bail.
In the ACT this concern has been fueled by a number of well publicised cases, such those in which bail was granted to David Eastman
in relation to a charge of murder and to Colin Dunstan in relation to charges of sending letter bombs through the mail. Cases of
this kind obviously led to fears that other people might be harmed if bail were granted or continued. However, similar concerns
have been expressed, not only in relation to allegations of murder, rape and other offences of violence, but cases in which alleged
offenders have been granted bail in relation to property offences such as burglary and car theft. These concerns have been echoed
in other Australian jurisdictions. Many people have plainly felt that the law has not adequately protected them from violence,
the violation of their homes and/or the theft of their property.
9. Some concern has also been expressed about the refusal of bail to people who may have committed criminal offences but who were
nonetheless seen as more in need of care than of incarceration. In other jurisdictions there have been notable cases of Aboriginal
children being confined in inappropriate facilities because bail was either refused or granted only on terms requiring cash deposits
or security which their families were unable to provide. Similar concerns are sometimes expressed about the continued detention
of people suffering from mental illness. Emotionally vulnerable people have sometimes been denied the care they needed and then
refused bail when the aberrant behaviour that led to them being arrested and charged may well have been caused by their illnesses.
10. It must be recognised that there is no wholly satisfactory answer to these problems. Bail applications are often made immediately
after a person has been arrested and before there has been any time for prosecuting authorities to prepare a full brief of evidence
or for defence counsel to marshal evidence in reply. A decision must be made quickly and often on the basis of hearsay accounts
of perhaps dubious reliability. Yet the decision may have serious repercussions for the accused person, the alleged victim, and
11. It is undeniable that, despite the presumption of innocence, a person who is denied bail may be incarcerated for several months
as a consequence of unproven allegations of a criminal offence which he or she may not have committed. Such a person may suffer
real hardship as a consequence and, even if subsequently acquitted, may be left with a justified sense of grievance. It is not unknown
for bail to be opposed but the charges subsequently dropped due to the paucity of incriminating evidence or even, on occasion, the
subsequent discovery of evidence effectively exonerating the accused person. Furthermore, as John Donne observed sadly, no person
is an island. When someone is abruptly taken from the community and imprisoned, his or her family may also suffer financial and emotional
hardship. Yet even if he or she is ultimately acquitted there will normally be no financial compensation.
12. On the other hand, if bail is granted, an accused person may abscond to avoid punishment, commit further offences whilst awaiting
trial or attempt to intimidate witnesses. In some cases, when bail is granted in relation to charges of attempted murder or other
violent offences, the alleged victims and members of their families may be left in a state of constant anxiety. If the accused person
is subsequently found guilty of the offences for which he or she was granted bail, the victims may be left with understandable feelings
of grievance that the court did little to protect them in the months prior to the trial. Those feelings may be shared by others
who have suffered due to offences committed whilst the accused person was on bail.
13. Despite some expectations to the contrary, neither magistrates nor judges are able to form any sensible view about whether
a person is guilty of the offence or offences charged without hearing evidence to that effect, unless, of course, guilt is admitted.
Nor are they able to foresee what the accused person might do if released on bail. Even a normally decent and emotionally stable
person may lose his or her temper and do or say things he or she almost instantly regrets. Consequently, it would be unjust to
refuse bail to everyone charged with assault or making threats. In each case the magistrate or judge will have to consider, not
only what was allegedly done or said, but the context in which it is said to have occurred and any evidence as to the person’s
character and disposition. However, one can never be absolutely certain that even an apparently gentle person with no criminal record
might not commit some act of wholly unexpected violence. The decision to grant or refuse bail must therefore involve a judgment
as to the balance between competing risks of injustice.
14. The Commission approached its task by seeking to determine the fundamental principles that should govern this area of the law,
identify particular problems experienced in the application of the existing statutory provisions and suggest possible avenues of
reform. It recognised that, whilst the law should be based upon sound principles, it should also be effective. For this reason,
the Commission was obliged to give particular attention to pragmatic issues, albeit within the context of a principled approach.
Fundamental principles
15. The Commission accepted that it was appropriate to begin any review of this area of the law by acknowledging that freedom from
incarceration is a fundamental human right.
Like all legitimate rights, however, the right to freedom from incarceration is not absolute. Even in modern democratic societies
the rights of individuals must be balanced to some extent against the rights of others. Hence, it is generally accepted that people
may be imprisoned if they have committed serious crimes. In such cases it is sometimes argued that they have forfeited their right
to freedom during the period of imprisonment by their own misconduct. Yet there are circumstances in which people may be deprived
of their freedom even though they have committed no crime. For example, they may be detained as involuntary patients in mental institutions
if suffering from a psychiatric illness of such severity that their behaviour would otherwise create an unacceptable risk of them
harming themselves or other people. However, no civilized society should permit such a fundamental human right to be overridden
unless such a course is required by the need to protect the rights of others. Where such a course is so required, people are not
imprisoned because their right not to be incarcerated has been abrogated but rather because it has been outweighed by competing
considerations.
16. Of course, the real difficulties lie in determining what circumstances give rise to such a need. It has sometimes been suggested
that a society could never be justified in depriving a person of liberty unless he or she has been convicted after a fair trial
of an offence of sufficient gravity to warrant a term of imprisonment. Whilst this suggestion obviously reflects an understandable
concern that a person’s freedom should not be removed merely because of an unproven allegation, it would be quite impracticable
to adopt such a stringent test. To take but one example, few people would accept that Martin Bryant should have been allowed to
leave Port Arthur and remain on bail until his trial for multiple counts of murder.
17. More commonly, it has been argued that the existence of such a need should be accepted only when there is apparently compelling
evidence that the accused person is such a violent offender that there is a real likelihood of someone being killed or seriously
injured if bail is not refused. The Commission is also unable to accept this contention. A person who persistently stalks an emotionally
vulnerable person may cause serious psychological harm even if there is no physical assault. Furthermore, a modern democratic society
is dependent upon the rule of law and if that is to be adequately maintained it must be possible to stop flagrant infringements without
delay. Hence, courts must have power to revoke bail if there is evidence that a person has continued to commit offences or has persisted
in breaching bail conditions.
18. The appropriate decision will inevitably depend upon the circumstances of the case since it will involve balancing competing
considerations. The nature of the offence or offences, the circumstances in which it or they were committed, the character and
antecedents of the accused and the extent to which his or her peremptory incarceration may cause hardship and other relevant factors
should all be taken into account. Despite the oft-expressed desire for certainty it is not possible to devise a rigid formula that
will do justice in all circumstances.
19. It is sometimes suggested that the law should require that bail be refused in relation to various types of offence, but the
gravity of offences even of the same type may vary very substantially. For example, one person charged with murder may be alleged
to be a paid assassin or a psychopath who has killed a stranger to indulge some morbid fantasy. Another might be alleged to have
killed an elderly and terminally ill partner because she could not bear to watch him endure any more suffering. In each case the
offence charged would have been the same but the risk of further offences and other factors relevant to the question of bail would
be quite different.
20. Similarly, it is sometimes suggested that the law should require that bail be refused whenever a person is alleged to have
committed a further offence whilst on bail or to have breached any of the conditions on which bail was granted. Again, however,
much may depend upon the circumstances. For example, it may be quite inappropriate to revoke bail granted in relation to drug charges
merely because the accused subsequently committed a minor offence such as failing to lodge a tax return or because he or she notified
the authorities of a change of address a day or two later than that required. This distinction has been recognised in recent amendments
which provide that bail must be refused, save in special or exceptional circumstances, if the accused person is charged with a serious
offence allegedly committed whilst on bail for another serious offence.
21. The quest for certainty may sometimes lead to inflexible provisions that limit the powers of judges and magistrates in ways
that are both unnecessary and undesirable. However, the balance between respect for the freedom of individuals and concern for the
protection of the community is a matter of profound importance to any democratic society and appropriate principles need to be established.
Hence, whilst any decision must ultimately involve the exercise of judicial discretion, that discretion should be exercised within
the context of statutory provisions reflecting an overall approach to bail which the legislature has determined best reflects community
The enactment of the Bail Act
22. Prior to the enactment of the present
in 1992, the law governing the grant of bail was drawn in part from common law principles and in part from statutory provisions contained
in six separate Acts. This diversity of sources made it difficult for people to ascertain the relevant law. It was obviously desirable
to make the legal principles more easily accessible by incorporating them into a single statute.
The law had also placed what was perceived to have been an inappropriate emphasis on financial means as a criterion for granting bail.
This was seen as effectively discriminating against those who were too poor to provide substantial cash or security and who had
no-one to be a surety for them.
was intended to encapsulate all of the relevant legal principles, though the explanatory memorandum said that it was not intended
to be a code which supplanted the common law entirely. It reflected the existing law and practice to a large extent but introduced
a number of innovations. Most significantly, it established a right to bail in relation to charges of minor offences punishable
only by fine or a maximum sentence of no more than six months imprisonment and a rebuttable presumption in favour of bail in all
other cases. It also specified “exhaustively” the criteria that could be taken into account in deciding bail applications
and the conditions upon which bail might be granted. It created a new offence of breaching a bail undertaking. In addition, it prescribed
procedures to be followed by police in relation to bail and provided for internal review of police bail decisions.
24. Subsequent amendments required that expressions of concern by victims about the need for protection from violence or harassment
be taken into account and purported to abolish the inherent power of the Supreme Court to grant bail.
Perceived problems
25. In the years since its enactment, questions have arisen about the adequacy of some of its provisions. In particular, there
has been criticism of the scope of the statutory presumption in favour of bail and the perceived inflexibility of the provisions
limiting the criteria which may be taken into account in deciding bail applications. It has been suggested that these problems may
have a cumulative impact. For example, the presumption in favour of bail applies even when the accused is charged with murder and,
in seeking to rebut that presumption, the Crown may not rely on such matters as the gravity of the offence, the strength of the
Crown case, any plea of guilty or the likelihood of a heavy sentence, save to the extent to which those matters may be relevant to
the factors specified in
section 22.
26. Having regard to the range of perceived problems raised in submissions to the Commission, it seemed appropriate to conduct
an overall review of the relevant provisions with a view to proposing means of ensuring that the law was as fair and effective as
OBTAINING BAIL – RIGHTS & PROCEDURES
Procedures on arrest
27. When a person has been arrested, whether with or without a warrant, the arresting police officer may proceed in a number of ways.
He or she may:
charge the person with an offence and convey him or her to the Magistrates Court in custody if it is considered inappropriate for
police to grant bail;
charge the person with an offence and release him or her on bail (with or without surety) to appear before the court on a date and
time specified
have the person enter into a voluntary agreement to attend court (VATAC) on a date and time specified.
release the person and seek to have a summons issued requiring him or her to appear before the court to answer specified charges.
28. The Commission accepts that it is desirable to maintain this diversity of procedure so that arresting police officers may adopt
the course that seems most appropriate having regard to the gravity of the alleged offence and other relevant considerations.
General power to grant bail
29. The general power to grant bail is provided by
subsection 5(1)
Bail Act 1992
which provides that:
An accused person may be granted bail in respect of any period during which he or she is not required to attend court in
relation to the offence with which he or she has been charged.
Subsection 5(2)
provides that a person is not entitled to bail in relation to an offence for any period during which he or she is in custody for
some other offence or in respect of which he or she is not entitled to bail or is serving a sentence of imprisonment.
provides that a court shall not grant bail pending appeal to a person who has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to a term
of imprisonment unless special or exceptional circumstances justify such a course.
31. The provision contained in
subsection 5(1)
merely provides a general power to grant bail to accused persons and the qualification relating to the provisions of
substantially reflects the common law principle that bail will be granted after conviction and sentence only in exceptional circumstances.
32. The provisions contained in
subsection 5(2)
were presumably intended to ensure that a person was not released on bail for one offence whilst serving a sentence or in custody
following refusal of bail for another. However, bail is granted only in relation to specific offences and could not secure a person’s
release from custody in such circumstances. Hence, strictly speaking, the provision is unnecessary. However, the Commission accepts
that it may be desirable to retain the provisions of this subsection in order to minimise any risk of confusion.
Rights of accused persons
provides that, when bail is granted and the accused person gives an undertaking to appear and comply with any bail condition that
may have been imposed, he or she is entitled to be released and to remain at liberty until required to appear at court in accordance
with the undertaking.
34. The rights of people charged with criminal offences are stipulated by
which is in the following terms:
(a) a person who has been taken into custody by a police officer
is charged with an offence but is not to be brought before a court forthwith after being so charged; or
(b) it is not practicable to bring before a court forthwith a person arrested under a warrant (being a warrant which
does not expressly preclude the granting of bail) issued under
subsection 42
Magistrates Court Act 1930
in respect of an offence punishable by a fine or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 2 years;
the police officer who charges or arrests the person—
(c) shall inform the person, or cause the person to be informed, that he or she may—
(i) apply for bail;
(ii) communicate with a legal practitioner of his or her choice in connection with the making of an application for bail;
(iii) if he or she cannot speak or understand the English language—have recourse to the services of a competent interpreter;
(iv) communicate with any other person of his or her choice, being a person who may reasonably be expected to assist him or her in
connection with the provision of bail;
and, if the person asks for facilities to do so, shall provide the person with reasonable facilities to enable the person
to communicate with a legal practitioner, such an interpreter or such other person;
(d) shall inform the person, or cause the person to be informed of—
(i) the matters specified in whichever of
subsection 8A
sections 22
and 23 would apply to the making of a determination regarding the granting of bail to the person; and
(ii) the conditions subject to which the person may be released on bail; and
(e) if the person applies for bail—
(iii) where the police officer is authorised to grant bail to the person—shall consider whether the person should be granted
(iv) In any other case—shall bring the person before an authorised officer.
Where a person is brought before an authorised officer pursuant to subparagraph (1) (e) (ii), the authorised officer shall
consider whether the person should be granted bail.
Where, before subsection (1) has been fully complied with in respect of an accused person, an authorised officer is satisfied that
it is appropriate to release the person on bail subject only to the person giving an undertaking to appear, the authorised
officer may so release the person.
A police officer who charges or arrests a person may refrain from complying with subparagraph (1) (c) (ii), (iii) or (iv)
if he or she believes on reasonable grounds that it is necessary to do so in order to prevent—
(a) the escape of an accomplice of the accused person; or
(b) the loss, destruction or falsification of evidence relating to the offence.
Where a police officer who charges or arrests a person refrains from complying with subparagraph (1) (c) (ii), (iii) or (iv)
for a reason specified in subsection (4), he or she shall record, or cause to be recorded, his or her reasons for not so complying.
Powers of authorised officers
35. Authorised officers are empowered to grant bail by section 14 which provides that:
Subject to subsection (2), an authorised officer may grant bail in accordance with this Act to an accused person who is
present at a police station.
An authorised officer may not grant bail to a person accused of an offence if—
(a) a determination concerning bail has been made by a court;
(b) the offence with which the accused person has been charged is a domestic violence offence of murder or
attempted murder.
36. These provisions are generally adequate, though it is not entirely clear whether the section was intended to deny authorised
officers the power to grant bail only when there had been a court determination concerning bail for the offence in question or whether
it was intended to apply even when a court had determined that bail should be granted for another offence. The former restriction
should obviously be retained but, whilst it will often be inappropriate to grant bail in the latter circumstances, a denial of any
power to do so may cause inconvenience and injustice, especially of both offences charged are trivial.
The Commission recommends that paragraph 14(2)(a) be amended
by adding the words “in respect of that offence” after the word “court”.
38. The exercise of any power provided by section 14 obviously requires the authorised officer to form certain opinions and make
certain decisions. Hence, section 15 provides that:
An authorised officer who is required to consider whether to grant bail to an accused person shall as soon as reasonably practicable—
(a) afford—
(v) the accused person or a legal practitioner representing the accused person; and
(vi) any police officer involved in the investigation of the offence with which the accused person is charged;
an opportunity to make submissions to the authorised officer concerning the conditions to which any grant of bail
to the accused person should be made subject; and
(b) having regard to those submissions, to the matters specified in whichever of subsection 8A (1) and sections 22 and 23 applies
to the making of a determination regarding the granting of bail to the accused person and to any other available information
that the authorised officer considers relevant and reliable, determine whether the person should be granted bail.
Where the authorised officer is satisfied, having regard to the matters specified in whichever of subsection 8A (1) and sections 22
and 23 applies to the making of a determination regarding the granting of bail to the accused person, that—
(a) it is appropriate to release the person upon the person giving an undertaking to appear; and
(b) it is not necessary to impose a bail condition;
the authorised officer shall release the person upon the person giving that undertaking.
Where the authorised officer is satisfied, having regard to the matters specified in whichever of subsection 8A (1) and sections 22
and 23 applies to the making of a determination regarding the granting of bail to the accused person, that it is not appropriate
to grant bail to the accused person without imposing a condition, the authorised officer shall, having regard to—
(a) the conditions that may be imposed in granting bail to a person; and
(b) the extent to which the imposition of 1 or more bail conditions would be appropriate having regard to the matters specified in
whichever of subsection 8A (1) and sections 22 and 23 applies to the making of a determination regarding the granting of bail to
the accused person;
determine whether to grant bail to the accused person.
Rights after refusal of bail
39. Upon refusal of bail or the grant of bail subject to conditions an accused person has the rights specified by section 16 which
is in the following terms:
Where an authorised officer decides
(a) to refuse to grant bail to an accused person; or
(b) to grant bail to an accused person subject to 1 or more bail conditions;
the authorised officer shall inform the accused person—
(c) of his or her decision;
(ca) the right of the accused person to request a review of the decision under section 38;
(d) where bail is refused—that the person is entitled to communicate with a legal practitioner; and
(e) where the person would be granted bail subject to 1 or more bail conditions and that bail condition, or those bail conditions,
are such that the person is unable or unwilling to comply, or to arrange for compliance, with them—that the person is entitled
to communicate with a legal practitioner.
An authorised officer shall, upon being requested to do so by an accused person in respect of whom he or she has made a decision of
the kind referred to in paragraph (1) (a) or (b), provide the person with reasonable facilities to communicate with a legal practitioner.
An authorised officer who refuses to grant bail to an accused person may refrain from complying with paragraph (1) (d) or (e) and
subsection (2) if he or she believes on reasonable grounds that it is necessary to do so in order to prevent—
(a) the escape of an accomplice of the accused person; or
(b) the loss, destruction or falsification of evidence relating to the offence.
Where an authorised officer refrains from complying with paragraph (1) (d) or (e) and subsection (2) for a reason specified in subsection
(2A), he or she shall record, or cause to be recorded, his or her reasons for not complying.
An authorised officer who considers whether an accused person should be granted bail in respect of a domestic violence offence shall—
(a) where he or she decides to grant bail to the person—take all reasonable steps to inform, as soon as practicable—
(i) if a child of the accused person was a person against whom it is alleged that the conduct which constituted the offence was directed—the
person who has the care and control of the child; and
(ii) if any other person was a person against whom it is alleged that the conduct which constituted the offence was directed—that
other person;
of the decision and, where the accused person is granted bail subject to 1 or more bail conditions, of that condition or those conditions;
(b) where he or she decides not to grant bail to the person—
(iii) if a child of the accused person was a person against whom it is alleged that the conduct which constituted the offence was
directed—inform the person who has the care and control of the child of the decision; and
(iv) if any other person was a person against whom it is alleged that the conduct which constituted the offence was directed—inform
that other person of the decision.
40. The right to be brought before a court is presently guaranteed by section 17 which provides that:
An accused person who—
(a) has been taken into custody and charged with an offence;
(b) is refused bail by an authorised officer or is not released on bail granted by an authorised officer;
shall be brought before a court as soon as practicable after he or she has been taken into custody and, in any case, within 48 hours
after having been taken into custody.
41. Section 18 requires the provision of certain facilities:
Where an accused person in police custody is to be brought, for the first time in relation to the offence, before a court more than
4 hours after he or she came into custody—
(a) the police officer for the time being in charge of the police station at which the person is in custody; or
(b) if the person is not in custody at a police station, the police officer who has custody of the person;
shall, if it is reasonably practicable to do so, cause the person to be provided with, and allowed to use—
(c) facilities to enable the accused person to wash, shower or bathe and (if appropriate) to shave; and
(d) facilities to enable the accused person to change his or her clothing.
Nothing in subsection (1) requires a police officer, the Territory or the Commonwealth to provide clothing for the accused person
unless the clothing is brought to the police station or other place at which the accused person is in custody by a member of the
accused person’s family or some other person.
Powers of courts
42. The power of the courts are governed by sections 19 and 20. Section 19 is in the following terms:
Subject to section 20, a court may—
(a) grant bail to an accused person who is being held in custody in connection with the offence with which he or she has been charged;
(b) enlarge, vary or revoke bail granted to an accused person.
There is no limit to the number of applications in relation to bail that may be made to a court by a person accused of an offence.
All applications to a court in relation to bail shall be dealt with as soon as is reasonably practicable.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (2) and (3), a court may refuse to entertain an application in relation to bail if it
is satisfied that the application is frivolous or vexatious.
Where a court has made a decision in relation to an application for bail by an accused person, a court may only consider a further
application for bail by the accused person if—
(a) the accused person was not represented by a legal practitioner at the hearing of his or her first application to a court for
bail in respect of the offence with which he or she is charged; or
(b) the accused person can show that there is fresh evidence or information of material significance to the granting of bail to the
accused person that was not available to be put before the court at the time of the hearing of the immediately preceding application
to a court for bail.
In determining whether to grant bail to an accused person, a court may have regard to any information it considers relevant and reliable.
43. There is an apparent incongruity between subsection (2) which provides that there is no limit to the number of applications
that may be made to a court and subsection (5) which provides that once a decision has been made further applications will be considered
only in the circumstances stipulated. However, the Act contains extensive provisions for the review of any such decisions and issues
relating to the need to limit successive applications and/or reviews are discussed later in this report.
44. Section 20 provides that:
A magistrate may not grant bail to a person under section 19 where the person has appeared before the Supreme Court –
(a) following his or her committal for trial or sentence; or
(b) on appeal against a conviction or order in respect of a sentence imposed on the person
45. It was presumably intended that the restriction on the powers of magistrates imposed by the section apply to the grant of bail
in relation to the offences for which the accused person was committed for trial or sentence and not to other offences alleged in
“back up charges” or other informations pending in the Magistrates Court. However, the section should be amended to
make that clear.
46. This provision does not deal with the issue of when conditions of bail may be varied.
Hence, there may be uncertainty as to whether any application for variation of conditions made after committal for trial or sentence
should be made to the Magistrates Court or to the Supreme Court.
47. It seems appropriate that any variation of conditions imposed by an order of a court order be made by that court unless sought
by means of review
or appeal. Hence, if bail has been granted by the Magistrates Court and remains in force then any application for variation should
be made to that court. If bail has been granted to attend the Supreme Court at a particular time and that court has continued or
is taken to have continued bail,
then the order imposing conditions remains in operation and should normally be made to Magistrates Court. If bail is not continued
but granted afresh by the Supreme Court then any application for variation of conditions should be made to that court.
48. However, the Supreme Court should obviously have power to intervene and either revoke bail or vary conditions of bail granted
in relation to any proceedings pending before it. Furthermore, there may be circumstances in which a magistrate would conclude that
it would be appropriate for the particular issue raised to be determined by the Supreme Court. For example, the issue of whether
particular conditions should be maintained might depend, in part, upon the length of time the accused person may be subject to restrictions
on his or freedom prior to trial. Hence, the Commission accepts that there should be concurrent jurisdiction in relation to continuing
bail following committal for trial or sentence.
The Commission recommends that section 20 be amended to provide that:
The restriction on the power of a magistrate to grant bail to a person who has appeared before the Supreme Court following committal
for trial or sentence applies only in relation to offences for which he or
she has been so committed;
following committal for trial or sentence a magistrate or judge may make orders varying the conditions upon which bail has been granted;
a magistrate may not vary conditions which have been imposed by the Supreme Court, whether upon a grant of bail in that court or by
variation of conditions previously imposed by the Magistrates Court;
a magistrate may decline to exercise any such power and may, at his or her discretion, direct that any such application be made to
the Supreme Court.
50. Section 28 provides that an accused person shall not be released on bail unless he or she undertakes by instrument to appear
before a specified court at a time, date and place specified in the instrument or notified by a police officer.
51. If an accused person does not or cannot enter his/her bail for any reason, a remand warrant is issued and the accused person
is conveyed to the Belconnen Remand Centre unless the matter is referred back to the court. Section 48 provides that the court shall
be notified, within seven days that the person is still in custody because s/he failed to meet a condition of bail and the court
may then conduct its own review of the bail requirements imposed.
52. The Commission is of the view that these provisions are generally adequate subject to the issues raised in the balance of this
Appearances by video link
53. In an age in which video conferencing is common and complainants in sexual assault cases routinely give evidence via closed
circuit television there is no obvious reason to require prisoners to be brought to court to make bail applications in person.
In many cases, of course, the issue of bail is dealt with at the time when the accused person is before a court to be charged or
present for some reason other than any issue relating to bail. In other circumstances, however, the hearing of a bail application,
review or appeal will involve the transportation from the Belconnen Remand Centre to the Court, the deployment of custodial staff
whilst the prisoner waits in a court cell, the need for at least one custodial officer to accompany him or her to court and, if
the application is refused, subsequent transportation back to the Belconnen Remand Centre. These processes may involve not only
unnecessary expense but sometimes give rise to unnecessary security risks.
Magistrates Court Act
was amended in 1999 to incorporate a number of provisions including those contained in
subsections 72A
(1) and (2), which are in the following terms:
Unless the Court otherwise directs, where –
(a) a person who is in custody is required or entitled to appear, or is required to be brought, before the Court for the hearing of
an application in relation to bail; and
(b) an audio visual link is available between the place where the Court is sitting and a place where the person is in custody;
the proceeding shall be conducted by the audio visual link.
The Court may at any time vary or revoke a direction made under subsection (1), either on its own motion or on the application
of a party to the proceeding.
55. Despite the enactment of these provisions, audio visual links have not been regularly used because issues of bail arising in
the Magistrates Court are often dealt with whilst the accused person is before the court after being charged or for some other purpose
requiring his or her presence. Furthermore, whilst facilities for audio visual links are available at the Belconnen Remand Centre
the Commission understands that the speed of transmission is presently somewhat limited.
56. The need for a specific direction seems unnecessary when the applicant is already present in court and there is no conceivable
reason to send him or her back to the Belconnen Remand Centre to enable the application to be heard by means of the audio visual
57. There is no comparable provision dealing with bail applications in the Supreme Court and applicants are frequently brought
in from the Belconnen Remand Centre for the express purpose of being present for the hearings. This could be rectified by inserting
an appropriate section in the
Supreme Court Act
but it may be more appropriate to amend the
to provide somewhat more flexible powers for both courts.
The Commission recommends that
section 72A
Magistrates Court Act
be repealed and that a section be inserted in the
providing that:
may determine whether a proceeding relating to bail
should be conducted by audio visual link or as to the manner in which an accused person might give evidence or otherwise participate
in such proceedings;
in exercising such power the court might have regard to the accused person’s conduct, capacity to instruct solicitors, any expressed
to be present in court, and any other factors the court considers relevant;
such a determination may be made by a judge or magistrate in
chambers without hearing submissions or receiving evidence from either the applicant or the respondent;
notwithstanding, any such determination the applicant or respondent
is entitled to apply for a direction that the accused person be present
at the hearing and, if satisfied that adequate grounds exist for
varying the earlier determination, the court may order that he or she be present.
59. It also seems unnecessary to require that people who have been refused bail be brought to court for consent adjournments, case
status or directions hearings and some other proceedings of an interlocutory nature, though the Commission accepts that it may be
appropriate for the accused to be physically present when arraigned or otherwise formally charged with an offence. However, issues
of this kind fall outside the scope of the present reference.
Entering into bail
60. If bail is granted the accused person must provide a written undertaking in accordance with
section 28.
That section is in the following terms:
A person shall not be released on bail unless he or she undertakes, by instrument, to appear before a specified court—
(a) at a place, date and time specified in the instrument; or
(b) at a place, date and time notified to him or her by a police officer.
An undertaking to appear may be given in respect of more than 1 offence.
An undertaking to appear may include an undertaking, if bail is continued, to appear at any time and place at which proceedings in
respect of the alleged offence may be continued, whether upon adjournment or otherwise.
, an accused person who is granted bail is under a duty to appear in person before a court in accordance with his or her undertaking
under subsection (1).
An instrument under subsection (1) is an official document and is admissible in evidence in a proceeding to prove the undertaking
it contains.
61. The Act appears to distinguish between an undertaking to appear given by instrument after bail has been granted and an order
imposing a condition that the accused person enter into an agreement in writing to observe specified requirements as to his or her
conduct whilst on bail.
This distinction is both unnecessary and confusing.
62. The Commission is of the view that compliance with any such conditions should form part of the bail undertaking. The conditions
upon which bail is granted are often as important as the obligation to appear at court when required and that should be reflected
in the same document. Furthermore, their relegation to a separate agreement means that they are unenforceable save, perhaps by application
for revocation of bail. The order of the court is not that the accused person comply with such conditions but only that he or she
enter into an agreement to do so. Hence, once the agreement has been entered into, the order had been complied with and breach of
the conditions does not involve breach of the order punishable by proceedings for contempt of court. The offence created by section
49 applies only to a failure to appear as required by the undertaking.
63. It should be possible for a court to impose conditions without requiring that they be written into the written undertaking.
For example, during the course of a jury trial, a judge may grant bail over a luncheon adjournment but impose a condition that
the accused person not leave the precincts of the court. It would generally be sufficient that the accused verbally acknowledge
that he or she is bound by such a condition. For this reason, the Commission does not propose that the proposed amendment require
that any conditions actually be stated in the undertaking but rather that the undertaking extend to compliance with any conditions
that may have been imposed or may subsequently be imposed.
64. However, it should be noted that section 34 requires a court or authorised officer granting bail to an accused person to provide
the accused person with a notice in writing setting out his or her obligations concerning the conditions of bail and the consequences
of any failure to comply with them. This should be sufficient to ensure that he or she understands the conditions that have been
imposed and has a suitable record of them.
The Commission recommends that section 28 be amended to provide that the bail undertaking include an undertaking to comply with any
conditions imposed by the authorised officer or court.
66. Section 31 also provides that:
A undertaking to appear may be given to—
(a) in the case of an accused person who is in a remand centre—the superintendent of the remand centre or the officer for the
time being in charge of the remand centre;
(b) in the case of an accused person who is in gaol—the keeper of the gaol or the officer for the time being in charge of the
(c) in every case—
(v) a court;
(vi) a clerk of a court; or
(vii) an authorised officer.
Where a court or an authorised officer imposes a bail condition that requires the entering into of an agreement, the making of an
acknowledgment or the depositing of security or an amount of money, the agreement may be entered into with, the acknowledgment may
be made to or the deposit may be made with—
(a) in the case of an accused person who is in a remand centre—the superintendent of the remand centre or the officer for the
time being in charge of the remand centre;
(b) in the case of an accused person who is in gaol—the keeper of the gaol or the person for the time being in charge of the
(c) in every case—
(viii) a court;
(ix) a clerk of a court; or
(x) an authorised officer.
67. Where there is provision for applicants to be heard by video link, this section would obviously permit bail undertakings by
accused persons and/or sureties to be executed before the superintendent or other officer in charge of the remand centre rather
than requiring people who were not physically present in court when bail was granted to remain in custody until brought to the Registrar
or Deputy Registrar.
68. The acceptance of sureties and/or security for bail is governed by section 32 which is in the following terms:
The determination of—
(a) which person or persons, or class or description of persons are acceptable persons for the purposes of a condition referred to
in paragraph 25 (1) (b), (c), (d) or (e) and the number of acceptable persons required for those purposes; or
(b) the nature and sufficiency of security that is acceptable for the purposes of a condition referred to in paragraph 25 (1) (d);
shall be made by—
(c) the court or authorised officer imposing the condition; or
(d) in the absence of a determination by the court or authorised officer imposing the condition—the court or person to whom
the undertaking to appear is given.
A reference in paragraph 25 (1) (c), (d) or (e) to an acceptable person shall be deemed to include a reference to a person
or body (whether incorporated or unincorporated) prescribed for the purposes of this subsection.
A condition, agreement or acknowledgment under section 25 may be imposed, entered into or made in respect of more than 1 offence.
69. Whilst these provisions do not require that a surety be resident in the A.C.T., the terms of section 31 require that the security
or money be provided to the superintendent or officer in charge of the remand centre, the keeper or person in charge of the gaol,
a court, clerk of a court; or authorised officer. As previously mentioned, section 3 defines the term “court” to mean
the Supreme Court or the Magistrates Court of this territory and “authorised officer” to mean the Commissioner of Police,
a Deputy Commissioner of Police of the Australian Federal Police or a police officer specified by one of those officers, in writing,
as an authorised officer for the purposes of this Act. As a consequence, sureties are in practice required to come to Canberra to
complete the necessary documentation.
70. There is no reason to suppose that a person who normally resides in Perth or Darwin might not be an acceptable surety or that
there is necessarily any need to require such a person to travel to Canberra to execute the relevant documents.
71. Whilst there might be grounds for concern about the practical value of an agreement with a person normally resident overseas,
the rigidity of the present approach could cause hardship in cases where an Australian citizen such as a member of the defence forces
or diplomatic corps has been temporarily posted overseas or where a citizen is simply on holidays when a son, daughter or other family
member or friend is arrested. In some cases it may be appropriate for security to be provided by the payment of cash to an Australian
consular official as agent of the court or the provision of a bond. Furthermore, many people travelling overseas will have retained
real estate or other property interests in Australia and may also have continuing businesses or careers based in this country.
72. In any event, concerns of this kind may be addressed by the court or authorised officer. Section 32 provides a broad discretion
to determine what sureties and/or security may be acceptable and any issues as to the adequacy of the arrangements offered or accepted
by a person who is overseas can be resolved on a case by case basis depending on the circumstances.
73. It also seems unnecessary to require payment by cash when it may be difficult for a surety to meet such a requirement, especially
at night, during a weekend or whilst overseas. Actual payment could be effected by means of an electronic transfer or credit card.
A bond could be lodged in the same manner as that prescribed by Order 26 of the
Supreme Court Rules
or section 85 of the
Magistrates Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Act 1982.
74. If a substantial sum of money is paid into court, the court should have authority to give directions as to the manner in which
the funds are to be retained or invested. Any interest would be returned when retention of the security was no longer required or
forfeited to the territory along with the principal sum.
The Commission recommends that
be amended by adding provisions:
enabling a potential surety to enter into any agreement, make any acknowledgment or make any deposit required as a condition of bail
with the Registrar or Deputy Registrar of any Australian Court, an authorised officer or a consular official in an Australian mission
authorising such people to provide certificates of surety by certifying on or with copies of any agreements made with or acknowledgments
or bonds provided by sureties or receipts provided to sureties that such documents or monies referred to in such receipts have been
received from the surety and that at the time of receipt he or she produced a driver’s licence, passport or other acceptable
photographic evidence sufficient to identify him or her as the surety;
requiring that the accused person be released if bail has been duly granted if, save for the provision of security, any conditions
upon which his her release was contingent have been fulfilled and the superintendent or officer for the time being in charge of the
remand centre or gaol in which he or she has been confined, has received, whether by facsimile or otherwise, a copy of such agreement,
undertaking or receipt accompanied by a certificate of surety.
The Commission also recommends that:
for the purposes of paragraph 25(1)(e) of the Act, electronic funds transfer (EFT), bank guarantee, credit card or bond be prescribed
as acceptable means for the payment of any monies required as
security; and
be amended to provided that a court which has granted bail on terms requiring that monies be paid into court may give directions
as to the manner in which the funds are to be retained or invested and that any interest earned on such monies be deemed
part of the security so provided and liable to forfeiture with the principal sum.
BAIL FOR MINOR OFFENCES
77. The right to bail in respect of charges of minor offences is provided by
which is in the following terms:
This section applies to –
(a) all offences not punishable by a sentence of imprisonment (except in default of payment of a fine); and
(b) all offences punishable by a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months.
Subject to subsection (3), a person charged with an offence to which
this section applies is entitled to be granted bail without any condition and,
if the person is in custody, he or she shall be released from custody as soon as he or she has given an undertaking to appear.
Subsection (2) does not apply to –
(a) an accused person who, in relation to the commission of the same offence on a previous occasion, failed to comply with any undertaking
to appear or bail condition given or imposed in relation to that offence on that occasion;
(b) an accused person who is, in the opinion of the court or authorised officer, incapacitated by intoxication, injury, use of drugs
or is otherwise in danger of physical injury or in need of physical protection;
(d) an accused person in respect of whom the requirement for bail is dispensed with under
(e) a person charged with-
(xi) an offence against section 19D of the Domestic Violence Act 1986;
(xii) an offence against section 206L of the
Magistrates Court Act 1930
(xiii) an offence against section 493 of the
Crimes Act 1900
(f) a person charged with a prescribed offence.
78. This approach presumably reflected the view that allegations of such minor offences would not justify depriving a person of
his or her liberty at least until the commission of the offences had been duly established. Whilst that approach may be appropriate
in most cases, there are some circumstances which in which the grant of unconditional bail may be undesirable. For example, if
a person is charged with possession of a knife in a school attended by children of a former partner, a magistrate should not be
forced to grant bail without imposing conditions that he not return to the school and/or not carry such a weapon in future.
79. Little flexibility is provided by the provision in paragraph 7(3)(a) purporting to withhold the right to unconditional bail
from people who have failed to comply with undertakings to appear or bail conditions in relation to similar offences on previous
occasions. This provision applies only when the earlier offence was the same as that forming the subject of the later charge. Hence,
to return to the last example, the person found in the school with a knife would be entitled to unconditional bail even if he had
previously committed different but equally disturbing offences on numerous occasions and had never complied with any undertakings
to appear. Furthermore, the reference to a failure to comply with bail conditions is largely illusory. Since the earlier offence
must have been the same as that charged, it could only have been a minor offence and no conditions can normally be imposed on bail
for such offences.
80. The Commission supports the principle that a person who has been charged with a minor offence should normally be neither be
deprived or his or her liberty prior to conviction and sentence nor released only upon conditions breach of which might be expected
to put that liberty at risk. However, it is unable to accept that it will never be appropriate to impose conditions upon the bail
granted to a person charged will such an offence or offences. Magistrates, who almost invariably deal with cases of this kind, encounter
an enormous diversity of circumstances and the Commission is of the view that they need the flexibility to determine the most appropriate
orders in the light of the situations with which they have been confronted.
81. It would be possible to identify some types of cases in which there should not be an entitlement to bail without any conditions.
To return to the earlier example, there should be no such entitlement when the accused person has been charged with certain minor
offences such as possession of a disabling substance or offensive weapon in a public place
or with possession of knife in a public place or school.
Unconditional bail should not be granted when a person is already on bail for another offence or when he or she has previously been
convicted of breaching bail. Nor should it be granted when the accused is charged with a series of minor offences. There would
appear to be no logical reason for granting such an entitlement to a person who has allegedly stolen a large sum of money by multiple
offences of minor theft
when he or she would have no such entitlement if charged with stealing the same amount in a single theft. Furthermore, it should
be possible to impose stringent conditions on a person who has allegedly continued to cause criminal damage even if the damage does
not exceed $1000 and each offence is a minor offence.
82. It would be possible to maintain the existing provision and enact a series of exceptions to deal with situations in which difficulties,
such as those identified, are reasonably foreseeable. However, there may be other cases in which conditions should be imposed.
For example, it may be appropriate to permit a magistrate to grant bail to a young or apparently psychologically vulnerable person
on conditions requiring him or her to stay away from a potentially volatile situation in which he or she has already committed a
minor offence and might become embroiled in more serious criminal activity if permitted to return. There may be other cases in which
it would be appropriate to impose conditions intended to address or at least ameliorate the apparent precipitating cause of the
offence or factors such as drug addiction or homelessness that may make the commission of further offences more likely. The imposition
of such conditions may not only provide some protection for potential victims but might sometimes be in the interests of the accused
83. On the other hand, even if the section were to be wholly repealed, the accused person would continue to enjoy a presumption
in favour of the grant of bail.
84. Having regard to all of the competing considerations, the Commission has concluded that the section should be amended in a
manner that would preserve the entitlement to bail but enable the court to impose some conditions. The range of available conditions
should be more limited than those that may be imposed in relation to more serious offences and, in particular, should not extend
to requiring the provision of substantial security or regular reporting to police stations. It has also concluded that the section
should not apply to the charges referred to earlier involving the possession of weapons in schools or other public places.
The Commission recommends that:
subsection 7(2)
be amended to provide as follows:
Subject to subsection (3), a person charged with an offence to which this section applies is entitled to be granted bail and, if the
person is in custody, he or she shall be released from custody as soon as he or she has given an undertaking to appear and comply
with specified requirements as to his her conduct while released on bail including any requirements that he or she refrain from residing
at a specified place, undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or participate in a program of counselling or rehabilitation but not
including any requirements that he or she report to police stations.
the offences of possession of a disabling substance or offensive weapon in a public place (s.494
Crimes Act 1900
) and possession of a knife in a public place or school (s.495
Crimes Act 1900
) be prescribed for the purposes of paragraph 7(3)(f).
BAIL FOR OFFENCES OTHER THAN MINOR OFFENCES
The presumption in favour of bail
Subsection 8(2)
provides a presumption in favour of the grant of bail even in relation to the most serious offences. The subsection is in the
following terms:
(a) accused of an offence to which this section applies; or
(b) to whom this section applies;
is entitled to be granted bail in accordance with this Act unless –
(c) the court or authorised officer is satisfied that, having regard to the matters referred to in whichever of section 22 and 23
apply to the accused person, the court or authorised officer is justified in refusing bail; or
(d) the requirement for bail is dispensed with under section 10.
87. Subsection (1A) provides that the section does not apply to the grant of bail by an authorised officer to a person accused
of a domestic violence offence or the grant of bail to a person accused of committing a serious offence alleged to have been committed
whilst on bail for another serious offence.
88. It may be noted that the entitlement to bail provided by subsection (2) is displaced only if the court or authorised officer
is satisfied that a refusal is justified having regard to the matters referred to in section 22 (which applies to adults) or 23
(which applies to children). This effectively casts on to the Crown the burden of proving any facts that might justify a denial
of bail. The general principle that anyone seeking to deprive another person of freedom should be obliged to prove that such a course
is necessary cannot be doubted. However, there are some circumstances in which the nature of the offence suggests that the grant
of bail might expose the public to some risk but there is insufficient evidence to enable the judge or magistrate to make any real
assessment of its gravity. A man charged with a seemingly pointless act of arson, a woman charged with murdering a possibly abusive
husband and a teenager charged with selling heroin might all prove to be people who were unlikely to commit any further offences
if granted bail but in each case the nature of the charge would be sufficient to give rise to justifiable concern.
89. In some cases it may be impossible to make any real assessment of the emotional stability or psychiatric condition of the accused
person without a thorough psychiatric assessment and the court might be unable to determine whether his or her release on bail would
pose an unacceptable risk that further serious offences might be committed. However, the Crown would not normally be entitled to
have an accused person referred for psychiatric assessment and a potential dangerous offender might have to be released on bail merely
because there was no evidence of his psychiatric state from which the danger could be inferred.
90. In such cases it seems reasonable to suggest that the presumption should be reversed. In that event the onus would be on the
accused person to show that bail should be granted. The same criteria would apply but the court would not be bound to grant bail
unless some justification for granting bail had been established. On the contrary, if the offence charged was such a nature as
to raise grounds for fearing that his or her release might pose a danger to the community it would be up to the accused person to
allay the concerns of the judge or magistrate sufficiently to tip the balance in favour of granting bail. That might be done by adducing
evidence of his or her psychiatric condition or by some other means. Somewhat similar conclusions have been reached in other Australian
91. The retention of a presumption in favour of bail for offences as grave as murder seems strikingly incongruous when section
9A now provides that a person charged with a ‘serious offence’ alleged to have been committed whilst on bail for another
serious offence must be refused bail save in special or exceptional circumstances.
A ‘serious offence’ is defined as one involving a maximum sentence of at least five years imprisonment and there are
many such offences which do not involve any violence. For example, an offence of dishonestly inducing a person to wait for payment
carries such a maximum sentence. A person who has been charged with two such offences, one whilst on bail for the other, must normally
be refused bail but, in contrast, a person charged with two counts of murder when initially arrested would be entitled to rely upon
the presumption in favour of bail.
92. As previously mentioned, the Commission accepts that people should not have their freedom restricted save for compelling reasons.
Hence it does not suggest that the presumption should be reversed in all cases but only when the accused person is charged with
an offence of sufficient gravity to fairly raise substantial concerns that his or her release might involve real danger to members
of the public. The real difficulty lies in determining how to defined the range of offences that fall into this category.
93. One obvious solution would have been to have relied upon the use or threatened use of a weapon as a distinguishing characteristic.
However, whilst
extends the concept of a weapon to an imitation or replica of a weapon, it does not define what is meant by the word. However, the
NSW counterpart of that Act refers to refers to an ‘offensive’ weapon which it defines as a ‘dangerous’ weapon,
anything that is used or adapted for offensive purposes’ and anything ‘intended for use or threatened to be used for
offensive purposes, whether or not it is ordinarily used for offensive purposes or is capable of causing harm’.
At face value, this would appear to extend to a case in which a person threatens a teenage child with a feather duster or throws
a snowball at someone. Furthermore, the Australian Oxford English Dictionary defines a weapon as either a thing designed, used or
usable for inflicting bodily harm or as a means employed for trying to gain the advantage in a conflict and as examples of the word
used in the latter sense cites irony and tears. On the other hand, the range of offences should extend to armed robberies even
if the pistol produced was unloaded or a replica.
94. Exclusive reliance upon such a formulation would have also excluded other serious offences such as major drug trafficking.
Accordingly, the Commission concluded that a more expansive description of the range of offences was necessary.
The Commission recommends that section 8 be amended:
by adding to paragraph (2)(a) the words ‘other than an offence referred to in subsection (3); and
by adding as subsection 3 the words:
Bail shall not be granted bail or dispensed to a person charged with an offence of:
treason or murder;
any offence in the course of committing which the accused person is alleged to have used or threatened to use violence with weapon
apparently capable of causing death or serious injury or a replica of such a weapon;
contravening a protection order or restraining order in the course of committing which the accused person is alleged to have used
or threatened to use violence and the accused person has within the preceding 12 months been convicted or found guilty of an offence
in the course of committing which he or she used or threatened to use violence against any person;
an offence of trafficking in relation to a commercial quantity of a drug of dependence or an offence of conspiring to commit such
an offence; or
an offence under
section 231(1)
or 233B(1) of the
Customs Act 1901
of the Commonwealth (as amended and in force for the time being) in relation to a commercial quantity of narcotic goods within the
meaning of that Act unless the court is satisfied exceptional circumstances exist which justify the grant of bail;
unless, having regard to the matters referred to in whichever of section 22 and 23 apply to the accused person, the court or authorised
officer is satisfied that it would be appropriate to grant bail notwithstanding the gravity of the offence charged.
Bail following conviction and sentence
96. Section 9 provides that:
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other section of this Act, where—
(a) a person has been convicted of an offence by a court and sentenced to a period of imprisonment in respect of that offence; and
(b) an appeal is pending in the Supreme Court, the Federal Court or the High Court against the conviction or the sentence;
a court shall not grant bail to that person unless it is established that special or exceptional circumstances exist justifying the
grant of bail.
97. It has sometimes been suggested that this section should be amended so that the provision would apply immediately upon conviction.
Such suggestions are usually supported by reference to the cases in which people have been convicted of serious crimes such as
murder or rape for which they will inevitably be sentenced to a substantial term of imprisonment. In such circumstances, it may
be contended that there should be no presumption in favour of bail. Any time spent in custody as a result of the refusal of bail
would count as part of the sentence ultimately imposed in relation to the offence
and the grant of bail would, at best, enable a convicted criminal to defer a presumably well deserved period of incarceration and,
at worst, facilitate his or her flight from the jurisdiction.
98. There are some difficulties with this approach.
99. First, as a matter of general principle, offenders should be required to commence serving sentences of imprisonment only after
a duly constituted court has found that they are warranted and not merely because of some expectation that such a finding may subsequently
100. Second, the argument is predicated upon the assumption that a custodial sentence is virtually inevitable. Section 9 applies
to all offences dealt with by courts and not merely to serious crimes such as those mentioned. In many cases the offence charged
would be comparatively minor and it would be entirely appropriate for the presumption in favour of bail to be maintained.
101. Third, the argument would apply with equal force to cases in which the offender had pleaded guilty and the adoption of a principle
that in such cases bail should be refused save in special or exceptional circumstances might produce a dramatic decline in the incidence
of pleas of guilty. Hence, it might be contrary to the public interest.
102. Fourth, even if it were accepted that there should be no presumption in favour of bail that would not warrant the adoption
of a principle that bail should be refused save in special or exceptional circumstances.
103. Nonetheless, there are cases in which the application of a presumption that a person should be admitted to bail even after
conviction for an extremely serious crime seems inappropriate, especially when neither the gravity of the offence nor the fact that
it has been proven beyond reasonable doubt are, of themselves, matters to which a court may have regard in deciding whether refusal
of bail is justified.
104. This problem could be addressed in a number of ways. Section 9 could be amended to apply upon conviction for any of a number
of particularly serious crimes, a separate provision could be enacted to address the position of offenders between conviction and
sentence or the provisions stipulating the criteria that may be taken into account in considering applications for bail could be
amended to give judges and magistrates greater latitude to deal with situations of this kind. The Commission favours the last approach
and has proposed a series of measures that should provide that latitude. These include not only the reversal of the presumption in
favour of bail in the circumstances mentioned, but expanding the criteria to include the gravity of the offence charged, the strength
of the Crown case in relation to such charge and any other matter that the court considers appropriate to be taken into account in
the circumstances of the case. The Commission is confident that these proposals will provide the courts with adequate discretionary
power to deal with situations of this kind upon their merits.
Bail for serious offences committed whilst on bail for another serious offence
105. Section 9A, which came into effect on 24 May 2001, is in the following terms:
This section applies if -
(a) a person is accused of an offence punishable by imprisonment for 5 years or more ( a serious offence); and
(b) the person is alleged to have committed the offence while on bail for another serious offence (or a number of offences including
a serious offence).
A court or an authorised officer must not grant bail to the accused person unless satisfied that special or exceptional circumstances
exist justifying the grant of bail.
However, even if special or exceptional circumstances are established, the court or officer must refuse bail if satisfied that refusal
is justified having regard to–
(a) if the accused person is an adult – the matters mentioned in section 22 (Criteria for granting bail to adults); or
(b) if the accused person is a child – the matters mentioned in section 23 (Criteria for granting bail to children).
Also, if a serious offence mentioned in subsection (1)(a) or (b) is a domestic violence offence, an authorised person must refuse
bail to the accused person if satisfied that refusal is required by section 8A (Bail by authorised officer – domestic violence
This section does not prevent the application of section 8A to the accused person if –
(a) a serious offence mentioned in subsection (1)(a) or (b) is a domestic violence offence; and
(b) an authorised person grants bail to the accused person.
106. This section provides for a radically different approach to be taken in relation to serious offences
allegedly committed whilst the accused was on bail for another serious offence. The section does not merely reverse the presumption
in favour of bail that would otherwise be provided by section 8, but imposes the additional requirement that bail be refused save
in “special or exceptional circumstances”. These terms have not been defined and it is not yet clear how strictly they
will be interpreted. However, they would appear to require that the circumstances be at least reasonably compelling and also somewhat
107. It may be protested that the concept of a serious offence should have been more limited to ensure that the section applied
only when the nature of the offences was such that incarceration without trial was justified by the need to protect the community.
Many offences with a maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment may not been seen as requiring immediate confinement that may cause
hardship to the accused and/or justify the cost the community currently estimated at about $2,000 per week. As previously mentioned,
an offence of dishonestly inducing a person to wait for payment
carries a maximum sentence of 5 years imprisonment but a person who makes up a ‘sob story’ to persuade a creditor to
wait another fortnight for payment of a debt may not pose much of a danger to the community even if he or she was on bail at the
108. On the other hand, people who are granted bail are required to give undertakings to be of good behaviour and if they actually
commit offences during the remand periods the criminal acts in question will involve breaches of their undertakings. It is true
that the relevant bail decisions may have to be made when the commission of the latter offences remains unproven and the offenders
are still presumed innocent. Hence, it would be inappropriate to dismiss any risk of injustice on the basis of a simplistic assumption
that all of those people will have brought the refusal of bail upon themselves by committing further offences and failing to honour
their undertakings. However, the mere fact that further charges have been laid obviously provides at least some additional grounds
for doubting whether those accused could be trusted to honour their undertakings or whether releasing them again would involve unacceptable
risks to the community.
109. In this context, the legislature chose to adopt a compromise: enacting a provision that would require the refusal of bail only
if both the offence for which bail was originally granted and the subsequent offence were punishable by maximum sentences of at
least five years imprisonment. In the context of this limited application, the Commission is inclined to accept that the provision
enabling bail to be granted in “special or exceptional circumstances” will generally be sufficient to permit magistrates
or judges to deal with the odd cases in which bail should be granted notwithstanding successive charges of serious offences.
110. In considering whether special or exceptional circumstances exist the courts will presumably take into account any indication
that the subsequent charge may have involved a merely technical infringement of the law, has been laid for some inappropriate purpose
and/or any apparent paucity of evidence to support it. The latter point is discussed in the context of the provisions of section
111. It has been suggested that the provision should be amended to ensure that it will apply in cases when a person has been charged
with a serious offence on an earlier occasion but bail has been granted not in relation to that charge but in relation to other
less serious charges laid at the same time. The problem arises only because bail has sometimes been granted in relation to one charge
and dispensed with in relation to other charges. For example, a person might be arrested and charged with one count of theft, which
would fall within the definition of a ‘serious offence’, and twenty counts of minor theft, which would not fall within
the definition. Bail is granted on one charge of minor theft and dispensed with in relation to the remaining charges. He is subsequently
charged with burglary, which is another serious offence, but would escape the application of section 9A because he had not been on
bail “for” another serious offence.
112. Whilst section 10 has recently been amended to provide that bail may not be dispensed with in relation to accused persons
to whom sections 9
apply, this would not prevent the problem from arising when bail is dispensed with in relation a serious offence not committed whilst
the accused person was on bail for another serious offence. However, section 21 provides that:
Where an accused person has been charged with 2 or more offences for which bail may be granted and is being held in custody in relation
to those offences—
(a) a court or an authorised officer shall, in considering whether to grant bail to the accused person, have regard to all the offences
with which the person stands charged; and
(b) if the court or authorised officer determines that the accused person should be granted bail—
(xiv) the accused person shall be granted bail in respect of all the offences with which he or she has been charged for which bail
may be granted;
(xv)the accused person need give only 1 undertaking to appear in respect of all the offences with which he or she has been charged
for which bail may be granted; and
(xvi) where the accused person is granted bail subject to conditions—the conditions shall apply in respect of each offence with
which the accused person is charged for which bail may be granted.
113. In view of the terms of this section, it is apparent that bail should not be granted in relation to one charge and dispensed
with in relation to others pending at the time bail is granted. On the other hand, the section does not prevent a judge or magistrate
from subsequently dispensing with bail in relation to later charges. Furthermore, people are sometimes charged with a large number
of offences and granting bail on each one as required by the section might require a significant waste of time on the part of both
the magistrate and office staff. Furthermore, even if magistrates were to adopt such a practice there would always be some risk
that a repeat offender would avoid the operation of the section due to oversight.
The Commission recommends that section paragraph 1(b) of section 9A be amended by repealing the words after “another serious
offence” and inserting in lieu thereof “or while the person was facing a charge for another serious offence and on bail
for any offence”.
The criteria for granting bail to adults
115. Section 22 provides that:
In making a determination regarding the grant of bail to an accused person who is not a child, a court or an authorised officer shall
have regard to the following matters, so far as they are ascertainable:
(a) the probability of the person appearing in court in respect of the offence for which bail is being considered, having regard
(xvii) the background and community ties of the person, having regard to the nature of his or her home environment and employment
and to his or her criminal record; and
(xviii) is alleged to have been committed, the nature and seriousness of the alleged offence, the strength of the evidence against
the person and any other information relevant to the likelihood of the person absconding;
(b) the interests of the person charged, having regard only to –
(xix) the period that the person may be held in custody if bail is refused and the conditions under which he or she would be held
in custody;
(xx) the need of the person to be free for the purposes of preparing for his or her appearance before a court and obtaining legal
advice and for other purposes; and
(vii) the need of the person for physical protection, whether the need arises because the person is incapacitated by intoxication,
injury or use of drugs or arises from other causes;
(c) the protection of the community, having regard only to –
(xxi) the likelihood
of the person interfering with evidence, intimidating witnesses or otherwise obstructing the course of justice whether in relation
to himself or herself or any other person;
(ii) the likelihood of the person committing an offence while released on bail; and
(iii) the likelihood of the person harassing a victim or other persons while released on bail.
In subparagraph (1)(c)(ii) a reference to an offence shall be read as including a reference to an offence against a law in force in
the Territory and a law of the Commonwealth, a State or another Territory (including an external Territory).
116. Section 23A adds a further provision in the following terms:
Where a court is determining the grant of bail to an accused person –
(a) the prosecutor shall inform the court of any concern of which he or she is aware expressed by the victim about the need for protection
from violence or harassment by the accused person;
(b) the court shall receive any submission in respect of that concern and have regard to it in the context of the matter referred
to in paragraph 22(1)(c).
Where an authorised officer determining the grant of bail to an accused person is aware that a victim has expressed concern about
the need for protection from violence or harassment by the accused person, the authorised officer shall have regard to that concern
in the context of the matter referred to in subsection 8A(1) and paragraph 22(1)(c).
117. Whilst subsection 22 (1) does not expressly confine the range of matters that may be taken into account by courts, the presumption
in favour of bail provided by subsection 8(2) is displaced only if a refusal would be justified “having regard to the matters
referred to in whichever of section 22 and 23 apply to the accused person”. Hence, it would appear that only the matters stipulated
in paragraphs 22(1)(a), (b) and (c) may be taken into account and the concern of the victim referred to in section 23A can be considered
only to the extent, if any, to which it might be relevant to the criteria referred to in paragraph (c).
118. In the Commission’s view these provisions impose unnecessary limitations on the discretion to grant bail. They are in
stark contrast to the more expansive provisions stipulating the factors that must be taken into account in sentencing offenders.
119. In some cases the difference is quite striking. For example, whilst a magistrate sentencing an offender is obliged to take
into “the probable effect that any sentence or order under consideration would have on any of the person’s family or
dependants”
there is nothing in section 22 to suggest that any such effect could be considered on the question of bail. It is true that the
position of a person’s family or dependents may be relevant to other criteria. For example, the fact that an accused person
is the sole parent of a disabled child could have some bearing on any assessment of whether he or she was likely to appear to answer
bail. However, the court would be required to ignore the hardship and distress which the child might experience if the person
were confined in custody. On the other hand, if it were sentencing the person it would be required to take that factor into account.
This inconsistency of approach is both unnecessary and undesirable.
120. The section also includes no reference to either the gravity of the offence or the strength of the Crown case. It may be
argued that these matters should be taken into account only insofar as they may be relevant to the factors stipulated in the section
because, as a matter of principle, bail should be refused only if such a course is required by the need to secure the attendance
of the accused person at trial or protect the community in the interim. The force of this argument must be conceded. However, the
decision to grant or refuse bail often involves balancing those needs against the accused person’s right to freedom. It seems
reasonable to suggest that the balance may be influenced at least to some extent by the gravity of the offence charged and the likelihood
that the accused person will be convicted.
121. For example, a person accused of common assault on the basis of dubious evidence identifying him or her as the offender should
be entitled to have the court take into account the likelihood of an acquittal or, if convicted, a non custodial sentence. Hence,
if bail were to be refused he or she might well spend considerable time in custody despite having committed no offence or having
committed an offence not warranting a sentence of confinement. At the other extreme, a person who had admitted committing murder
for financial gain would inevitably be facing a substantial term of imprisonment and, since any period spent in custody will count
as part of the sentence subsequently imposed, the only consequence of a refusal of bail would be that the offender would commence
a justified period of confinement at an earlier date. In both cases the accused person’s right to freedom would be balanced
against the need to secure his or her attendance at trial and/or protect the community but the weight that should be given to that
right would be greater in the former case than the latter.
122. In the context of the restrictions on discretion imposed by section 8(2), section 23A is of doubtful utility. It requires
a court to consider any submission in respect of concern expressed by the alleged victim “in the context of the matter referred
to in subsection 8A(1) and paragraph 22(1)(c)”. However, subsection 8A(1) provides that a person is entitled to bail, unless
“having regard to the matters referred to in whichever of section 22 and 23 apply...”, the court is justified in refusing
bail. At face value, that would appear to exclude any reliance upon upon the contents of section 23A. Paragraph 22(1)(c) refers
to the protection of the community including the likelihood of the person harassing a victim whilst on bail but not to the concerns
of the victim. It is difficult to see how submissions concerning expressed concerns could be considered in this context other than
as some evidence of the likelihood of harassment, albeit by inference based upon unsworn hearsay.
123. There are some cases in which it might be appropriate for the court to take into account the likelihood that the release of
the accused person on bail would cause real fear to the alleged victim and/or other people such as his or her children. For example,
a person may have been charged with several counts of attempting to break into the home of a single mother whom he had allegedly
been stalking. The offences may have occurred late at night, may have involved attempting to enter through a child’s window
and the offender may have been armed with a knife on each occasion. In circumstances of that kind, it seems reasonable to suggest
that the court should be entitled to take into account the likelihood that his release on bail would leave the victim and her children
in constant fear even if the accused person in fact commits no further offences or harasses them.
The Commission recommends that:
subsection 22(1) and section 23A be repealed; and
subsection 22(1) be re-enacted in the following terms:
In making a determination regarding the grant of bail to an accused person who is not a child, a court or an authorised officer shall
have regard to the following matters, so far as they are ascertainable:
(a) the interests of the accused person;
(b) the probable effect that refusal of bail would have on any of the accused person’s family or dependants;
(c) the likelihood of the accused person duly appearing in court if bail is granted;
(d) the need to protect the community from risks of the accused person interfering with evidence, intimidating witnesses or otherwise
obstructing the course of justice
and/or committing an offence while released on bail;
(e) the likelihood of a victim or other persons being harassed by the accused person or otherwise put in fear as a consequence of
his or her release on bail;
(f) the gravity of the offence charged and the strength of the Crown case in relation to such charge;
(g) failure to attend court as required by previous bail undertakings or to comply with bail conditions on previous occasions; and
(h) any other matter that the court considers appropriate to be taken into account in the circumstances of the case.
The criteria for granting bail to children
125. The presumption in favour of bail provided by section 8(2) applies to children as well as adults but the matters which must
be taken into account in determining whether notwithstanding that presumption a refusal of bail is justified are set out in section
23. That section is in the following terms:
In making a determination regarding the grant of bail to an accused person who is a child, a court or an authorised officer shall
have regard to the following matters, so far as they are ascertainable:
(a) the matters referred to in paragraphs 22 (1) (a), (b) and (c);
(b) the principles in sections 12 and 68 (Principles) of the Children and Young People Act 1999;
(c) if the determination is being made by a court and a report has been furnished to the court under section 73 of the
Children and Young People Act 1999 in relation to the child—the contents of the report.
126. The reference to paragraphs 22(1)(a), (b) and (c) picks up all of the criteria presently applicable to adults. As previously
mentioned, the Commission is of the view that the provisions of subsection 22(1) unduly confine the range of matters that may be
taken into account by an authorised officer or a court and, subject to the provisions relating to the Children and Young People
Act, the same problems arise in relation to section 23.
127. It should be noted that the word, “child’, is used in the
to refer to anyone under 18 years of age
but in the Children and Young People Act it refers only to those under 12 years of age, with the term ‘young people’ being
used to those between 12 and 18 years old.
128. Section 12 of the latter Act provides that:
In making a decision or taking action under this Act in relation to a child or young person, the general principles to be applied
by a person are as follows:
(a) the best interests of the child or young person should be the paramount consideration (
the best interests principle
(b) the primary responsibility for providing care and protection for the child or young person should lie with his or her parents
and other family members;
(c) high priority should be given to supporting family members, in cooperation with them, to care for and protect the child or young
person, including when the child or young person is subject to an order under this Act or a voluntary care agreement;
(d) if the child or young person is in need of care and protection and family members are unwilling or unable to provide the child
or young person with adequate care and protection (whether temporarily or permanently)—it is the responsibility of government
to share or take over their responsibility;
(e) if intervention by government in the life of the child or young person (and his or her family) is appropriate—the intervention
should be the least intrusive consistent with the best interests of the child or young person;
(f) if removal of the child or young person from his or her existing situation is necessary or desirable in his or her best interests—consideration
should be given, before any other placement option is considered, to the child or young person living or being placed with a family
member or a person regarded by the child or young person as a family member;
(g) if the child or young person does not live with his or her family because of the operation of this Act—contact with people
who are significant in his or her life should be encouraged;
(h) the education, training or lawful employment of the child or young person should be encouraged and continued without unnecessary
interruption;
(i) the child’s or young person’s sense of racial, ethnic, religious, individual or cultural identity should be preserved
and enhanced and the decision or action should be consistent with his or her racial or ethnic traditions and religious, cultural
and individual values.
In making a decision under this Act about a child or young person, the following general principles are also to be applied:
(a) the child or young person, and anyone else involved in making decisions about the child or young person, should be given sufficient
information about the decision-making process, in language and a way that they can understand, to allow them to take part fully in
the process;
(b) if the child or young person can form and express views about his or her wellbeing—those views should be sought and considered,
taking into account his or her age and maturity;
(c) anyone else involved in making decisions about the child or young person should be given the opportunity to give his or her views
(d) the decision-maker should make a decision promptly—
(xxii) having regard to the degree of urgency of the particular case and the child’s or young person’s developmental needs;
(ii) having regard to the principle that a delay in the decision-making process is likely to prejudice the wellbeing of the child
or young person;
(e) the decision-maker should also have regard to the principle that it is important for a child or young person to have settled and
permanent living arrangements.
In addition, if the decision-maker is a court considering whether to make an order under this Act in relation to the child or young
person, the court should apply the general principle that an order under this Act should be made by a court in relation to a child
or young person only if the court considers that making the order would be better for the child or young person than making no order
129. There is a measure of incongruity between these provisions and those presently contained in paragraphs 22(1)(a), (b) and (c)
or even the formulation which the Commission has recommended. The ‘best interests’ principle should not be applied
without qualification to issues of bail. The Act clearly contemplates that bail may be refused
and whilst such a course might sometimes be in the best interests of the young person charged it seems unlikely that the legislature
would have intended that it might only be refused in such circumstances. On the contrary, bail is usually refused when the interests
of the accused person are outweighed by the need to ensure his or her attendance at the trial and protect the community from further
criminal behaviour. It would be quite inappropriate for bail to be granted to a young offender who had repeatedly committed offences
of serious violence merely because of a principle that “the best interests of the child or young person should be the paramount
consideration.”
130. It should also be noted that violence by people under eighteen years of age is often directed at other young people and an
unqualified application of the best interests principle would also mean that the interests of one child would have to be preferred
to the interests of all others. Furthermore, that one child would have become entitled to such preference only by virtue of being
charged with criminal offences.
131. The provisions contained in section 68 reflect a more balanced approach to issues of this kind. That section provides that:
If a decision is to be made under this Part in relation to a young person or young offender, the decision-maker must make the decision
in accordance with the following principles:
(a) if a young person does anything that is contrary to law, he or she should be encouraged to accept responsibility for the behaviour
and be held accountable;
(b) the young person should be dealt with in a way that acknowledges his or her needs and that will provide the opportunity to develop
in socially responsible ways;
(c) a young person may only be detained in custody for an offence (whether on arrest, in remand or under sentence) as a last resort;
(d) young offenders should be dealt with in the criminal law system in a manner consistent with their age and maturity and have the
same rights and protection before the law as would adults in similar circumstances;
(e) on and after conviction, it is a high priority to give a young offender the opportunity to re-enter the community;
(f) a balanced approach must be taken between the needs of the young offender, the rights of any victim of the action that constituted
the young offender’s offence and the interests of the community.
132. The reason for the apparent distinction between a “young person” and a “young offender” is not clear.
However, the Commission agrees that it would be appropriate for these principles to be taken into account when a court or authorised
officer is considering whether bail should be granted to a young person and, if so, what conditions should be imposed.
133. Section 73 provides that a court may order a public servant whose duties relate to the welfare of children and young people
to provide a report about the child or young person in question. This seems a useful provision which may provide valuable information
to a judge or magistrate considering bail. It should be retained.
134. Subject to these qualifications, there is no obvious reason why the power to grant bail and the principles governing the exercise
of such power should not be the same for children and young people as for adults.
The Commission recommends that section 23 be amended by deleting the reference to section 12 of the
Children and Young People Act 1999
Bail in relation to Domestic Violence offences
136. Section 8A imposes limitations on the powers of authorised officers to grant bail to people accused of domestic violence offences.
The section is in the following terms:
Where a person is accused of a domestic violence offence, an authorised officer shall not grant bail to that person unless the authorised
officer is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the person poses no danger to the relevant person during the period of
Where an authorised officer is satisfied of the matters referred to in subsection (1), the accused person is entitled to be granted
bail unless the authorised officer is satisfied that, having regard to the matters referred to in whichever of sections 22 and 23
apply to the accused person, he or she is justified in refusing bail.
Where an authorised officer grants bail to a person in accordance with this section, the authorised officer shall, in his or her record
under section 27, state why in his or her opinion the person poses no danger to the relevant person.
A person shall not be released on bail under this section unless he or she has given an undertaking in accordance with section 28
to appear before a specified court within 48 hours of being released.
In this section—
“relevant person” means the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been directed, or—
(a) a spouse of that person;
(b) a child of a spouse of that person;
(c) a relative of that person; or
(d) a household member in relation to that person.
137. It may be noted that the reference to the ‘balance of probabilities’ relates to the standard of satisfaction;
not the probability of risk. The authorised officer may grant bail only if able to be satisfied to that standard not as to the
absence of a substantial risk to the relevant person but as to the absence of “any risk”. It is difficult to see how
an arresting officer could ever be so satisfied unless the person being granted bail was physically incapacitated.
138. The term “domestic violence offence” is defined by the provisions of section 3 to mean an offence under section
4A (1) (c)namely, an offence committed against –
(a) section 19D of the Domestic Violence Act 1986;
(b) a provision of the
Crimes Act 1900
specified in the Schedule;
(c) any of the following provisions of the
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management Act 1999
subsection 6(1)
(which is about negligent driving);
subsection 7(1)
(which is about furious, reckless or dangerous driving);
subsection 8(1)
) (which are about menacing driving);or
(ca)an offence against section 129 of the Motor Traffic Act 1936 (which is about reckless, dangerous or negligent driving).
that is directed against a spouse, child of a spouse, relative or household member.
139. The offences referred to in section 19D of the Domestic Violence Act involve breach of protection or emergency orders. Those
provisions of the
specified in the schedule include very serious criminal offences but also common assault and destroying or damaging property. It
is obviously appropriate for any authorised officer to take into account the gravity of such allegations and in many cases this factor
might be sufficient to justify the officer refusing to grant bail and bringing the person before a court so that the matter might
be determined by a magistrate. However, it by no means follows that every late night accusation should result in a person being
held in custody until the next morning.
140. In one case litigated in the Supreme Court it was alleged that a person had breached a restraining order by driving his vehicle
along East Row, Canberra without stopping because, in doing so he came within 100 metres of the workplace of a young man contrary
to the terms of a restraining order which he had obtained against him.
Whilst in that case the restraining order had not been obtained under the
Domestic Violence Act
it is possible that conduct of a similar kind could constitute an offence against section 19D of that Act. In those circumstances,
however, an arresting police officer might well have concluded that the actions of the accused person did not justify refusal of
bail but be bound by the terms of section 8A.
141. The section does not even permit bail to be granted when the authorised officer has no reason to fear that the accused person
poses any danger to the relevant person during the period between the time of his arrest and the time of his appearance in court
the next morning. It requires refusal unless the authorised officer can be affirmatively satisfied that he or she poses no danger
to the relevant person and, as previously mentioned, that would rarely be possible. The strictness of this test inevitably means
that the vast majority of people charged with a domestic violence after normal court hours will spend the night in police cells.
142. The strictness of this provision could produce unintended consequences. Strictly construed, the provision would require a woman
arrested for assault after slapping a partner or damaging property by tearing up a photograph to satisfy a police officer that there
was no risk of her proving to be a latter day Lucretia Borgia. A man who abandoned a heated argument for fear of losing his temper
but was arrested for damaging property by angrily kicking the door of their jointly owned home as he left could find himself in
a similar predicament. Such inappropriate consequences are often by the application of a somewhat liberal approach to the words
of the section by authorised officers accustomed to approaching issues of bail with common sense and restraint. However, a person’s
right to freedom from incarceration should not be dependent upon encountering an authorised officer whose commitment to common sense
and fairness might outweigh his or her commitment to strict statutory interpretation.
143. The present provision is also open to abuse. Bail must be refused no matter how great inconvenient overnight detention may
be. A false or trivial allegation by a former partner made immediately before the accused person is due to be married, leave on
an overseas trip or perform at an important concert could cause irretrievable prejudice.
144. In fact, there are many cases in which bail is refused because of the strictness of this provision even though the alleged
victim has not claimed to have been in any fear of the accused person following the alleged offence and bail is not opposed when
the matter is before the court in the morning. There has been at least one recent case in which a police officer was struck by the
absurdity of a refusal of bail in such circumstances but felt that his hands were tied by the legislation and contacted a magistrate
by telephone to suggest that she might grant bail.
145. Whilst it is clearly appropriate to make special provision for offences of domestic violence, the present provision needs to
be redrafted to provide the protection for victims of domestic violence that was obviously intended without being conducive to absurdity
or unfairness.
The Commission recommends that subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) be repealed and replaced with the following provisions:
(1) Where a person is accused of a domestic violence offence, an authorised officer shall not grant bail to that person if, having
regard to the circumstances of the alleged offence and any/or other apparently reliable information, the authorised officer is of
the opinion that the release of that person on bail, even on conditions, would be likely to expose a relevant person to danger of
further violence.
(2) Where an authorised officer is not of that opinion, the accused person is entitled to be granted bail unless the authorised officer
is satisfied that, having regard to the matters referred to in whichever of sections 22 and 23 apply to the accused person, he or
she is justified in refusing bail but such bail shall be granted only upon the following conditions:
(a) The accused person undertake to appear before a specified court within 48 hours of being released; and
(b) that he not assault, molest, approach
or personally contact
any alleged victim of the offence charged or attend within 50 metres of his or her home
147. It would be for the court to decide whether any condition of the kind mentioned in subparagraph (b) should be maintained.
Dealing with those who may be mentally dysfunctional
does not contain any provisions specifically dealing with the need to facilitate the treatment of people accused of criminal offences
who may be mentally dysfunctional or who may need to be referred to the Mental Health Tribunal for assessment. Courts are frequently
confronted by accused persons who have behaved in an apparently irrational manner and such an assessment may assist them whether
they should be regarded as bearing any criminal responsibility for their behaviour and, if so, the extent, if any, to which that
responsibility may have been mitigated by their psychological conditions. They may also assist them to form judgments as to the
appropriate disposition of the cases. The Tribunal must obtain an assessment before making any treatment order
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act 1994
provides it with wide powers in relation to the conduct of assessments.
149. However, there is an inevitable hiatus between the order of the court referring the matter to the Tribunal and the making of
the assessment order by the Tribunal. Furthermore, it may be important for the court dealing with the criminal proceedings to retain
oversight of the circumstances in which the accused person remains at liberty notwithstanding the intervention of the Tribunal.
The objectives of the
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act
relate only to the treatment, care, rehabilitation and protection of mentally dysfunctional people. On the other hand, even if
the person proves to be mentally dysfunctional, concern for the offender cannot be the sole concern of a court charged with the
resolution of criminal proceedings. Whilst it must take such matters into account, it must also consider other issues such as the
need to ensure that the community is adequately protected until the outstanding charges can be resolved.
150. In many cases it may be extremely difficult to determine whether bail should be granted and, if so what conditions should be
imposed. The court may have little information as to the nature and extent of any psychological problem and any assessment as to
the person’s likely behaviour during the period of the remand will inevitably involve a considerable measure of speculation.
It may also be difficult to justify granting bail on terms requiring the person to accept treatment the need for which has not been
established though, in practice, that problem is usually approached by requiring him or her to accept the supervision of the Director
of ACT Corrective Services and comply with any reasonable directions, including directions as to psychiatric treatment or counselling.
There is also at least a theoretical possibility of potential for conflict between orders made by the Tribunal and the requirements
of bail conditions.
151. However, legislation alone cannot provide complete answers to every problem and the Commission is inclined to accept that the
present law provides adequate powers for magistrates and judges to deal with possibly dysfunctional accused persons in the most
effective and humane manner that can be devised in the circumstances. There is nothing in the
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act
to limit the powers provided by the
and it is difficult to envisage circumstances in which a court would be justified in pressing on with criminal proceedings whilst
the accused person remained mentally dysfunctional or his or her mental capacity remained unclear.
152. For these reasons the Commission does not recommend the enactment of further provisions dealing specifically with this issue.
BAIL WHEN NO OFFENCE IS ALLEGED
153. In some circumstances there may a need for a person to be arrested even though he or she is not accused of committing any criminal
offence. For example, people may be arrested and brought before a court with a view to having them bound over to keep the peace
or to ensure their attendance to give evidence after they have refused to attend in compliance with a summons or subpoena.
Bail after arrest for breach of peace
did not initially contain any provision for bail to be granted to people taken into custody because it was intended to apply for an
order that they be “bound over to keep the peace”. This was initially a common law remedy but the common law has now
been supplemented by section 547 of the
which is in the following terms:
In every case of apprehended violence by any person to the person of another, or of his or her spouse or child, or of apprehended
injury to his or her property, a Magistrate may on the complaint of the person apprehending such violence or injury, issue a summons
or warrant as in any case of apprehended violence to the person, where at present security is required to keep the peace—and
a Magistrate may examine the complainant, and defendant, and their witnesses, as to the truth of the matter alleged, and, if it appears
that the apprehension alleged is reasonable, but not otherwise, the Magistrate may require the defendant to enter into a recognizance
to keep the peace, with or without sureties, as in any case of a like nature.
If in any such case the defendant has spoken any offensive or defamatory words to or of the complainant, on an occasion when a breach
of the peace might have been induced thereby, he or she may be required by the Magistrate to enter into a recognizance, with or without
sureties, to be of good behaviour for a term not exceeding 6 months, and, in default of its being entered into forthwith, the defendant
may be imprisoned for 3 months, unless such recognizance is sooner entered into.
155. The remedy may be obtained when people are found to have acted in a manner which involves a breach of the peace or which gives
rise to a reasonable apprehension that a breach of the peace will ensue. It involves requiring those concerned to enter into recognisances
not to commit a breach of the peace. The remedy is invoked rarely and then almost always in circumstances in which there is a real
likelihood of an outbreak of violence.
156. Section 7A was inserted in the
in 1994 following difficulties experienced in dealing with about 160 demonstrators who had been arrested outside an arms fair at
the National Exhibition Centre some years ago. It was then realised that there was no power to grant them bail and that it would
be necessary to deal with each person’s case before he or she could be released. Since all had pleaded not guilty, this might
have required many weeks of hearing time. Ultimately, one application proceeded as a “test case” and when that was
dismissed at about 11.00 pm the remaining applications were discontinued.
157. Section 7A now provides as follows:
A person arrested for a breach of the peace or an apprehended breach of the peace –
(a) is entitled to be granted bail without any condition or on condition that he or she keep the peace; and
(b) shall be released from custody as soon as he or she has given an undertaking to appear and, if a condition to keep the peace is
imposed, has entered into an agreement under paragraph 25(1)(a);
(c) as a consequence of the conduct that resulted in his or her being arrested, another person would be likely to make application
for a protection order under the Domestic Violence Act 1986 or for a restraining order under the
Magistrates Court Act 1930
against the arrested person; or
(d) in relation to a breach of the peace or an apprehended breach of the peace on a previous occasion, the person failed to comply
with any undertaking to appear or bail condition given or imposed in relation to that breach or apprehended breach on that occasion.
158. These provisions are inadequate for a number of reasons.
159. First, they provide only for a person to be released on bail without condition or on condition that he or she keep the peace.
There is no provision for any other condition to be imposed. In many cases the real dispute between the parties will be as to
whether the person’s conduct involved a breach of the peace or gave rise to any reasonable apprehension that such a breach
might occur. A condition that he or she “keep the peace” will obviously leave such a dispute unresolved. The person
may engage in further behaviour of the same kind only to be rearrested and raise the same issue in relation to the allegation of
a breach of bail.
160. Whilst it is obviously important to ensure that bail conditions are not used as a means of stifling legitimate expressions
of dissent, the objective of preventing a breach of the peace would be better served if judges or magistrates were able to grant
bail on more specific conditions. Not all applications of this kind arise from public protests or demonstrations and in some cases
it may be appropriate to grant bail only on the condition that the person refrains from going to a particular place. In other cases
it may be appropriate to grant bail only upon the condition that he or she does not behave in a particular manner.
161. Second, the entitlement to bail provided by paragraph 7A(a) is displaced in the circumstances referred to in paragraphs (c)
or (d) and there is no alternative provision for bail to be granted. Hence, in any of those circumstances bail must be refused
and the person kept in custody. This is both unnecessary and unfair. It must be remembered that even if the case against the person
is ultimately proven the only order that will be made against him or her is one requiring entry into a recognisance. It would obviously
require the most compelling reasons to justify holding a person in custody as an interim measure when no order for imprisonment could
be made at the hearing unless the person was required to enter into a recognisance and refused to do so.
162. Third, refusal of bail is required by circumstances which may provide no sensible reason for such an order.
163. Bail should not be refused because of speculation as to the likelihood of some other person making an application for a protection
order under the
Domestic Violence Act 1986
or a restraining order under the
Magistrates Court Act 1930
. Such an application might never be made and, if made, might be refused. Furthermore, even if granted, such orders do not require
the respondents to be held in custody. They merely restrain them from assaulting, molesting or approaching the applicants and, in
some cases, approaching places of residence or employment. If there is an immediate need then interim orders may be granted. The
mere likelihood that someone might want to apply for such an order could offer no justification for refusing bail to a person who
has not been accused of any offence.
164. The provision excluding bail in the event of any previous failure to comply with an undertaking to appear or bail condition
is also inappropriate. Such a failure does not always lead to the revocation of bail even if granted in relation to serious criminal
charges. The provision is not even qualified by any reference to reasonable excuse or extenuating circumstances. Consequently,
a magistrate might be obliged to refuse bail even if satisfied that the previous failure to appear had occurred only because the
person had been run over on his or her way to the court.
Bail after arrest for non-compliance with summons of subpoena
165. From time to time people who have failed to pay judgment debts are required to attend court to be examined as to their assets
and any transactions which they may have entered into for the purposes of preventing property from falling into the hands of their
creditors. If they fail to attend in response to a summons they may sometimes be given another chance at compliance by means of
a letter from a court registrar advising them that the proceedings have been adjourned and of the likely consequences of again failing
to attend as required. If they again fail to attend, and there is no apparently compelling explanation for that failure, the court
will almost inevitably order that a warrant be issued for their arrest.
166. When such a person has been arrested and brought before the court arrangements will have to be made for the conduct of the
oral examination, usually before a registrar, and it will rarely be possible for that to occur immediately. The
does not presently apply to cases of this kind and the court will have to determine whether to remand the person in custody until
the adjourned date or to release him or her without any real basis for confidence that he or she will return as required. In circumstances
of this kind there should be a clear power to release people on bail.
167. In many cases no conditions would be required. It would be sufficient that the person undertake to attend court on the date
stipulated, knowing that any unjustified breach of that undertaking would constitute an offence under
. In other cases strict conditions might be appropriate. The case might involve a major corporate failure and there might be evidence
that extremely large sums of money appear to be missing or even that substantial sums have been transferred offshore. The person
might have been arrested in circumstances raising suspicions about whether he or she may have been intending to interfere with evidence
or flee overseas. Even if the court concluded that the evidence did not justify remanding a person in custody, possibly for an extended
period, when he or she had not even been charged with criminal behaviour, it might nonetheless conclude that stringent restrictions
be imposed to secure the rights of creditors.
168. There are other cases in which witnesses are served with subpoenas requiring them to give evidence at civil or criminal trials
but decline to attend. They may have done so due to fear, self-interest, sympathy for a friend or feelings of antipathy towards police
or other authorities. Whatever the reasons, the evidence they could have given may have been essential to the just and efficient
resolution of the proceedings and it may be imperative to secure their attendance. For example, no court could permit a murder trial
to proceed with hearing evidence from an ‘eye witness’ merely because he or she did not want to attend court. It may
be necessary to have such a person arrested but, again, the
does not apply to cases of this kind.
169. As in the case of people arrested for failing to comply with a summons requiring their attendance for an oral examination as
to their financial affairs, it would sometimes be sufficient for bail to be granted unconditionally but stringent conditions would
sometimes be required.
The Commission recommends that:
a new section be enacted providing that a court may grant bail to any person arrested under a warrant issued to secure his or her
attendance at court when he or she has failed to comply with a summons or subpoena requiring such attendance in the same matter and,
in granting bail in such circumstances, may impose any of the conditions referred to in
section 25.
be amended by deleting the words ‘an accused person’ or ‘the accused person’ wherever they appear in
and replacing them with the words ‘a person’ or ‘the person’ as the case may be.
Bail pending hearing of application for writ of habeas corpus
171. There may also be circumstances in which a real issue has arisen as to whether a person has been validly confined or held in
confinement but proceedings for a writ of habeas corpus cannot be resolved immediately.
Section 226
Magistrates Court Act
authorises the Supreme Court to grant bail when applications of that kind concern a committal to prison following summary conviction
or order in the Magistrates Court.
However, there is no provision for bail to be granted when the confinement has occurred in other circumstances, such as when the
person has been ‘removed’ purportedly pursuant to orders under the
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act
The Commission recommends that there be a section inserted in the
providing a general power for the Supreme Court to admit any person brought up by a writ of habeas corpus to bail in accordance with
the provisions of the
Bail Act 1992
The inherent power of the Supreme Court
173. Section 57AA of the Act purports to abolish the inherent power of the Supreme Court to grant bail. It seems unlikely that
it was effective.
Supreme Court Act
provides that the court has “all original and appellate jurisdiction that is necessary to administer justice in the Territory”.
Kelly v Apps
[2000] FCA 687
a Full Court of the Federal Court held that the intention of the legislature seems to have been to “ensure that the Supreme
Court had the ability to right any wrong that might have occurred in the administration of justice by any court within the Territory”.
FAI Properties Pty Ltd v Nationwide Travel Canberra Pty Ltd
[2000] ACTSC 82
(6 October 2000) the decision in
Kelly v Apps
was distinguished on the basis that the more restrictive appellate provisions in the
Tenancy Tribunal Act 1994
should be taken to prevail over the more general provisions of that section.
provides that “(e)xcept where otherwise expressly provided by this Act, or the
Bail (Consequential Amendments) Act 1992
, this Act applies in relation to the grant of bail to accused persons to the exclusion of any other law in force immediately before
the commencement of this Act so far as any other such law makes provision for or in relation to bail for accused persons. Hence,
had it not been for the provisions of
section 48A
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act
the same principle might have prevented the provisions of
being invoked in relation to bail.
175. However, that section provides as follows that “(t)he Supreme Court is to have all original and appellate jurisdiction
that is necessary for the administration of justice in the Territory. The Territory is authorised to confer further jurisdiction
on the Supreme Court but not to reduce it. Since the
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act
is the Commonwealth statute which defines the powers of the ACT Legislative Assembly the section cannot be read down by reference
or otherwise narrowed by any enactments of the Territory.
176. In any event, the difficulties that have been experienced in relation to people arrested for the purpose of being bound over
to keep the peace or as a consequence of failing to comply with summonses or subpoenas raise serious questions as to whether the
retention of such an inherent power might not be appropriate. Whilst the Commission has recommended that those problems be resolved
by the amendment and/or enactment of specific provisions in the
, further and as yet unanticipated situations may arise in which bail should be granted. The existence of an inherent power provides
a ‘safety net’ enabling the court to ensure that a person’s right to freedom is not unnecessarily infringed even
if he or she is unable to point to some legislative pigeon hole in which the case might be accommodated. 177. On the other hand,
the Commission is not aware of any case in which it was suggested that the power was abused and it seems unlikely that it would
be invoked save in exceptional circumstances. Whatever may have been the reason for the enactment of
section 57AA
, the Commission is of the view that any doubt as to the retention of the inherent power of the Supreme Court should be removed.
The Commission recommends that
section 57AA
be repealed.
CONDITIONS OF BAIL
179. The general power to impose conditions is provided by
which provides that:
A court or an authorised officer may grant bail without imposing conditions or subject to bail conditions imposed—
(a) in the case of a court—by order; or
(b) in the case of an authorised officer—by instrument.
180. This section must be read subject to the provisions of
which provides that a person charged with a minor offence shall be entitled to unconditional bail unless any of the circumstances
specified in subsection (3) are established. The Commission is of the view that
should be amended to permit the imposition of some conditions when bail is granted for minor offences but that the range of conditions
that may be so imposed should be limited.
provides that the court shall have regard to all offences charged in considering whether to grant bail and the conditions which
may be imposed but an accused person need only enter into one bail undertaking in respect of all of offences and, where the bail
undertaking includes conditions, those conditions apply in respect of each offence.
182. The conditions that may be imposed on a grant of bail to an accused person are limited by the terms of
in the case of bail granted to adults and
in the case of bail granted to children.
Conditions on which bail may be granted to adults
is in the following terms:
The only conditions that may be imposed on a grant of bail to an accused person who is an adult are:
(a) that the accused person enters into an agreement, in writing, to observe specified requirements as to his or her conduct while
released on bail;
(b) that an acceptable person, or each of a specified number of acceptable persons, (not being or including the accused person) acknowledges
or acknowledge, in writing, that he or she is acquainted with the accused person and regards the accused person as a responsible
person who is likely to appear in court to answer the charge;
(c) that the accused person, an acceptable person or each of a specified number of acceptable persons enters into an agreement, in
writing, to pay to the Territory a specified sum if the accused person fails to appear in court in accordance with his or her undertaking
(d) that the accused person, an acceptable person or each of a specified number of acceptable persons—
(i) enters into an agreement, in writing, to pay to the Territory a specified sum; and
(ii) gives acceptable security for the payment of that sum;
if the accused person fails to appear in court in accordance with his or her undertaking to appear;
(e) that the accused person, an acceptable person or each of a specified number of acceptable persons deposits with a court or an
authorised officer a specified amount of money, paid either in cash or by a prescribed means of payment, and enters into an agreement,
in writing, to forfeit the amount deposited if the accused person fails to appear in court in accordance with his or her undertaking
Without limiting the generality of paragraph (1) (a), the requirements that an accused person may be required to observe
relating to his or her conduct while released on bail include—
(a) a requirement that the accused person report periodically, or at specified times, at a specified place;
(b) a requirement that the accused person reside at a specified place;
(c) a requirement that the person undergo psychiatric treatment or other medical treatment;
(d) a requirement that the accused person participate in a program of personal development, training or rehabilitation; and
(e) in the case of a person charged with a domestic violence offence—
(xxiii) a requirement that the accused person not harass or molest, or cause another person to harass or molest, a specified person;
(xxiv) a requirement that the accused person not be in or on premises in or on which a specified person resides or works;
(xxv) a requirement that the accused person not be in, on or near premises frequented by a specified person;
(xxvi) a requirement that the accused person not be in a locality in which are situated premises in or on which a specified person
resides or works;
(xxvii) a requirement that the accused person not approach within a specified distance of a specified person; and
(xxviii) where the accused person resides with another person—a requirement that the accused person not enter or remain in the
place of residence while under the influence of liquor or a drug.
A court or an authorised officer shall, in considering conditions for the release on bail of an accused person who is an
adult, consider the conditions for the release of that person in the sequence in which they appear in subsection (1).
A court or an authorised officer, in granting bail to an accused person who is an adult—
(a) shall not impose a condition referred to in subsection (1) unless the court or authorised officer is of the opinion that the imposition
of the condition is necessary to secure 1 or more of the following purposes:
(xxix) the attendance of the person before a court from time to time as required in relation to the offence in respect of which bail
is being granted;
(xxx) the protection from harm of the accused person or any other person;
(xxxi) the prevention of the accused person from committing an offence while at liberty on bail;
the prevention of the accused person from interfering with evidence, intimidating witnesses or otherwise obstructing the course of
justice whether in relation to himself or herself or any other person; and
(b) shall not, except at the request of the accused person, impose a condition, or a combination of conditions, which impose obligations
that are more onerous than necessary to secure the purposes referred to in paragraph (a) for which the condition or combination of
conditions is imposed.
A court or an authorised officer, in granting bail to an accused person on a condition referred to in paragraph (1) (d) or (e) shall
not require the accused person to give an acceptable security for a specified sum, or to deposit a specified sum with the court or
authorised officer, where the court or authorised officer has reasonable grounds for believing that the accused person does not have
the means to provide such a security or make the deposit, as the case may be.
Where a court or an authorised officer grants bail to an accused person on a condition referred to in subsection (1) and the accused
person satisfies the court or authorised officer that he or she is unable to comply with that condition, the court or authorised
officer shall—
(a) refuse bail; or
(b) grant the accused person bail subject to such other condition referred to in subsection (1) as the authorised officer or the court
believes the accused person will be able to comply with and will secure the purposes referred to in paragraph (4) (a).
An agreement or acknowledgment under this section may be entered into or made in respect of more than 1 offence.
In this section—
“premises” includes—
(a) any land;
(b) any structure, building, vehicle, vessel or place (whether built upon or not); and
(c) any part of such a structure, building, vehicle, vessel or place.
184. The Commission frankly doubts the need for any provisions restricting the conditions that may be imposed on a grant of bail.
However, if restrictions are to be retained, some amendment of this section would seem desirable.
185. As previously mentioned, the Commission is of the view that conditions relating to the accused person’s conduct whilst
on bail should not be contained in a separate agreement but covered by the bail undertaking. Hence,
should be amended to remove any reference to entering into an agreement and provide that the conditions that may be imposed include
requirements as to the accused person’s conduct while released on bail.
186. No member of the Commission could recall any case in which bail had ever been granted on a condition of the kind specified
in in paragraph 25(1)(b) that an acceptable person, or persons acknowledges that he or she is acquainted with the accused person
and regards him or her as a responsible person who is likely to appear in court to answer the charge. An applicant for bail is
free to call any such person to give character evidence on his or her behalf or to provide a written reference. Hence, it is difficult
to envisage any circumstances in which the provision would be used.
187. The requirements specified in
subsections 25(3)
and (4) appear to impose unduly onerous requirements on judges and magistrates.
The Commission recommends that paragraph 25 be amended by:
repealing paragraph (1)(b);
repealing subsections (3) and (4);
removing any reference to the accused person being required to enter into an agreement; and
providing that the conditions that may be imposed include requirements as to the accused person’s conduct while released on
Conditions on which bail may be granted to children
provides as follows:
The conditions that may be imposed on the grant of bail to an accused person who is a child are—
(a) the conditions referred to in
subsection 25
(1) (being those conditions as amplified by
subsection 25
(b) any other conditions that the court or authorised officer considers appropriate having regard to the principles in sections
12 and 68 of the Children and Young People Act 1999.
A court or an authorised officer shall, in considering the release on bail of an accused person who is a child, consider
the conditions for the release of the person that are referred to in subsection 25 (1) in the sequence in which they
are referred to in that subsection.
A court or an authorised officer, in granting bail to an accused person who is a child—
(a) may not impose a condition referred to in subsection 25 (1) unless the court or the authorised officer is of the opinion that
the imposition of the condition is —
(i) necessary to secure 1 or more of the purposes specified in subparagraphs 25 (4) (a) (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) (
the relevant purposes
(ii) in accordance with the principles under sections 12 and 68 of the Children and Young People Act 1999 (
the relevant principles
(b) may not, except at the request of the accused person, impose a condition, or a combination of conditions, that
puts a greater obligation on the accused than is –
(xxxiii) necessary to secure the relevant purposes; or
(xxxiv) in accordance with the relevant principles.
Subsection 25 (5) applies in relation to a grant of bail under this section.
Where a court or an authorised officer grants bail to an accused person who is a child on a condition referred to in subsection
25 (1) and the accused person satisfies the court or authorised officer that he or she is unable to comply with that condition,
the court or authorised officer shall—
(a) refuse bail; or
(b) grant the accused person bail subject to such other conditions referred to in subsection (1) as the court or authorised officer
believes the accused person will be able to comply with and will secure the purposes referred to in subparagraphs (3) (a) (i) and
190. The Commission also doubts the need for these provisions. In this case, it is again concerned at the inclusion of a reference
to section 12 of the Children and Young People Act. As previously mentioned, it does not seem appropriate to require that bail
decisions be based upon the best interests of accused persons even if they are juveniles.
The Commission recommends that subsection 26(1) be amended by removing any reference to section 12 of the Children and Young People
THE INTERESTS OF VICTIMS
192. The Act presently contains three sections specifically concerned with the interests of victims.
193. Section 23A is intended to ensure that the concerns of victims are adequately communicated to the court and duly considered.
It provides that:
Where a court is determining the grant of bail to an accused person—
(a) the prosecutor shall inform the court of any concern of which he or she is aware expressed by the victim about the
need for protection from violence or harassment by the accused person; and
(b) the court shall receive any submission in respect of that concern and have regard to it in the context of the matter
referred to in paragraph 22 (1) (c).
Where an authorised officer determining the grant of bail to an accused person is aware that a victim has expressed concern
concern in the context of the matter referred to in subsection 8A (1) and paragraph 22 (1) (c).
194. As previously mentioned, the Commission is of the view that this provision is largely ineffective and should be repealed.
The protection which it was intended to provide would be more effectively provided by amending subsection 22(1) to require courts
to take into account the criteria previously recommended, including:
(a) the need to protect the community from risks of the accused person interfering with evidence intimidating witnesses or otherwise
obstructing the course of justice whether in relation to himself or herself or any other person and/or committing an offence while
released on bail; and
(b) the likelihood of a victim or other persons being harassed by the accused person or otherwise put in fear as a consequence of
his or her release on bail;
195. Section 27A is intended to ensure that victims are informed of bail decisions. It provides that:
Where a court or authorised officer determining the grant of bail to an accused person is aware that a victim has expressed
concern about the need for protection from violence or harassment by the accused person, the court or authorised officer shall take
all reasonable steps to inform the victim (or if the victim is a child, the person who has care and control of the child), as soon
as practicable of—
(a) its decision concerning the grant of bail; and
(b) if it decides to grant bail —any condition on which bail is granted.
196. Similarly section 46A provides that:
Where a court or authorised officer conducting a review under this Part is aware that a victim has expressed concern about the need
for protection from violence or harassment by the accused person, the court or authorised officer shall take
all reasonable steps to inform the victim (or if the victim is a child, the person who has care and control of the child), as soon
as practicable of its decision.
197. The Commission fully supports the principle that victims or alleged victims of serious criminal offences who are concerned
to require some refinement.
198. First, they should be consolidated and amended to ensure that an obligation also exists to advise victims of decisions made
199. Second, the term ‘victim’ is too narrowly confined. The term is defined by section 3 of the Act to mean:
(a) a person (in this definition called the “primary victim”) who suffers harm—
(xi) in the course of, or as the result of, the commission of an offence of which the accused person is accused;
(xii) in the course of assisting a police officer in the exercise of the officer’s power to arrest the accused person or to
take action to prevent the commission of an offence of which the accused person is accused;
(b) where a primary victim dies as a result of the commission of an offence of which the accused person is accused—any person
who was financially or psychologically dependent on the primary victim immediately before his or her death.
200. The concept of “harm” has been defined to include:
(a) physical injury;
(b) mental injury or emotional suffering (including grief);
(c) pregnancy;
(d) economic loss; and
(e) substantial impairment of rights accorded by law;
201. Despite this somewhat expansive definition, the requirement that the victim must suffer “harm” seems unduly limiting.
It seems reasonable to suggest that the intended victim of an attempted murder might have a genuine interest in being informed of
whether the alleged offender had been granted bail. In some cases such a person may have sustained “mental injury or emotional
suffering” even as a result of a failed attempt, but there is no obvious reason for excluding those who did not sustain such
harm but who were nonetheless concerned for their safety and that of their families.
202. Thirdly, it is neither practicable nor desirable for courts to assume obligations to keep victims informed. Courts are rarely
informed of the addresses of people alleged to have been victims of crime until they are called as witnesses at the trial and are
almost never informed of telephone numbers or other means of contacting them. Indeed, even at trial, the addresses are often withheld
and the witness is simply asked to confirm that his or her address is known to the police or to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Furthermore, it would be undesirable for the court to risk creating an impression of partiality by authorising staff to initiate
private conversations with alleged victims. The obligation should be imposed upon the informant.
The Commission recommends that:
the provisions of sections 27A and 46A be consolidated;
the obligation to inform victims who have expressed concern about the need for protection from violence or harassment of the bail
decisions be imposed upon informants rather than courts;
the obligation be extended to require victims to be informed of decisions made on appeal; and
the definition of the word ‘victim’ in section 3 be amended by adding after the words in paragraph (a) “who suffers
harm”, the words “or who might have suffered such harm had the object of the offence been carried out”.
204. Whilst these provisions should ensure that victims are kept informed, they will not give them any substantive rights to intervene
in bail applications to assert their need for protection. In Queensland the legislature has attempted to give victims more than
information about decisions that have already been made. In some circumstances complainants may apply for orders that bail granted
to an accused person be varied or revoked.
205. Whilst the Commission is not unsympathetic to the concerns that may have led to the enactment of this provision, it is of
the view that it was unwise to authorise the intervention of third parties into criminal litigation. It is unlikely that a complainant
would be able to lead any evidence or advance any arguments not available to the Director of Public Prosecutions. More importantly,
such a course could lead to problems. For example, it could lead to a proliferation of litigation, especially when accused persons
were charged with multiple offences. Situations could be created in which complainants were cross-examined as if bail hearings
were additional committal hearings. On occasions, complainants might find themselves contending against each other. It might also
leave them exposed to accusations of malice or spite at the subsequent trials. Furthermore, it might create significant difficulties
in cases in which the Director of Public Prosecutions had agreed not to oppose bail for reasons that could not be disclosed, such
as the accused person’s agreement to engage a principal offender in a covertly recorded conversation or otherwise assist police
investigations. The Commission believes that the proposals put forward above will offer a far more efficient and effective means
of protecting complainants than the apparently ill-considered Queensland provision.
CONTINUATION AND EXTENSION OF BAIL
206. Then continuation and extension of bail is governed by section 33 which is in the following terms:
If an accused person has given an undertaking to appear at a place, date and time at which proceedings in respect of the
offence may be continued, whether on any adjournment, postponement or other deferment of the proceedings, or by way of committal,
a court may continue the bail already granted in respect of the offence, whether or not the accused person is present
Where bail is continued under subsection (1), the undertaking to appear and the bail conditions continue to apply, except
to the extent that the undertaking or condition otherwise provides or the court otherwise orders.
If the accused person appears before a court in accordance with a bail undertaking referred to in subsection (1) but no
specific direction is made by the court in respect of bail, the court is to be taken to have continued bail.
An agreement entered by a surety to satisfy the requirements of a bail condition referred to in paragraph 25 (1) (c), (d)
or (e) may, with the consent of the surety, contain a provision for its extension without any further consent of
the surety if the court from time to time directs the proceedings in respect of the offence be adjourned,
postponed or otherwise deferred or the accused person is committed for trial.
Subsection (3) does not derogate from the right of a person offering to enter an agreement required by a bail condition referred to
in paragraph 25 (1) (c), (d) or (e) to elect to be bound by an agreement which may be continued only with his or her consent given
at the time of the continuation and a court or an authorised officer shall not refuse to grant bail to a person l
on the ground only that a person offering to enter such an agreement has so elected.
Where a hearing of a charge against an accused person is adjourned, postponed or otherwise deferred, the place, date
and time for the commencement of the sittings to which the hearing is adjourned, postponed or otherwise deferred
shall be specified by the court and the court—
(a) with the consent of any surety for the grant of bail to the accused person; or
(b) where the bail agreement entered by any surety so provides—without the consent of the surety;
may continue the bail of the person charged, and the person charged shall be bound to attend at that place, date and time
without entering into a fresh undertaking to appear and the surety shall be bound accordingly, or the court may make such other
order as to bail and as to the commitment of the person charged into custody until the bail conditions are satisfied as the court
thinks fit.
Where an accused person has been released on bail and the court is satisfied that the accused person is by reason of illness
or accident or other sufficient cause unable to appear personally before the court on the day on which he or she is required
to appear, the court may, in the absence of the accused person, order him or her to be further remanded to such place, date
and time as the court thinks fit and may order that the undertaking to appear given by the accused person and any agreement
entered into pursuant to a condition of the grant of bail be continued so as to require the appearance of the accused person at every
place, date and time to which the accused person is remanded or the hearing adjourned, postponed or otherwise deferred.
207. The Commission is of the view that these provisions are generally satisfactory. The only issue that they do not seem to address
is the position of a person who failed to appear in accordance with a bail application but whose bail was not the subject of any
specific direction. That might occur because there was an apparently reasonable excuse for the non-attendance such as serious illness.
Subsection 33(2A) would not apply because the person had not appeared but, if the judge or magistrate before whom the matter had
been listed had simply forgotten to make an express direction that bail was to continue, the person might be arrested. It is, of
course, open to the judge or magistrate to revoke bail in such circumstances but if he or she chooses not to do so bail should not
be permitted to lapse by oversight. Furthermore, the subsection does not require that notice of the adjourned hearing and any continuance
made or taken to have been made be provided to the accused person.
The Commission recommends that subsection 33(2A) be amended to read:
Where an accused person has given a bail undertaking referred to in subsection (1) and no specific direction in respect of is made
by the court on the occasion at which he or she had undertaken to appear, the court is to be taken to have continued bail, irrespective
of whether the accused person duly appeared in accordance with his or her undertaking.’ However, where such a person has failed
to appear in accordance with his or her undertaking the court shall notify or cause such person or his or her legal representative
to be notified of the adjourned date and of any continuance of bail made or taken to have been made and/or any other order made in
relation to bail.
VARIATION AND REVOCATION OF BAIL
209. Section 19 empowers a court to vary or revoke bail but does not stipulate the grounds upon which such an order might be made.
Such an order could also be sought upon review
but, again no grounds ate stipulated. It may be thought that the Act should specify the circumstances in which a court could make
orders depriving a person of his or her liberty even after bail has previously been granted. However, there is a wide range of circumstances
which might justify such a course and, after due consideration, the Commission has concluded that any attempt to limit judicial discretion
in this area would be inappropriate.
210. The Commission is also of the firm view that applications for orders of this kind should only be made by the Director of Public
Prosecutions or police informant.
As previously mentioned, the comparable legislation in Queensland now permits complainants to apply in some circumstances for orders
that bail be varied or revoked but, for the reasons already given, the Commission is of the view that such a provision is unlikely
to result in the court hearing either evidence or arguments not available to the Director of Public Prosecutions and likely to create
significant problems. The power to make such an order on the court’s own motions should be preserved.
211. The Commission accepts that, as a general principle, applications to vary or revoke earlier orders may be made only by parties
to the proceedings in which the orders were made and that no amendment to this section is necessary.
ENFORCEMENT OF BAIL UNDERTAKINGS
212. Bail undertakings are enforceable in a number of ways and, as previously mentioned, the Commission is of the view that such
undertakings should include undertakings to comply with any bail conditions.
213. The forms used by the courts contain appropriate warnings and advice in relation to non-compliance. The forms advise that
failure to attend will result in the issue of an arrest warrant and if the failure to appear is without reasonable excuse, the accused
person may be guilty of an offence pursuant to
Bail Act 1992
now provides that if a person who has given an undertaking to appear before a court but fails to do so the court may issue a warrant
for his or her arrest. The person will then be brought before a court which may reconsider the accused person’s entitlement
to bail, and may remand the person in custody.
215. Further powers of arrest are provided by section 349Z of the
Crimes Act 1900
which is in the following terms:
A police officer may, without warrant, arrest a person who has been admitted to bail in the Territory, a State
or another Territory, subject to conditions, if the officer believes on reasonable grounds that the person—
(a) has failed to comply with a bail condition; or
(b) will not comply with a bail condition.
Where a police officer arrests a person under subsection (1), the officer shall cause the person to be brought before a court
as soon as is practicable.
Where a person is brought before a court under subsection (2), the court may—
(a) in the case of a person originally admitted to bail in the Territory—exercise the same powers in relation to
the person in relation to bail (or dispensing with bail) as it has in relation to other accused persons in custody; or
(b) in the case of a person originally admitted to bail in a State or another Territory—
(xxxv) release the person unconditionally;
(xxxvi) admit the person to bail subject to such conditions as the court thinks fit; or
(xxxvii) remand the person in custody for a reasonable time pending the obtaining of a warrant for the arrest of the person from
the State or Territory in which the person was admitted to bail.
A release referred to in subparagraph (3) (b) (i) does not affect the operation of the bail order or the conditions of the bail imposed
in the other State or Territory.
216. In addition, section 349ZA provides a mechanism for arrest for breach of bail conditions by person outside the Territory:
This section applies where a police officer believes on reasonable grounds that—
(a) a person who has been admitted to bail in the Territory subject to conditions has breached those conditions; and
(b) the person is in a State or another Territory.
Where this section applies, an issuing officer may, upon the information of the police officer—
(a) issue a warrant to arrest the person in that State or other Territory and bring him or her before a court in the Territory;
(b) issue a summons for the person’s appearance before a court in the Territory.
217. These sections appear to provide ample power to ensure the arrest of an accused person who has failed to appear in accordance
with his or her undertaking, breached one of the conditions upon which bail was granted or acted in a manner that provided reasonable
grounds for a police officer to believe that he would not comply with such a condition. The latter power is particularly important
because it enables police officers to intervene to prevent a potential fugitive from boarding a flight to an overseas country with
no relevant extradition treaty or a potentially violent defendant from harassing a victim or witness.
218. However, the only “conditions” permitted are those stated in section 25 and they do not include any conditions
relating to conduct, other than a condition that the person enter into an agreement to observe specified requirements. Once that
agreement has been duly entered into, the accused person has complied with the agreement. Breach of the requirements contained
in the agreement would not involve breach of a condition and these sections would appear to have no application. Furthermore, since
no offence under
will have been committed,
there would appear be no other basis upon which the person might be arrested. This problem should be overcome by the proposal that
conditions be imposed directly by order of the court and that the bail undertaking be extended to include an undertaking to comply
The Commission recommends that the provisions presently contained in sections 349Z and 349ZA of the
Crimes Act 1900
be retained but transferred to the
Forfeiture and liability to pay monies
provides that the court may also declare that all or part of any sum of money which a surety has agreed to forfeit be so forfeited
and order the surety to pay that sum to the territory
221. The knowledge that a parent, spouse or other family member stands to forfeit a substantial amount of money is a significant
inducement to compliance because it draws upon the bonds of family affection and loyalty and, conversely, it is likely to result
in family pressure and encouragement.
222. In the event of default the Registrar writes to the accused person and any surety(s) advising them of the court’s order
and demanding payment within a specified period of time or, if cash has been deposited, advising that it has been forfeited. If
a sum of money forfeited by order of the court remains unpaid, a warrant of execution is issued for execution against the goods and
chattels of the person liable by the Bailiff of the Magistrates Court. Procedures relating to the execution of warrants of execution
are detailed in
Part XVIIIA
Magistrates Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Act 1982.
Section 37 provides that where a person granted bail fails to comply with his/her undertaking to appear and that person or another
person has entered into an agreement pursuant to a bail condition to forfeit an amount of money, the Court may declare that amount
or any part of it to be forfeited and order the person who entered the agreement to pay the forfeited sum to the Territory. Any amount
forfeited may be recovered by the Territory in the Magistrates Court as a debt due to the Territory.
223. These provisions are generally adequate, though they appear to have been invoked only infrequently.
However the Commission recommends that section 37 should be amended to provide that once 28 days have elapsed after service of a notice
advising the surety of the order for forfeiture an order forfeiting bail is to have effect as if it were a judgment of the Supreme
Court or the Magistrates Court (depending upon the court in which the grant of bail was made) unless there has been an application
to set the order aside an that order has not been resolved. The notice should advise the surety that he or she might apply to the
court to set aside the order but that any such application should be made within 28 days of service of the notice.
225. It should also be noted that the Act contains no provision that would enable a surety who has come to believe that the accused
person will not answer his bail or is breaching condition to seek to be relieved of his or her obligations by raising the matter
with the court. It is desirable that such a provision be enacted not only so that sureties who have entered into agreements in good
faith may be protected but so that breaches or contemplated breaches of bail may be brought to the court’s notice.
The Commission recommends that:
in determining whether to order the reversal of any order forfeiting the surety’s security, the court should have regard to:
(a) any action taken by the surety to ensure compliance by the accused person with the conditions of bail imposed;
(b) the provision of information relating to the accused person’s whereabouts;
(b) whether the person had applied to the court to be released from his or her obligations; and
(d) any relevant personal circumstances.
an appropriate warning of the risk of forfeiture be included in the bail undertaking to signed by sureties.
a section be inserted to permit sureties to apply even before any date upon which the relevant accused person is to answer bail for
orders that they be relieved from obligations under their agreements.
Prosecution for offences under the Bail Act
227. Bail undertakings may also be enforced by criminal prosecution. The Act contains several sections creating offences. Section
49 provides that a person who has given an undertaking to appear and fails, without reasonable excuse, to appear before a court
in accordance with his or her undertaking is guilty of an offence. Section 50 provides that a person who makes an acknowledgment
under paragraph 25(1)(b) knowing it to be untrue in a material particular is also guilty of an offence. Section 51 provides that
where a person indemnifies another person, or agrees with another person to indemnify that other person, against a liability which
that other person may incur as a surety to secure the appearance in answer to bail of a person accused of an offence, he or she and
that other person are each guilty of an offence. In each case the maximum penalty is imprisonment for a period not exceeding 2 years
or a fine not exceeding 200 penalty units, or both.
228. As mentioned earlier, section 49 applies only to a failure to answer bail and not to breach of a condition. Having regard
to the potential importance of some bail conditions it would seem prudent to ensure that criminal sanctions are available.
229. The Commission otherwise accepts that these provisions generally offer adequate means of enforcing bail orders and dealing
with offenders who fail to comply with them.
The Commission recommends that section 49 be amended to provide that the offence may also be constituted by breach of a condition
REVIEWS AND APPEALS
231. Part VI of the Act is devoted to provisions for the review of bail decisions. Since they provide further avenues for accused
persons to obtain judicial consideration of issues relating to bail, it is appropriate to consider this part of the Act in the context
of earlier provisions governing applications for bail.
232. As previously mentioned, subsection 19(2) provides that there is no limit to the number of applications that may be made to
a court. It is true that subsection 19(5) prevents any further applications from being considered once a decision has been made
unless the accused person had been unrepresented at the earlier hearing or there is fresh evidence of material significance not previously
available. However, Part VI contains an extensive legislative scheme permitting at least a number of successive reviews of any such
233. Section 38 provides that an accused person may request a review of a bail decision made by an authorised officer whether by
that officer or another authorised officer. The authorised officer to whom the application is made must conduct a review of the
decision and may affirm or vary the decision or substitute another decision.
234. Section 41 provides that an accused person or informant may apply for review of any decision by a court or an authorised officer
in relation to bail.
235. Section 42 provides that a magistrate may review any decision by an authorised officer or a magistrate including his or her
own decision.
236. Section 43 enables the Supreme Court to review “any decision of an authorised officer, the Magistrates Court or the Supreme
Court (however constituted) in relation to bail” and this power may be exercised irrespective of whether any power to review
the decision under section 38 or 42 has been exercised or sought to be exercised. There has been some debate as to whether this
section presently authorises the Supreme Court to review decisions made upon the review of an earlier decision or only primary decisions.
However, a number of more fundamental questions arise as to the need for such provisions. If an accused person may make a further
application on the basis of changed circumstances or fresh evidence, as subsection 19(5) seems to contemplate, then is there any
need to provide for earlier decisions to be reviewed on such grounds? Furthermore, if neither changed circumstances nor fresh evidence
are alleged, then is there any need to provide for decisions to be reviewed when they could, in any event, be challenged on appeal?
237. Section 44 casts no light on these issues. It provides that a court “may not, pursuant to this Division, review a decision
in circumstances where, had the decision not been made, the court would be prohibited from making a decision in relation to the grant
of bail.” This provision would appear to be at best unnecessary and at worst a source of confusion. Subsection 45(2) requires
that a decision as varied or substituted upon a review shall be in conformity with the Act but section 44 purports to exclude the
power to conduct such a review in the circumstances posited. It is difficult to see any utility in a provision of that nature.
Furthermore, there would appear to be no circumstances in which “had the decision not been made”, a court would be prohibited
from making a decision in relation to the grant of bail. It should be repealed.
238. However, subsection 45(3) provides that the review of a decision shall be by way of rehearing and evidence or information in
addition to, or in substitution for, the evidence or information given or obtained on the making of the decision may be given or
obtained on the review. These rights extend beyond those normally available on appeal. Whatever the present effect of section 43,
it may be reasonable to permit a person denied bail by an authorised officer the opportunity of a hearing unrestrained by the rules
normally applicable to appeals. However, there is no apparent justification for permitting unlimited hearings each involving a
review of the preceding decision. Once there has been a review of the decision any further re- examination of the relevant issues
should occur only upon appeal.
239. The Commission also accepts that there is a need to ensure that any reconsideration of a bail decision can proceed without
unnecessary delay. Appeals to the Supreme Court normally involve the filing of a notice of appeal followed by the settling of appeal
books before a date for hearing is allocated. In most cases this procedure is necessary to ensure that the appeal can be conducted
efficiently and fairly. However, it should be possible to deal with appeals from bail decisions without appeal books and, if a transcript
of the earlier proceedings were not available, the appeal could proceed on the basis of agreement as to the effect of the evidence
or by one or both parties invoking the power to adduce evidence in substitution for that evidence. Furthermore, the provision of
detailed grounds of appeal would appear unnecessary and, since appeals of this nature can often be resolved relatively quickly,
it should be possible to have them listed on short notice. An expedited hearing could be facilitated by enabling appeals to be
instituted by originating applications stating simply that the applicants appeal against the orders in question and the orders sought.
Appeals from the Supreme Court are presently subject to the rules of the Federal Court but the procedures could be reviewed when
the ACT Court of Criminal Appeal assumes responsibility for appeals of this nature.
The Commission recommends that the original and appellate jurisdiction to grant bail be defined as follows:
(a) sections 13 to 18 should be retained in their current form;
(b) paragraph 19(5)(b) should be amended to permit a further bail application:
if the accused person can show that there has been a significant change in circumstances since the bail decision or there is fresh
evidence or information of material significance to the granting of bail to the accused person that was not available to be put before
the court at the time of the hearing of the immediately preceding application to a court for bail;
(c) section 42 should be amended by retaining the power for a magistrate to review the decision of an authorised officer but removing
the power for magistrates to review decisions made by each other or by themselves;
(d) section 43 should be amended by retaining the power for the Supreme Court to review the decision of an authorised officer but
removing the power for the Supreme Court to review decisions made by magistrates or judges;
(e) section 43 should also provide that any challenge to the correctness of bail decisions made by magistrates or judges should
be by appeal rather than review;
(f) however, subsection 45(3) should be amended to provide that evidence or information in addition to, or in substitution for, the
evidence or information given or obtained on the making of the decision may be given or obtained on either review or appeal;
(g) section 44 should be repealed; and
(h) the procedure for appeals should be left to rules of court which will need to be reviewed upon the creation of an ACT Court
PROVISIONS IN OTHER STATUTES
Subsection 68(3)
Supreme Court Act 1933
contains the following provisions:
Upon an information being filed without examination or commitment for trial, the Court may—
(a) cause a summons to be issued to the accused person to appear at the time and place specified in the summons and there
to answer the charge specified in the information; or
(b) issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused person and hold him or her in custody or admit him or her to bail.
242. These provisions seem adequate and there is no apparent reason to recommend any amendment.
Magistrates Court Act 1930
contains a number of relevant provisions.
authorises the Court to remand defendants in custody pending the hearing of proceedings for indictable offences:
(a) because of the absence of witnesses; or
(b) for any other reasonable cause;
it becomes necessary or advisable to defer the hearing of proceedings for an indictable offence, the Court may adjourn the
hearing and may by warrant or, if the period of remand is not to exceed 3 days, by order made orally, remand the defendant into
the custody of the Administrator for such period (not exceeding 15 days at any one time) as the Court considers reasonable.
A warrant or order under subsection (1) shall direct the Administrator to—
(a) keep the defendant in custody for the specified period; and
(b) bring the defendant before the Court at the specified time and place for the hearing.
enables the Court to have such defendant brought back during the remand period:
The Court may order the defendant to be brought before it at any time before the expiration of the time for which
he or she was so remanded, and the officer in whose custody he or she then is shall duly obey the order.
Section 73 provides that Magistrates may admit such defendants to bail:
Instead of detaining the defendant in custody during the period for which he or she is remanded, the Magistrate before whom he or
she appears or is brought may admit the defendant to bail in accordance with the provisions of the
Bail Act 1992
Section 84 provides the Court with similar powers in relation to defendants charged with summary offences:
Where, before or during the hearing or further hearing of any information, it appears advisable, the Magistrate
may, in his or her discretion, adjourn the hearing or further hearing to a certain time and place to be then appointed
and stated in the presence and hearing of the parties or the legal practitioners or other persons appearing for them.
The Magistrate may, in the meantime, suffer the defendant to go at large or commit him or her to gaol or a place of security,
or to such other safe custody as the Magistrate thinks fit, or may admit the defendant to bail in accordance with the provisions
Bail Act 1992
Section 226 empowers the Supreme Court to admit a person to bail pending a decision on a matter brought up by writ of habeas corpus:
Where any person committed to gaol by virtue of a summary conviction or order is brought up by writ of
habeas corpus, and the Supreme Court or the Judge postpones the final decision of the case, the Supreme Court or the Judge may
admit the person to bail in accordance with the provisions of the
Bail Act 1992
If the judgment of the Supreme Court or the Judge is against any person so brought up, the Supreme Court or the Judge
may remand him or her to his or her former custody, there to serve the rest of the term for which he or she was committed.
244. These provisions seem generally adequate, though it seems somewhat incongruous that the Supreme Court’s power to grant
bail in relation to an application for a writ of habeas corpus should be derived from a statute governing a different court. Whether
this provision and others in the
Magistrates Court Act
relating to such applications should be relocated in the
Supreme Court Act
should, perhaps, be considered in the context of a review of the statutes governing the two courts. In any event, the proposed
amendment to the
providing for bail in any proceedings for a writ of habeas corpus granting court would make the provision substantially redundant.
245. There is no adequate reason for the limiting to 15 days the period for which the Magistrates Court may remand a person in
custody. If a person is refused bail pending committal proceedings or a summary trial for a serious offence he or she may apply
to have the decision reviewed, appeal against it and, in some circumstances, make a fresh application. If the decision is nonetheless
affirmed, it will almost invariably reflect a judgment that the person in question should be held in custody until the hearing.
It is difficult to see any justification for requiring such a person to be brought to court each fortnight only to be again remanded
in custody. Many prisoners apparently resent being brought to court and confined in a cell until their cases are reached and arrangements
can be made for them to be transported back to the Remand Centre and some actively seek to be relieved of the requirement.
246. There may be a need to review the plight of people who have been granted bail but who are unable to satisfy conditions such
as a requirement for a cash surety, but it would be open to such a person to pursue the avenues previously mentioned whether at
his own initiative or upon the advice of a social worker or Remand Centre visitor. Furthermore, as previously mentioned,
requires the superintendent of the remand centre or officer in charge of the facility in which the person is being held to notify
the court within seven days if he or she is still in custody because of a failure to meet bail conditions.
The Commission recommends that subsection 70 (1) be amended by deleting the words “for such period (not exceeding 15 days at
any one time) as the Court considers reasonable” and inserting in lieu thereof the words “
until the date to which the proceedings have been adjourned
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY GOVERNMENT ACT LAW REFORM COMMISSION
I, Gary Humphries MLA, Attorney-General for the Australian Capital Territory, having regard to community concern about the application
Bail Act 1992
refer the following matter to the ACT Law Reform Commission:
to review the provisions of the
Bail Act 1992
to determine whether they are best suited to the public interest and particularly, the interests of victims of crime;
to identify how successfully the provisions of the
Bail Act 1992
are operating;
to identify appropriate criteria, if not already identified, for the grant of bail and whether discretion for various offences is
appropriately exercised by police or members of the judiciary and under what circumstances;
to determine whether amendments to the
Bail Act 1992
should be recommended; and
to identify and make recommendations on any associated issue that the Commission considers relevant.
In undertaking this reference, the Commission will consult with, and have regard for, views of members of the community.
Gary Humphries MLA
Attorney-General
30 December 1997
Interstate provisions limiting availability of bail
In some Australian jurisdictions the general discretion to grant bail has been limited or the presumption in favour of bail reversed
in certain circumstances. The relevant provisions are set out hereunder.
A. QUEENSLAND –
Bail Act 1980
Section 16:
Refusal of bail
Notwithstanding this Act, a court or a police officer authorised by this Act to grant bail shall refuse to grant bail to a defendant
if the court or police officer is satisfied -
(a) that there is an unacceptable risk that the defendant, if released on bail -
(i) would fail to appear and surrender into custody;
(ii) would, while released on bail -
(A) commit an offence; or
(B) endanger the safety or welfare of a person who is claimed to be a victim of the offence with which the defendant is charged or
anyone else’s safety or welfare; or
(C) interfere with witnesses or otherwise obstruct the course of justice, whether for the defendant or anyone else; or
(b) that the defendant should remain in custody for the defendant’s own protection.
Where it has not been practicable to obtain sufficient information for the purpose of making a decision in connection with any matter
specified in subsection (1) due to lack of time since the institution of proceedings against a defendant the court before which the
defendant appears or is brought, shall remand the defendant in custody with a view to having further information obtained for that
In assessing whether there is an unacceptable risk with respect to any event specified in subsection (1)(a, the court or police officer
shall have regard to all matters appearing to be relevant and, in particular, without in any way limiting the generality of this
provision, to such of the following considerations as appear to be relevant -
(a) the nature and seriousness of the offence;
(b) the character, antecedents, associations, home environment, employment and background of the defendant;
(c) the history of any previous grants of bail to the defendant;
(d) the strength of the evidence against the defendant.
Where the defendant is charged -
(a) with an indictable offence that is alleged to have been committed while the defendant was at large with or without bail between
the date of the defendant’s apprehension and the date of the defendant’s committal for trial or while awaiting trial
for another indictable offence; or
b) with an offence to which section 13 applies [which concerns matters upon which only the Supreme Court may grant bail]; or
c) with an indictable offence in the course of committing which the defendant is alleged to have used or threatened to use a firearm,
offensive weapon or explosive substance; or
d) with an offence against this Act;
the court or police officer shall refuse to grant bail unless the defendant shows cause why the defendant’s detention
in custody is not justified and, if bail is granted or the defendant is released under section 11A [bail for intellectually impaired
people], must include in the order a statement of the reasons for granting bail or releasing the defendant.
In granting bail in accordance with sub section (3) a court or police officer may impose conditions in accordance with section 11.
B. NORTHERN TERRITORY –
7A Presumption against bail for certain offences
This section applies to the following offences:
(a) murder;
(b) treason;
(c) an offence against the
Misuse of Drugs Act
punishable by a term of imprisonment for more than 7 years.
(d) an offence against the
Customs Act 1901
of the Commonwealth in relation to narcotic goods punishable by a term of imprisonment for 10 years or more.
A person accused of an offence to which this section applies is not to be granted bail unless the person satisfies an authorised member
or court that bail should not be refused.
The requirement for bail cannot be dispensed with for a person accused of an offence to which this section applies and
subsection 9(2)
does not apply with respect to any such offence.
Section 23A
23A Limitation on power to grant bail
Notwithstanding anything in this Act, where an appeal is pending in the
Court of Appeal against -
(a) a conviction on indictment; or
(b) a sentence passed on conviction on indictment,
bail shall not be granted by the court or any other court unless it is established that special or exceptional circumstances exist
justifying the grant of bail.
C. WESTERN AUSTRALIA –
Bail Act 1982
Schedule 1,
, Clause 3A
Bail where serious offence committed while defendant on bail for another serious offence
Notwithstanding clause 1 or 2 or any other provision of this Act, where -
(a) a defendant is in custody awaiting an appearance in court before conviction for a serious offence; and
(b) the serious offence is alleged to have been committed while the defendant was–
(xxxviii) on bail for; or
(xxxix) at liberty under an early release order made in respect of,
another serious offence,
the judicial officer or (if section 16A does not apply) the authorized officer in whom jurisdiction is vested shall refuse to grant
bail for the serious offence referred to in paragraph (a) unless the judicial officer or authorised officer–
(c) is satisfied that there are exceptional reasons why the defendant should not be kept in custody; and if clause 3B applies, is
so satisfied only after complying with that clause; and
(d) is also satisfied that bail may properly be granted having regard to the provisions of clauses 1 and 3 or, in the case of a child
defendant, clauses 2 and 3.
Notwithstanding section 7(1), where a defendant is refused bail under subclause (1), for an appearance for a serious offence his case
for bail need not be considered again under that subsection for an appearance for that offence unless he satisfies the judicial officer
who may order his detention that -
(a) new facts have been discovered, new circumstances have arisen or the circumstances have changed since bail was refused;
(b) he failed to adequately present his case for bail on the occasion of that refusal.
Where a child defendant is refused bail under subclause (1) he shall be dealt with in accordance with
section 19(2)
Young Offenders Act 1994
Subsection 3(1)
Bail Act 1982
defines “serious offence” to mean the offences described in
and Schedule 2. The offences described in
are failing to comply with bail conditions which are imposed to ensure that a defendant does not “endanger the safety, welfare
or property of any person” or “interfere with witnesses or otherwise obstruct the course of justice” whether in
relation to themselves or another person.
The offences described in Schedule 2 include:
Wilful murder
Manslaughter
Disabling in order to commit an indictable offence
Acts intended to cause grievous bodily harm or to resist or prevent arrest
Intentionally endangering the safety of persons traveling by railway Intentionally endangering safety of persons traveling by aircraft
Grievous bodily harm
Causing or attempting to cause explosion likely to endanger life
Wounding and similar Acts
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm
Assault with intent to commit or facilitate a crime
Assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm
Serious Assaults
Indecent assault
Aggravated indecent assault
Sexual penetration without consent
Aggravated sexual penetration without consent
Kidnapping Deprivation of liberty Stalking
Stealing a motor vehicle
Assault with intent to commit robbery
Criminal damage if the property is destroyed or damaged by fire Wilfully lighting a fire or causing a fire to be lit under such circumstances
as to be likely to injure or damage a person or property
Offences concerned with prohibited drugs generally
Offences concerned with prohibited plants generally
Conspiracy to commit an offence under
Misuse of Drugs Act 1981
Breach of a violence restraining order, and other specific offences under the Restraining Orders Act 1997
Dangerous driving causing death injury etc. Dangerous driving causing bodily harm
D. VICTORIA -
Bail Act 1977
Accused person held in custody entitled to bail
Notwithstanding the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) a court shall refuse bail –
(a) in the case of a person charged with treason or murder except in accordance with
(aa) in the case of a person charged with -
(iii) an offence of trafficking in relation to a commercial quantity of a drug of dependence under section 71 of the Drugs of Poisons
and Controlled Substances Act 1981 or an offence of cultivating a narcotic plant under section 72 of that Act in circumstances where
the offence is committed in relation to a quantity of a drug of dependence that is not less than the commercial quantity applicable
to that narcotic plant or an offence of conspiring to commit either of those offences under section 79(1) of that Act; or
(iv) an offence under
section 231(1)
or 233B(1) of the
Customs Act 1901
of the Commonwealth in circumstances where the offence is committed in relation to narcotic goods within the meaning of that Act
in respect of a quantity that is not less than the commercial quantity (as defined in
section 70(1)
Drugs, Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981
) applicable to the drug of dependence constituted by those narcotic goods–
unless the court is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist which justify the grant of bail;
(b) if the accused person is in custody pursuant to the sentence of a court for some other cause;
(c) if the accused is in custody for failing to answer bail unless the accused person satisfies the court that the failure was due
to causes beyond his control;
(d) if the court is satisfied -
(i) that there is an unacceptable risk that the accused person if released on bail would:
fail to surrender himself into custody in answer to his bail;
commit an offence whilst on bail; endanger the safety or welfare of members of the public; or
interfere with witnesses or otherwise obstruct the course of justice whether in relation to himself or any other person.
(ii) (repealed)
(xiii) that it has not been practicable to obtain sufficient information for the purpose of deciding any question referred to in this
sub-section for want of time since the institution of proceedings against him.
Despite sub-section (2)(b), a court is not required to refuse bail in the case of an accused person who is serving a sentence of imprisonment
for some other cause but any bail granted must be subject to the condition that the person will not be released on bail
before he or she is entitled to be released under a parole order made, or which may be made, in respect of him or her;
In assessing in relation to any event mentioned in sub-section (2)(d)(i) whether the circumstances constitute an unacceptable
risk the court shall have regard to all matters appearing to be relevant and in particular, without in any way limiting
the generality of the foregoing, to such of the following considerations as appear to be relevant, that is to say–
(a) the nature and seriousness of the offence;
(b) the character, antecedents, associations, home environment and background of the accused person;
(c) the history of any previous grants of bail to the accused person;
(d) the strength of the evidence against the accused person;
(e) the attitude, if expressed to the court, of the alleged victim of the offence to the grant of bail.
Where the accused person is charged -
(a) with an indictable offence that is alleged to have been committed while he was at large awaiting trial for another indictable
(b) with an offence against
section 21A(1)
Crimes Act 1958
(stalking) and -
(i) the accused person has within the preceding 10 years been convicted or found guilty of an offence against that section in relation
to any person or an offence in the course of committing which he or she used or threatened to use violence against any person; or
(ii) the court is satisfied that the accused person on a separate occasion used or threatened to use violence against the person whom
he or she is alleged to have stalked, whether or not the accused person has been convicted or found guilty of, or charged with, an
offence in connection with that use or threatened use of violence; or
(ba) with an offence against section 22 of the
Crimes (Family Violence) Act 1987
of contravening an order in the course of committing which the accused person is alleged to have used or threatened to use
violence and-
(xiv) the accused person has within the preceding 10 years been convicted or found guilty of an offence in the course of committing
which he or she used or threatened to use violence against any person; or
(xv) the court is satisfied that the accused person on a separate occasion used or threatened to use violence against the person who
is the subject of the order , whether or not the accused person has been convicted or found guilty of, or charged with, an offence
in connection with that use or threatened use of violence; or
(c) with an offence of aggravated burglary under
Crimes Act 1958
or any other indictable offence in the course of committing which the accused person or any person acting in concert with the accused
person is alleged to have used or threatened to use a firearm, offensive weapon, or explosive within the meaning of the said
(ca) subject to sub-section (2)(aa), with an offence of trafficking in a drug of dependence under
Drugs, Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981
or an offence of cultivating a narcotic plant under
of that Act or an offence of conspiring to commit either of those offences under section 79(1) of that Act; or
(cb) subject to sub-section (2)(aa), with an offence under
section 231(1)
or 233B(1) of the
Customs Act 1901
of the Commonwealth (as amended and in force for the time being) in relation to a commercial or trafficable quantity of narcotic
goods within the meaning of that Act; or
(d) with an offence against this Act -
the court shall refuse bail unless the accused person shows cause why his detention in custody is not justified and in any such case
where the court grants bail the court -
(i) if constituted by a judge or magistrate, shall include in the order a statement of reasons for making the order; or
(ii) in any other case, shall, as prescribed by regulations record and transmit a statement of reasons for making the order.
In granting bail a court may impose conditions in accordance with section 5.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Powers of authorised officers
37. The Commission recommends that paragraph 14(2)(a) be amended by adding the words “in respect of that offence” after
the word “court”.
Powers of courts
49. The Commission recommends that section 20 be amended to provide that:
The restriction on the power of a magistrate to grant bail to a person who has appeared before the Supreme Court following committal
for trial or sentence applies only in relation to offences for which he or she has been so committed;
following committal for trial or sentence a magistrate or judge may make orders varying the conditions upon which bail has been
a magistrate may not vary conditions which have been imposed by the Supreme Court, whether upon a grant of bail in that court or
by variation of conditions previously imposed by the Magistrates Court; and
a magistrate may decline to exercise any such power and may, at his or her discretion, direct that any such application be made
to the Supreme Court.
Appearances by video link
58. The Commission recommends that
section 72A
Magistrates Court Act
be repealed and that a section be inserted in the
providing that:
may determine whether a proceeding relating to bail
should be conducted by audio visual link or as to the manner in which an accused person might give evidence or otherwise participate
in such proceedings;
in exercising such power the court might have regard to the accused person’s conduct, capacity to instruct solicitors, any
expressed wish to be present in court, and any other factors the court considers relevant;
such a determination may be made by a judge or magistrate in chambers without hearing submissions or receiving evidence from either
the applicant or the respondent;
notwithstanding, any such determination the applicant or respondent is entitled to apply for a direction that the accused person
be present at the hearing and, if satisfied that adequate grounds exist for varying the earlier determination, the court may order
that he or she be present.
Entering into bail
65. The Commission recommends that
be amended to provide that the bail undertaking include an undertaking to comply with any conditions imposed by the authorised officer
75. The Commission recommends that
be amended by adding provisions:
enabling a potential surety to enter into any agreement, make any acknowledgment or make any deposit required as a condition of
bail with the Registrar or Deputy Registrar of any Australian Court, an authorised officer or a consular official in an Australian
mission overseas;
authorising such people to provide certificates of surety by certifying on or with copies of any agreements made with or acknowledgments
or bonds provided by sureties or receipts provided to sureties that such documents or monies referred to in such receipts have been
received from the surety and that at the time of receipt he or she produced a driver’s licence, passport or other acceptable
photographic evidence sufficient to identify him or her as the surety; and
requiring that the accused person be released if bail has been duly granted if, save for the provision of security, any conditions
upon which his her release was contingent have been fulfilled and the superintendent or officer for the time being in charge of the
remand centre or gaol in which he or she has been confined, has received, whether by facsimile or otherwise, a copy of such agreement,
undertaking or receipt accompanied by a certificate of surety.
76. The Commission also recommends that:
for the purposes of paragraph 25(1)(e) of the Act, electronic funds transfer (EFT), bank guarantee, credit card or bond be prescribed
as acceptable means for the payment of any monies required as security; and
be amended to provided that a court which has granted bail on terms requiring that monies be paid into court may give directions
as to the manner in which the funds are to be retained or invested and that any interest earned on such monies be deemed part of
the security so provided and liable to forfeiture with the principal sum.
Bail for minor offences
85. The Commission recommends that:
subsection 7(2)
be amended to provide as follows:
Subject to subsection (3), a person charged with an offence to which this section applies is entitled to be granted bail and, if the
person is in custody, he or she shall be released from custody as soon as he or she has given an undertaking to appear and comply
with specified requirements as to his her conduct while released on bail including any requirements that he or she refrain from residing
at a specified place, undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or participate in a program of counselling or rehabilitation but not
including any requirements that he or she report to police stations.
the offences of possession of a disabling substance or offensive weapon in a public place (s.494
Crimes Act 1900
) and possession of a knife in a public place or school (s.495
Crimes Act 1900
) be prescribed for the purposes of paragraph 7(3)(f).
The presumption in favour of bail
95. The Commission recommends that
be amended:
by adding to paragraph (2)(a) the words ‘other than an offence referred to in subsection (3); and
by adding as
subsection 3
Bail shall not be granted bail or dispensed to a person charged with an offence of:
(a) treason or murder;
(b) any offence in the course of committing which the accused person is alleged to have used or threatened to use violence with weapon
apparently capable of causing death or serious injury or a replica of such a weapon;
(c) contravening a protection order or restraining order in the course of committing which the accused person is alleged to have used
or threatened to use violence and the accused person has within the preceding 12 months been convicted or found guilty of an offence
in the course of committing which he or she used or threatened to use violence against any person;
(d) an offence of trafficking in relation to a commercial quantity of a drug of dependence or an offence of conspiring to commit such
an offence; or
(e) an offence under
section 231(1)
or 233B(1) of the
Customs Act 1901
of the Commonwealth (as amended and in force for the time being) in relation to a commercial quantity of narcotic goods within the
meaning of that Act unless the court is satisfied exceptional circumstances exist which justify the grant of bail;
unless, having regard to the matters referred to in whichever of section 22 and 23 apply to the accused person, the court or authorised
officer is satisfied that it would be appropriate to grant bail notwithstanding the gravity of the offence charged
Bail for serious offences committed whilst on bail for another serious offence
114. The Commission recommends that section paragraph 1(b) of section 9A be amended by repealing the words after “another
serious offence” and inserting in lieu thereof “or while the person was facing a charge for another serious offence
and on bail for any offence”.
The criteria for granting bail to adults
124. The Commission recommends that:
subsection 22(1) and section 23A be repealed; and
subsection 22(1) re-enacted in the following terms:
In making a determination regarding the grant of bail to an accused person who is not a child, a court or an authorised officer shall
have regard to the following matters, so far as they are ascertainable:
(a) the interests of the accused person;
(b) the probable effect that refusal of bail would have on any of the accused person’s family or dependants;
(c) the likelihood of the accused person duly appearing in court if bail is granted;
(d) the need to protect the community from risks of the accused person interfering with evidence, intimidating witnesses or otherwise
obstructing the course of justice
and/or committing an offence while released on bail;
(e) the likelihood of a victim or other persons being harassed by the accused person or otherwise put in fear as a consequence of
his or her release on bail;
(f) the gravity of the offence charged and the strength of the Crown case in relation to such charge;
(g) failure to attend court as required by previous bail undertakings or to comply with bail conditions on previous occasions; and
(h) any other matter that the court considers appropriate to be taken into account in the circumstances of the case.
The criteria for granting bail to children
135. The Commission recommends that section 23 be amended by deleting the reference to section 12 of the
Children and Young People Act 1999
Bail in relation to Domestic Violence offences
146. The Commission recommends that subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) be repealed and replaced with the following provisions:
(1) Where a person is accused of a domestic violence offence, an authorised officer shall not grant bail to that person if, having
regard to the circumstances of the alleged offence and any/or other apparently reliable information, the authorised officer is of
the opinion that the release of that person on bail, even on conditions, would be likely to expose a relevant person to danger of
further violence.
(2) Where an authorised officer is not of that opinion, the accused person is entitled to be granted bail unless the authorised officer
is satisfied that, having regard to the matters referred to in whichever of sections 22 and 23 apply to the accused person, he or
she is justified in refusing bail but such bail shall be granted only upon the following conditions:
(a) The accused person undertake to appear before a specified court within 48 hours of being released; and
(b) that he not assault, molest, approach
or personally contact
any alleged victim of the offence charged or attend within 50 metres of his or her home
Bail after arrest for non-compliance with summons of subpoena
170. The Commission recommends that:
a new section be enacted providing that a court may grant bail to any person arrested under a warrant issued to secure his or her
attendance at court when he or she has failed to comply with a summons or subpoena requiring such attendance in the same matter and,
in granting bail in such circumstances, may impose any of the conditions referred to in section 25.
Section 25 be amended by deleting the words ‘an accused person’ or ‘the accused person’ wherever they appear
in section 25 and replacing them with the words ‘a person’ or ‘the person’ as the case may be.
Bail pending hearing of application for writ of habeas corpus
172. The Commission recommends that there be a section inserted in the
providing a general power for the Supreme Court to admit any person brought up by writ of habeas corpus to bail in accordance with
the provisions of the
Bail Act 1992
The inherent power of the Supreme Court
178. The Commission recommends that
section 57AA
be repealed.
Conditions on which bail may be granted to adults
188. The Commission recommends that
be amended by:
repealing paragraph (1)(b);
repealing subsections (3) and (4);
removing any reference to the accused person being required to enter into an agreement; and
providing that the conditions that may be imposed include requirements as to the accused person’s conduct while released
Conditions on which bail may be granted to children
191. The Commission recommends that
subsection 26(1)
be amend by removing any reference to section 12 of the Children and Young People Act.
The interests of victims
203. The Commission recommends that:
the provisions of sections 27A and 46A be consolidated;
the obligation to inform victims who have expressed concern about the need for protection from violence or harassment of the bail
decisions be imposed upon informants rather than courts;
the obligation be extended to require victims to be informed of decisions made on appeal; and
the definition of the word ‘victim’ in section 3 be amended by adding after the words in paragraph (a) “who suffers
harm”, the words “or who might have suffered such harm had the object of the offence been carried out”.
Continuation and extension of bail
208. The Commission recommends that subsection 33(2A) be amended to read:
‘Where an accused person has given a bail undertaking referred to in subsection (1) and no specific direction in respect of
is made by the court on the occasion at which he or she had undertaken to appear, the court is to be taken to have continued bail,
irrespective of whether the accused person duly appeared in accordance with his or her undertaking.’
However, where such a person has failed to appear in accordance with his or her undertaking the court shall notify or cause such
person or his or her legal representative to be notified of the adjourned date and of any continuance of bail made or taken to have
been made and/or any other order made in relation to bail.
219. The Commission recommends that the provisions presently contained in sections 349Z and 349ZA of the
Crimes Act 1900
be retained but transferred to the
Forfeiture and liability to pay monies
224. The Commission recommends that
should be amended to provide that once 28 days have elapsed after service of a notice advising the surety of the order for forfeiture
an order forfeiting bail is to have effect as if it were a judgment of the Supreme Court or the Magistrates Court (depending upon
the court in which the grant of bail was made) unless there has been an application to set the order aside an that order has not
been resolved. The notice should advise the surety that he or she might apply to the court to set aside the order but that any such
application should be made within 28 days of service of the notice.
226. The Commission recommends that:
in determining whether to order the reversal of any order forfeiting the surety’s security, the court should have regard to:
(a) any action taken by the surety to ensure compliance by the accused person with the conditions of bail imposed;
(b) the provision of information relating to the accused person’s whereabouts;
(c) whether the person had applied to the court to be released from his or her obligations; and
(di) any relevant personal circumstances.
an appropriate warning of the risk of forfeiture be included in the bail undertaking to signed by sureties.
A section be inserted to permit sureties to apply even before any date upon which the relevant accused person is to answer bail for
orders that they be relieved from obligations under their agreements.
230. The Commission recommends that
be amended to provide that the offence may also be constituted by breach of a condition of bail.
Reviews and appeals
240. The Commission recommends that the original and appellate jurisdiction to grant bail be defined as follows:
sections 13
should be retained in their current form;
(b) paragraph 19(5)(b) should be amended to permit a further bail application:
if the accused person can show that there has been a significant change in circumstances since the bail decision or there is fresh
evidence or information of material significance to the granting of bail to the accused person that was not available to be put before
the court at the time of the hearing of the immediately preceding application to a court for bail;
should be amended by retaining the power for a magistrate to review the decision of an authorised officer but removing the power
for magistrates to review decisions made by each other or by themselves;
should be amended by retaining the power for the Supreme Court to review the decision of an authorised officer but removing the
power for the Supreme Court to review decisions made by magistrates or judges;
should also provide that any challenge to the correctness of bail decisions made by magistrates or judges should be by appeal rather
than review;
(f) however,
subsection 45(3)
should be amended to provide that evidence or information in addition to, or in substitution for, the evidence or information given
or obtained on the making of the decision may be given or obtained on either review or appeal;;
(g) section 44 should be repealed; and
(h) the procedure for appeals should be left to rules of court which will need to be reviewed upon the creation of an ACT Court of
Provisions in other statutes
247. The Commission recommends that subsection 70 (1) be amended by deleting the words “for such period (not exceeding 15
days at any one time) as the Court considers reasonable” and inserting in lieu thereof the words “until the date to
which the proceedings have been adjourned.”
A copy of the terms of reference has been provided as appendix A.
section 8(2)
Bail Act 1992
. The proposed change is discussed later in this report.
Both meanings are acknowledged in the Oxford Dictionary and the word is frequently used during bail applications in both
subsections 3(5)
It is sometimes suggested that such a right must be qualified. People should enjoy only freedom from arbitrary or
unjustified incarceration. However, there are at least two objections to any such formulation. First, those who seek to restrict
human freedoms inevitably maintain that such restrictions are neither arbitrary nor unjustified. On the contrary, as William Pitt
observed in 1783, necessity is the plea for every infringement of human freedom. Hence, the addition of such qualifying adjectives
may make any affirmation of such a right substantially ineffective. Second, such a qualification may imply that the right
has no relevance unless the contemplated incarceration would be arbitrary or unjustified. In fact, the right should be recognised
and given due weight in any decision as to possible incarceration. The ultimate question is not whether the right applies but whether
it is outweighed by other compelling considerations.
The effect of this amendment is discussed later in this report.
Though both the
Supreme Court Act 1933
Magistrates Court Act 1930
still contain some relevant provisions. These are discussed later in this report.
Explanatory memorandum, clause 22, page 8.
Having regard to the provisions of
Supreme Court Act 1933
section 48A
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
it may be doubted whether the inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court was or could have been validly abolished by an amendment
. See paragraphs 148 to 153.
Section 14(1)
Bail Act 1992
Police generally proceed by VATAC only where an accused person is to be charged with less serious offences. The person is formally
charged when he/she appears before the court.
Where an accused person appears before the court in answer to a summons and the case is adjourned, the court does not usually require
the accused person to enter into bail. The case may be adjourned to a case management hearing pursuant to a Magistrates
Court practice direction and bail may be required to ensure that he or she attends that hearing.
See, for example,
Chamberlain v R
[1983] HCA 13
(1983) 153 CLR 514.
This aspect is discussed later in this report.
The only particular provision for variation of conditions is that contained in
section 25(6)
which applies when a court has granted bail and the accused person subsequently satisfies the court that he or she is unable to
comply with the conditions imposed.
section 46.
subsection 33(2A).
This problem will no doubt be addressed when new cabling is installed in the proposed ACT prison.
The word ‘court’ is defined by
to mean the Supreme Court or the Magistrates Court.
The term ‘proceeding relating to bail’ should be defined to include an application for bail, an application for variation
of bail conditions, a review of a bail decision or an appeal relating to bail but not a proceeding relating to a prosecution for
an offence under the
See paragraph 25(1)(a) of the
The section also requires the court or authorised officer to be satisfied before releasing the accused person that he or she will
comply with the conditions, to provide a surety with a notice advising him or her of the accused person’s obligations
in relation to bail conditions and the consequences of non-compliance. Further notices must be provided to both the accused
person and the surety in the event of variation of conditions upon review and in the event of the court continuing bail upon an adjournment.
Amendments to
sections 25
(to remove any reference to the accused person entering into an
agreement) and to
(to provide that the offence may also be constituted by breach of a condition of bail) are proposed later in this report.
Though it is conceivable that subsection (2) might not have prevented the imposition of conditions on bail for the
earlier offence because the accused person failed to comply with an undertaking to appear given in relation to an even
earlier offence and paragraph 3(a) was thereby invoked.
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Bail Act 1992
This section is discussed later.
See appendix B
This provision is discussed later in this report.
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
See section 451 of the
See the discussion of the provisions of
under the heading “The criteria for granting bail to adults”.
These proposals are dealt with later in this report.
As defined by the requirement that such offences be punishable by at least 5 years imprisonment
See section 106 of the
Crimes Act 1900
Section 9 deals with applications for bail after sentences of imprisonment.
Section 9A deals with serious offences committed whilst on bail for other serious offences.
The term “likelihood” must be interpreted by reference to the context in which it is used (
Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Ltd v Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
per Deane J at 346-8
[1979] FCA 85
at 380-2) and in the present context should not be construed to mean “more likely than not” but to refer to a real and
not remote chance or possibility.
See sections 429, 429A and 429B of the
Crimes Act 1900
in its application to the ACT.
Paragraph 429A (m) of the
The phrase ‘otherwise obstruct the course of justice’ is intended to cover a wide range or risks such as the risk
of the accused warning co-offenders not to attempt to pick up drugs from a location under surveillance or of
the presence of a police informer who had infiltrated a group undertaking a criminal operation.
See the definition in
sections 54
This provision has now been repealed.
[1999] ACTSC 109.
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act 1994
sections 16
This section is discussed later in this report.
DeDomenico v Marshall
(unreported) ACTSC 52, Crispin J, 24 May 2001.
See the discussion at paragraphs 65 to 73 inclusive.
Bail Act 1980
(Queensland)
See sections 42 and 43.
Prosecutions in the Magistrates Court are almost invariably brought in the name of the police informant and are conducted by staff
of the Director of Public Prosecutions on his or her behalf. However, the Director has power to take over the conduct of the prosecution
pursuant to
Director of Public Prosecutions ACT 1990
. Whilst it would be theoretically possible for a police informant to act independently of the Director in relation to bail proceedings,
it is difficult to envisage circumstances in which such a course would be likely.
This section Is discussed later in the report.
See section 39.
See the contrary decisions of
Johnsen v Dunstan
[1999] ACTSC 30
Dunstan v DPP
[1999] FCA 921
(1999) 92 FCR 168.
The word ‘court’ is defined by section 3 of the
to mean the Supreme Court or the Magistrates Court.
The term ‘proceeding relating to bail’ should be defined to include an application for bail, an application for variation
of bail conditions, a review of a bail decision or an appeal relating to bail but not a proceeding relating to a prosecution for
an offence under the
The phrase ‘otherwise obstruct the course of justice’ is intended to cover a wide range or risks such as the risk
of the accused warning co-offenders not to attempt to pick up drugs from a location under surveillance or of
the presence of a police informer who had infiltrated a group undertaking a criminal operation.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter