URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2003/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Community Justice Centres - Issues Paper [2003] NSWLRCIP 23
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Introduction
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Reasons for community mediation
Community mediation in NSW before 1980
Establishment of CJCs
OUTLINE OF THE CJC ACT
COMMUNITY MEDIATION IN OTHER AUSTRALIAN JURISDICTIONS
Australian Capital Territory
Other States
CJCs’ PLACE IN THE MEDIATION “INDUSTRY”
THE EXTENT OF GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT
Forms of regulation
Provision of mediation services
DEFINITION OF MEDIATION
AN OBJECTS CLAUSE?
Provision of other services?
Services to minorities or disadvantaged groups
REFERENCE OF DISPUTES TO MEDIATION
Means of referring disputes
ASSIGNMENT OF MEDIATIONS
CONSENT AND PARTICIPATION OF THE PARTIES
Mandatory mediation
Continuing participation
INVOLVEMENT OF OTHER PARTIES
Presence of lawyers
Support and representation of parties
CULTURALLY-BASED COMMUNITY-SPECIFIC SERVICES
INTERACTION WITH OTHER AGENCIES
Memorandums of understanding
Relationship with Local Courts
MEDIATOR SELECTION
Representativeness
ACCREDITATION AND TRAINING
Qualifications, training and experience
Continuing education
Assessing the training programs
STATUS AND REMUNERATION
Status of CJC mediators
Remuneration
COMPETENCY STANDARDS
CJCs’ Competencies for Mediators
United Kingdom College of Family Mediators
CODES OF PRACTICE
The role of codes of practice
CJC regulation of practice
Coverage of codes of practice
Establishing codes of practice
ENFORCEMENT OF STANDARDS, CODES AND GUIDELINES
Consumer choice/market regulation
IMPARTIALITY OF MEDIATORS
PREVENTING UNDESIRABLE OUTCOMES
Protections
EXONERATION FROM LIABILITY
Mediators and other officers and staff of CJCs
Members of the Police Service
CONFIDENTIALITY
Review by the Ombudsman
Admissibility of evidence
Concealing a serious indictable offence
NON-ENFORCEABILITY OF OUTCOMES
Administrative framework
COMMUNITY JUSTICE CENTRES COUNCIL
Relationship to current management structure
Future role for the Council
REFERENCE GROUPS AND NETWORKS
Professional Reference Group
Training Group
Statewide services
DIRECTORS AND DEPUTY DIRECTORS
PAYMENT FOR SERVICES
EVALUATIONS
RENAMING COMMUNITY JUSTICE CENTRES?
Services to Indigenous people
TERMS OF REFERENCE
MEDIATION AND THE NEEDS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
CURRENT PROVISION
Mediation and training program
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network
Other agencies
INDIGENOUS CJCs
LIAISON WITH INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
REPRESENTATION ON THE CJCs COUNCIL
INCLUSION IN AN OBJECTS CLAUSE?
Appendix A:
Preliminary submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
Terms of reference
History of this Reference (Digest)
Community Justice Centres
In a letter to the Commission received on 2 October 2002, the Attorney General, the Hon R J Debus MP referred the review of the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) including:
(a) The role of Community Justice Centres as a statewide conflict management and mediation service;
(b) Whether the current structure of Community Justice Centres sufficiently meets the needs of the indigenous community of New South
(c) The role and entitlements of mediators; and
(d) Any related matter.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
Participants
History of this Reference (Digest)
Division Members
Pursuant to
section 12A
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
The Hon Justice Michael Adams
Professor Hilary Astor
Ms Andrea Durbach
Master Joanne Harrison
The Hon Justice David Kirby
Professor Michael Tilbury (Commissioner-In-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Mr Joseph Waugh
Ms Anna Williams
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper.
Making a submission
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may contact
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or arrange to make your submission in person.
THE CLOSING DATE FOR SUBMISSIONS IS 19 DECEMBER 2003.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy, Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
postal addresses
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 2001
or DX 1227 Sydney
street address
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
telephone (02) 9228 8230
facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
Confidentiality and use of submissions
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. If
you would like all or part of your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. The Commission
will respect requests for confidentiality when using submissions in later publications.
Copies of submissions made to the Commission will also normally be made available on request to other persons or organisations. Any
request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential” will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
Other publication formats
The Commission is committed to meeting fully its obligations under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination legislation. These laws
require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices which may prevent people with disabilities from having full and equal
access to our services. This publication is available in alternative formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document
please contact us.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
History of this Reference (Digest)
Follow the links below for a discussion of the Issues listed.
What place do CJCs have in the mediation industry in New South Wales?
Does the definition of “mediation” in the CJC Act need to be changed?
(a) Should an objects clause be included in the CJC Act?
(b) If, so, what objects should it contain?
(a) Should CJCs have functions beyond the provision of mediation services?
(b) If so, what recognition, if any, needs to be accorded in the CJC Act to services other than mediation?
Should reference be made in the objects to the provision of mediation services to minorities or disadvantaged groups?
Should any matters be specifically excluded from the range of matters that can be the subject of a CJC mediation?
To what extent should CJCs provide mediation in Apprehended Violence Order proceedings?
Should any commercial disputes be excluded from CJC mediations?
(a) Should CJCs be required to deal with compulsory mediations?
(b) Should special provision be made to deal with the possibility that mandatory mediations may be referred to CJCs?
What implications would a requirement to mediate in good faith have for CJC mediators when dealing with compulsory mediations?
In what circumstances should a mediation be terminated?
Should lawyers who are not parties to the mediation have any role in mediations conducted by CJCs?
What provision should be made for parties who are not able to take part in CJC mediations effectively on their own account, in particular
in relation to:
(a) the presence of support persons in the mediation; and
(b) the representation of their own interests in the mediation?
(a) Should there be CJCs that cater for particular communities in addition to the geographically based CJCs?
(b) Are there other ways in which CJCs can make better provision for the needs of particular communities?
Should CJCs make use of court facilities for mediation and administrative support?
(a) Are CJC mediators sufficiently representative of the communities in which they operate?
(b) Should the aim of recruiting mediators who reflect the community in which they operate be included in legislation?
(c) Should special provision be made for the representation of minority groups on CJC mediator panels?
(a) What qualifications, training and experience ought to be required for people to become CJC mediators?
(b) Should a system be established for the recognition of training and experience gained in mediation that is not conducted by CJCs?
(a) Should continuing education/training be required for CJC mediators?
(b) If so, what should be the content of such courses?
(c) Should legislation prescribe any such content?
What provision, if any, should be made for the accreditation and evaluation of CJC mediator training programs?
Should CJC mediators be employed under the
Public Sector Management Act 1988
(NSW) or should they continue to be ministerial appointees?
How should the remuneration of mediators be structured?
(a) What standards should be applied to CJC mediators?
(b) How should these standards be imposed?
(c) How should CJC mediators’ compliance with standards be assessed?
What issues should be addressed in codes of practice for CJC mediations?
(a) What provision, if any, should be made for the development of codes of practice for CJC mediations?
(b) Who should have a role in developing these codes of practice?
(a) Should provision be made for participants to provide feedback concerning the conduct of CJC mediations?
(b) Should provision be made for the enforcement of codes of practice for CJC mediations?
What provisions, if any, are required with respect to the impartiality of CJC mediators?
What provision, if any, should be made to prevent mediation outcomes that are discriminatory, unethical, illegal or otherwise against
public policy?
(a) Should the scope of the immunities currently offered by the Act be increased or reduced?
(b) What account should be taken of the rights of the parties to a CJC mediation in providing any immunities?
Should the requirement that CJC mediators swear an oath be removed from the confidentiality provisions of the CJC Act?
(a) What exceptions, if any, should apply to the confidentiality provisions under the CJC Act?
(b) Should any list of exceptions specifically include the protection of children?
(c) When confidentiality is waived by consent, whose consent should be required?
Should the Ombudsman be able to investigate the conduct of CJC mediators during mediations?
(a) In what circumstances should it be possible to allow evidence raised in or in relation to a CJC mediation to be admitted in legal
proceedings?
(b) If evidence is to be admissible with consent, whose consent should be required?
Should officers of CJCs have immunity if they conceal a serious indictable offence without reasonable cause in respect of any information
obtained in connection with the administration or execution of the CJC Act?
Should it be possible to enforce agreements entered into at the end of a CJC mediation?
(a) Should the CJCs Council be retained?
(b) If so, what should its role(s) be?
(c) Should it have a more general role of advising the Attorney General on dispute resolution matters?
(a) Who should be members of the CJCs Council?
(b) If there is to be a broader advisory council on dispute resolution matters, who should its members be?
Is the CJCs Council, however constituted, necessary in light of the role and functions of the CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Training Group and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network?
Should the requirement for gazettal of CJCs be removed?
(a) Is there a need for greater coverage by CJCs?
(b) If so, how should the need be met?
Should references to the “Deputy Director” be removed from the Act?
Should the Director of CJCs be “subject to the control and direction of the Council”?
Should the provision relating to the keeping of records and access to them be removed from the CJC Act?
(a) Should it be possible for CJCs to require payment for its services?
(b) For what services and in what circumstances should payments be allowed?
Should a clause requiring periodic review be inserted in the CJC Act?
Do CJCs need to raise their profile?
(a) Should Community Justice Centres be renamed?
(b) If so, what should they be called?
(a) What are the needs of Indigenous people in relation to the activities of CJCs?
(b) Are the services that are currently provided to Indigenous people by CJCs appropriate?
(c) How could CJCs better meet the needs of Indigenous people?
What provision, if any, should be made to ensure there are adequate numbers of Indigenous mediators for CJCs?
Is the CJCs Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network the best mechanism for CJCs to identify and meet the needs of Indigenous
(a) Should Indigenous CJCs be established?
(b) If so, who should be involved in their operation and to what extent?
(c) What adaptations should be made to meet the needs of Indigenous people?
How should CJCs liaise with Indigenous people and communities?
(a) Should provision be made for the representation of Indigenous people on the CJCs Council?
(b) If so, what should the criteria be for such a representative?
Should reference be made, by way of an objects clause in the CJC Act, to the provision of mediation services to Indigenous people
and communities?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of reference
Outline of the CJC Act
Community Mediation in other Australian jurisdictions
CJCs' place in the mediation "industry"
The extent of government involvement
TERMS OF REFERENCE
1.1 In a letter to the Commission received on 2 October 2002,
the Attorney General, the Hon R J Debus MP asked the Commission to
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) including:
(a) The role of Community Justice Centres as a statewide conflict management and mediation service;
(b) Whether the current structure of Community Justice Centres
sufficiently meets the needs of the indigenous community of New South
(c) The role and entitlements of mediators; and
(d) Any related matter.
1.2 Community Justice Centres (“CJCs”) were established
to provide a means of settling the sort of disputes that conventional
court-based procedures are unable to resolve satisfactorily. The
disputes envisaged were basically within a relatively narrow range
domestic or neighbourhood disputes where the disputing parties had, or
once had, an ongoing relationship.
Such disputes could
include disputes between family members, partners, friends, workmates,
members of social groups and other community
organisations, neighbours,
landlords and tenants, flatmates and so on.
1.3 In handling disputes CJCs make use of mediation.
Mediation is defined by the National Dispute Resolution Advisory Council (“NADRAC”) as being:
A process in which the parties to a dispute, with the assistance of
a neutral third party (the mediator), identify the disputed issues,
develop options, consider alternatives and endeavour to reach an
agreement. The mediator has no advisory or determinative role in
to the content of the dispute or the outcome of its resolution, but may
advise on or determine the process of mediation whereby
resolution is
1.4 However, there is not complete agreement about what constitutes
mediation and there has been debate about some of its features.
practice mediators are sometimes more active than merely facilitating
the settling of an agreement. There are a number of styles
mediation, some of which involve a greater degree of mediator
intervention than others.
1.5 The key point often emphasised, particularly in relation to
community-based mediation, is that the mediators do not make decisions
or impose outcomes on the parties to a dispute, rather, the parties
make any settlement themselves.
1.6 Mediation differs from other methods of alternative dispute
resolution such as conciliation and arbitration. Conciliation is
similar to mediation except that the conciliator has a more
active advisory role than the mediator, NADRAC notes that a
conciliator,
unlike a mediator, “may have an advisory role on the
content of the dispute or the outcome of its resolution” but,
a mediator, still not have a “determinative role”.
Arbitration, on the other hand, is an adversarial process where,
following submissions, one or more arbitrators impose an award that
binding on the parties.
1.7 The mediation services that CJCs provide to disputing
parties are available free of charge. The mediations are conducted by
who provide their services on a voluntary basis (receiving
small remuneration) and who are, at least in theory, drawn from the
communities
where the services are provided. Any changes to the type or
level of service provided by CJCs will, therefore, have resource
implications
for the Government.
Reasons for community mediation
1.8 One main reason for government taking an interest in the
provision of community mediation is that it can be an appropriate
for the resolution of some disputes, including, for example:
those which are otherwise not readily resolvable by adversarial proceedings;
those which, while able to be determined by traditional legal
proceedings, will still be better resolved by mediation, and will also
be cheaper for the parties involved and take pressure off the courts;
those which, while able to be determined by traditional legal
proceedings, will be cheaper for the parties involved and take pressure
off the courts.
This gives rise to two functions for CJCs in providing mediation services to the community:
they can relieve pressure on the court system, particularly the Local Courts; and
they can prove an inexpensive and accessible dispute resolution mechanism for members of the community.
These are the two main reasons offered for the provision of community
mediation. Other reasons for providing mediation services are
in the consideration of the objectives of CJCs below.
Relieving pressure on the court system
1.9 It has been observed that traditional legal methods are
ineffective at resolving certain types of disputes. In such cases often
neither party is satisfied by the outcome imposed by the court. For
example, disputes between neighbours about fences or noise. Such
“difficult” cases can tie up court resources and can be
relieved, in some cases, by mediation.
This was one of the chief influences on the development of some community mediation programs in the United States.
A number of preliminary submissions accepted the proposition that
increased use of mediation in the community would relieve the pressure
on Local Courts.
Providing services to people and communities
1.10 As already noted, mediators do not make decisions or impose
outcomes on the parties to a dispute, the parties make the settlement
themselves. The use of community mediation to empower members of
communities to resolve their own disputes was also one of the driving
forces in the early history of the community mediation movement in the
United States in the 1960s and 1970s.
The empowerment of
individuals and communities through community mediation is still
recognised in some of the formal documentation
emanating from CJCs.
1.11 However, it appears to be the case that community mediation
has generally not realised this objective. Community mediation’s
close connection with the communities it serves, its responsiveness to
local needs and demands, has diminished in many cases in favour
greater institutionalisation and attachment to the formal justice
system and the state. For example, many cases in Australia are
from the formal justice system. Increasingly, in both Australia and the
United States, community mediation programs are
tied to the state.
1.12 The point about empowering people and communities to take
responsibility for managing their own affairs has certain limitations
in a post-structural urban society. However, a move away from strictly
locality based communities to mediation within communities
of interest
or particular cultural communities might be a way of strengthening the
empowerment of some groups within society.
Community mediation in NSW before 1980
1.13 In the past alternative dispute resolution happened
informally, often with the sanction of the courts. For example, in the
and early 1850s some matters before the Sydney Police Court were
adjourned to allow the parties “to adjust their
differences”.
These matters were mostly disputes within families,
or other relationships, for example, landlady and tenant,
apprentice and master,
as well as building disputes,
and minor assaults.
No mention, however, is made of the engagement of a third person to
assist the disputing parties in reaching an agreement. Adjournments
this sort no doubt continued at a local level.
1.14 An early statutory attempt at providing for the voluntary
mediation of civil disputes was adopted in Queensland in 1892 when
Samuel Griffith introduced the
Courts of Conciliation Act 1892
(Qld). The scheme, which was based on Prussian and Norwegian models, was apparently not successful and attracted few clients.
1.15 Similar schemes, based on courts of conciliation in
Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and Germany, were proposed in New
Wales in 1881, some 10 years earlier than Queensland, when
various proposals were unsuccessfully put forward to establish courts
of conciliation to act as an alternative to traditional court-based
procedures. One member of Parliament framed the following motion
was not formally put):
1. That the satisfactory administration of justice is and should be the chief duty of Government.
2. That the proper object of law is to endeavour to allay hot blood between those at variance.
3. That these principles are being seemingly overlooked in our
courts of so-called justice, where the delay, expense, difficulty,
uncertainty of obtaining redress are aggravated by an entire absence of
such legal endeavour as exists in many civilised countries
disputes rather by conciliation than by litigation.
4. That this want is oppressive even to citizens of the
metropolis; but in the country, where justice, except in minor courts
of restricted
inaccessible to the multitude, the defect is paralysing.
5. That this desirable preliminary of an endeavour to
conciliate can be best effected by legislation introduced by the
Government,
and that their action in this direction cannot, for the
public good, be too soon commenced.
1.16 One of the proposals, like the Queensland Act a decade later,
involved the exclusion of lawyers from the process. A bill, aimed at
remedying the ills identified above, was introduced in the same
The preamble to this bill read as follows:
Whereas the procedure of civil justice has become antiquated and is
now too tedious and expensive to be any longer of practical service
alone solving the legal complications of a busy and advancing age. And
whereas in consequence of such deficiency all business
would long ago
have come to a stand did not the community (as a rule well-meaning and
averse to strife) habitually defer or desire
to defer in the settlement
of dispute claims to good sense and honorable feeling.
And whereas it is expedient in the Legislature to render general
this peaceful substitution of equitable custom for the heartburnings
imperfect justice and to suppress all obstruction to the same through
professional jealousy. And whereas the enforcing of extreme
law has become synonymous with persecution and matter of reproach from
even tribunals themselves unable to dispense full
practical justice.
And whereas great relief under similar hardship has been afforded to
the lay community of several other countries
by the institution of
courts of conciliation and by legislation in connection therewith be it
However, the
Conciliators Appointment Bill 1881
(NSW) offered something in the nature of a system of arbitration. It lapsed for want of a quorum.
Establishment of CJCs
1.17 CJCs were first established as a pilot program in 1980.
They were heralded as “the most promising step taken this century
to provide a system for the settlement of a class of dispute
adversary processes of our courts have never been able to resolve
satisfactorily”.
The project was monitored by the Law Foundation of New South Wales. A favourable report was produced in 1982
and the scheme was made permanent in 1983 with the passing of the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) (“CJC Act”).
1.18 Three centres were established at Wollongong, Bankstown and
Surry Hills (originally proposed to be in Redfern). CJCs are now
administered in four regions – the northern, southern, western
and Sydney regions
with offices at Campbelltown, Penrith, Wollongong, Bankstown and Newcastle.
1.19 The Act has been used as a model for other legislation. In
New South Wales it has supplied model provisions that were introduced
into the statutes of various courts in 1994
as well as the Legal Aid Commission.
The New South Wales provisions have also provided a model for the
establishment of similar schemes in other Australian jurisdictions.
OF THE CJC ACT
1.20 The Act provides for the administration of the
CJCs Council
covering such matters as:
the constitution of the Council (s 5);
the functions of the Council (s 6); and
the use by the Council of facilities and staff of other organisations (s 8).
1.21 It makes provision for the
staff of CJCs
by providing for such positions as:
the Director (s 10);
the Deputy Director;
mediators (s 11); and
other staff (s 12).
1.22 It makes provision for the
establishment and operation of CJCs
, including:
the use of premises (s 15, s 16);
the keeping and disposal of records (s 17); and
their operation within the Attorney General’s Department (s 18).
1.23 It sets out a framework for the
provision of mediation services
the conduct of mediation sessions (s 21);
the types of disputes suitable for mediation (s 22);
the voluntary nature of any mediation conducted (s 23, s 24); and
representation of some parties by agents (s 25).
1.24 It provides for other
miscellaneous matters
, including:
evaluation of the operations and activities of CJCs (s 26);
exoneration from liability (s 27);
privilege (evidence) (s 28); and
secrecy (non-disclosure of information) (s 29).
MEDIATION IN OTHER AUSTRALIAN JURISDICTIONS
1.25 Other Australian jurisdictions have statutes that are modelled closely on some of the New South Wales provisions.
1.26 The Queensland legislation is the most closely modelled on the New South Wales Act.
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
includes provisions dealing with the establishment and functioning of a
Dispute Resolution Centres Council, the staff of the
Centres, the
establishment and functioning of Dispute Resolution Centres, the
conduct of mediation, protections for various parties
miscellaneous matters.
1.27 In practical terms Dispute Resolution Centres are operated
by the Alternative Dispute Resolution Branch of the Department of
Justice and Attorney General. The Branch also manages other mediation
services that are not operated through Dispute Resolution Centres.
Dispute Resolution Centres Council, in accordance with the Act,
merely provides advice to the Minister on the provision of mediation
services by the Alternative Dispute Resolution Branch as well
dispute resolution generally.
Court-ordered mediations
1.28 The chief difference from the New South Wales Act is that,
in 1997, formal recognition was accorded to court-ordered mediations
(called “referring orders”) meaning that Dispute Resolution
Centres now have to deal with mediations that are not voluntary.
This type of court-ordered mediation is increasingly the principal function of Dispute Resolution Centres in Queensland.
1.29 Victoria’s legislation (first enacted in 1987)
provides the simplest possible administrative framework, by stating
a “dispute settlement centre” is an organisation so
declared by Order of the Governor in Council and that a
is a person who is so declared by notice by the
Secretary to the Department of Justice published in the
Government Gazette
Provision is then made for the types of protections that are contained
in the New South Wales Act in relation to mediations conducted
dispute settlement centres.
Australian Capital Territory
1.30 The Australian Capital Territory’s provisions
differ from those in New South Wales in that they do not specify an
organisation to provide the mediation services but still include
Other States
1.31 South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania provide
funding to non-government community organisations (referred to as
Mediation Services”) to run mediations.
There would appear to be no statutes to back up the community mediation services that are available in these States.
1.32 In South Australia however, there is some legislative
protection for the mediation of disputes that have already been brought
to court. In these cases the relevant judicial officer of the Supreme
Court, District Court or Magistrates Court may, with or without
consent of the parties, refer a matter to mediation. The mediator
appointed by the court has the same privileges and immunities
judicial officer in that court and the mediator must not disclose
information obtained in the course of the mediation “except
required or authorised to do so by law”. Evidence of anything
said or done in an attempt to achieve settlement at such a
mediation is
not admissible in subsequent proceedings and the terms of any
settlement reached may be embodied in a judgment of the
PLACE IN THE MEDIATION “INDUSTRY”
1.33 Since CJCs were established more than 20 years ago, there
has been an explosion in the provisions for mediation in New South
Wales. Far from being one of the few providers of mediation services,
CJCs are now one of many. For example, most courts and tribunals
South Wales now make provision for mediation with each of the courts
and tribunals maintaining their own lists of suitable
Mandatory mediation is provided for in the Supreme Court, District Court and Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal.
Voluntary mediation is provided for in the Compensation Court, the Land
and Environment Court, Local Courts and the Administrative
In the Federal sphere, mediation is available in relation to family law matters as well as in the Federal Court.
1.34 Mediation may also be conducted in relation to a variety of
different matters under the auspices of various government
instrumentalities,
including, for example, the New South Wales Rural
Assistance Authority (in relation to farm debts), the Legal Aid
Commission, the
Department of Agriculture (in relation to agricultural
tenancies), the Department of Fair Trading (in relation to, among other
community land management and strata schemes) and the Legal
Services Commissioner (in relation to consumer complaints about
The Law Society of New South Wales also
conducts a mediation program and has adopted a mediation model for
accredited members to
1.35 Given the increased availability of mediation to deal with
all manner of disputes that might otherwise be dealt with by formal
methods, a general question arises as to the place of CJCs within the
mediation industry as it currently exists and as it is likely
What place do CJCs have in the mediation industry in New South Wales?
EXTENT OF GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT
1.36 The brief descriptions of the regimes in other Australian
for mediation services in numerous ways and to various extents. There
are broadly three ways in which government can operate. It
establish, fund and operate mediation services, either connected
with courts and tribunals or operating outside the formal justice
provide funding for private mediation services; or
provide a legal framework within which mediators operate, for
example giving protections of confidentiality and immunity to mediators.
A government can perform a combination of all of these functions as,
for example, the Federal government presently does in relation
family mediation under the
Family Law Act 1975
Forms of regulation
1.37 In assessing the desirability of changes to the way CJCs
are governed, consideration must also be given to how this governance
is to be achieved. In Australia statutes governing community mediation
services differ widely in the level of issues covered.
Areas not covered by statute may, in some cases, be covered by
regulations, policies and guidelines determined by administering
and their advisors.
1.38 In the United States there is a much broader range of
options for governmental provision. One of the more comprehensive
at regulating the provision of state-wide dispute resolution
services can be found in New Jersey.
The system in New
Jersey covers over 37 different types of dispute resolution programs
including community mediation programs associated
with the municipal
courts. Rules and guidelines under this scheme cover various aspects of
the provision of dispute resolution services.
Some of these are
mentioned, where relevant, in the course of this paper.
1.39 Much of this paper is concerned with the question of
whether the current arrangements by which CJCs are governed are
and necessary and further, if changes are desirable. An issue
for this review concerns what matters should appropriately be covered
by statue, what by regulation and what by the development of policies
and guidelines by CJCs and their advisors. Throughout this
question of the most appropriate vehicle for regulation and control of
the activities of CJCs is left open. For instances
of regulation that
are not covered by statute, questions will arise as to how the
regulations, policies and guidelines can be arrived
at. For example,
regulations can be framed by the responsible Minister with input from
advisory bodies; policies and guidelines can
be framed by advisory
bodies themselves or by the management of CJCs with input from various
other participants. In framing issues
for possible reform in the rest
of this paper, the Commission welcomes submissions on the most
appropriate means of achieving the
desired changes.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
19 November 1980 at 3147.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
26 November 1980 at 3696; 19 October 1983 at 1881.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
Alternative dispute resolution definitions
(1997) at 5. See also National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 116; Australian Standard (AS4608).
. See, eg, L Boulle,
Mediation: principles, process practice
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at 28-30. See also National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
ADR terminology: a discussion paper
(2002) at 17
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 116.
. See H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 89.
. See para 2.4-2.10.
. See, eg, L Street, “Mediation and the judicial institution”
Australian Law Journal
at 794. But see J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 156 for an alternative view point.
. See D McGillis,
Community mediation programs: developments and challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 7; American Bar Association,
Report of pound conference follow-up task force
(1976) at 9-10.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
at 1; Confidential 1,
Preliminary submission
at 2; H Sham-Ho,
Preliminary submission
. D McGillis,
Community mediation programs: developments and challenges
National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 7. W Faulkes and R Claremont,
“Community mediation: myth and reality”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
. For example, promoting the “empowerment of individuals and communities” is an objective of the
Memorandum of understanding between NSW Local Courts and the Community Justice Centres, NSW
(28 January 2000).
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 14-15, 33-37.
. See, eg, W Faulkes and R Claremont, “Community mediation: myth and reality”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
at 180-181; S E Merry, “Going to court: strategies of dispute
management in an American urban neighborhood” (1979) 13
Law and Society
891 at 898, 916, 920. See also below at para 2.59-2.62 and Chapter 6.
. See, eg, C A Corbyn,
Sydney revels (the eighteen-fifties) of bacchus, cupid, and momus
(Ure Smith, Sydney, 1970) at 37, 40, 53;
The Sentinel
(8 October 1845) at 2.
. See, eg, C A Corbyn,
Sydney revels (the eighteen-fifties) of bacchus, cupid, and momus
(Ure Smith, Sydney, 1970) at 60.
The Sentinel
(17 September 1845) at 2.
The Sentinel
(8 October 1845) at 2.
The Sentinel
(8 October 1845) at 2.
. See M Tilbury, M Noone and B Kercher,
Remedies: commentary and materials
(2nd edition, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1993) at 46-50.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 1 September 1881 at 910.
Courts of Conciliation Act 1892
(Qld) s 14.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 3 August 1881 at 432.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 3 August 1881 at 432-437.
Community Justice Centres (Pilot Project) Act 1980
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 November 1980 at 3147.
. J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 155, 191.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 October 1983 at 1881.
. See CJCs,
Annual Report 2001-2002
Courts Legislation (Mediation and Evaluation) Amendment Act 1994
(NSW). See also NSW,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 4 May 1994 at 1858.
Legal Aid Commission Act 1979
. These are outlined in para 1.26-1.30, below.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
refers to the Department of Courts Administration. All references
to the Department of Courts Administration are to be construed
reference to the Attorney General’s Department:
Administrative Changes (Departments) Order 1995
(NSW) cl 8.
. See Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 17 May 1990 at 1718.
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
. Queensland, Department of Justice and Attorney General,
Annual Report 2001-2002
at 154-156.
. See Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 30 April 1997 at 1176.
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 21K.
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 21L-21N.
Mediation Act 1997
Mediation Act 1997
. See National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at para 2.20.
Supreme Court Act 1935
District Court Act 1991
Magistrates Court Act 1991
Courts Legislation (Mediation and Evaluation) Amendment Act 1994
(NSW). See, for example,
Compensation Court Act 1984
District Court Act 1973
(NSW) s 164G;
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW) s 61J;
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110Q. See also
Legal Aid Commission Act 1979
Supreme Court Act 1970
District Court Act 1973
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
Compensation Court Act 1984
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Legal Aid Commission Act 1979
Agricultural Tenancies Act 1990
Community Land Management Act 1989
Legal Profession Act 1987
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
. See Law Society of NSW,
Mediation and evaluation information kit
(2003). See also “Society adopts charter on mediation practice”
(1997) 35(11)
Law Society Journal
. See para 1.26-1.30, above.
. See D McGillis,
Community mediation programs: developments and challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 31.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
2. Provision of mediation services
History of this Reference (Digest)
Definition of mediation
An objects clause?
Reference of disputes to mediation
Assignment of mediations
Consent and participation of the parties
Involvement of other parties
Culturally-based community-specific services
Interaction with other agencies
2.1 Mediation is the principal activity of CJCs. This focus was determined early in the history of the scheme (although the possibility
of arbitration was never strictly ruled out).
CJCs now refer to providing “conflict management services” in addition to mediation services, although mediation is the
primary means by which disputes are managed. Because of the need to ensure that parties can feel confident to come to a mediation
conference, the Act provides that certain protections attach to mediation (these are discussed in Chapter 4). The skill, professionalism
and conduct of the mediators are also important to public and consumer confidence in the mediations conducted by CJCs. These issues
are dealt with in Chapter 3.
2.2 The Act states that the Director is responsible for the provision of mediation services. The sessions are commenced and conducted
according to procedures determined by the Director, subject to any policy guidelines or directions issued by the Council.
OF MEDIATION
2.3 The Act provides for a broad definition of mediation:
(a) the undertaking of any activity for the purpose of promoting the discussion and settlement of disputes,
(b) the bringing together of the parties to any dispute for that purpose, either at the request of one of the parties to the dispute
or on the initiative of the Director, and
(c) the follow-up of any matter the subject of any such discussion or settlement.
The Act also makes it clear that a mediator may not adjudicate or arbitrate upon a dispute that is undergoing mediation.
It has been submitted that the definition is broad enough to encompass the activities of CJCs and so does not need to be changed.
Does the definition of “mediation” in the CJC Act need to be changed?
AN OBJECTS CLAUSE?
2.4 The CJC Act does not currently contain an objects clause apart from the statement that “Community Justice Centres shall
be established and operated in accordance with this Act for the purpose of providing mediation services”.
2.5 The most recent annual report of CJCs lists the following organisational goals:
To contribute to the safety and harmony of communities by improving individual, group and community responses to and resolution of
To provide quality mediation and conflict management services for metropolitan and regional NSW.
To provide services that are confidential, impartial, accessible and voluntary.
To empower people to take ownership of the dispute and assist the parties by the transference of skills and knowledge to the community
on dealing with and resolving conflict.
2.6 The annual report also lists a number of “key objectives”:
The provision throughout NSW of accessible, innovative, appropriate and diverse conflict management and mediation programs which are
benchmarked with national and international best practice.
Tailored services and programs which meet the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, people from culturally diverse
backgrounds, and people with disabilities.
The continuing development of a quality organisation, accredited by an external national standards body, with a priority of promoting
equity, safety and harmony in the workplace and ensuring the organisation is fiscally responsible and monitors risks.
Effective and diverse communication strategies for staff, mediators, the media, stakeholders and the community relevant to a state
wide service.
Maintaining existing mediation services and refining infrastructure and administrative functions across the regions.
The establishment of partnerships with key stakeholders within the Attorney General’s Department and with related government
and non-government agencies in order to promote a whole of government approach to the management of conflict in the community.
2.7 It has become common practice to include objects clauses in legislation that establish agencies and regulate the provision of
services. Examples of such clauses include statements of objects in relation to the system for dealing with complaints against lawyers,
disability services, optometrists, and the Community Relations Commission.
Objectives are necessary so that outcomes of programs can be measured.
2.8 Objectives will differ depending on the nature of the service provided. An Australian Institute of Judicial Administration issues
paper has provided a list of possible objectives for court-connected mediation derived from the literature on the subject. These
objectives can be adopted in various combinations and not all of them are necessarily compatible with each other. Given that the
list is concerned with court-connected mediation some of the objectives may not be so relevant to community mediation schemes. However,
in light of the increasing connection of community mediation with the formal justice system, some of these objectives may have more
relevance to community mediation than they once had:
Objectives of court connected dispute resolution schemes could be to provide a method/methods of dispute resolution that
Reduce delay, clear lists, reduce the backlog of court/tribunal.
Assist in management of cases (which implies a question about the objectives of case management).
Reduce cost (to parties; court; government; taxpayer).
Are appropriate to the needs of the case/parties.
Are responsive to personal as well as business needs.
Produce fair, equitable outcomes in all the circumstances.
Achieve party satisfaction.
Produce enduring agreements.
Preserve ongoing relationships between the disputants.
Protect the interests of vulnerable third parties.
Preserve and, if possible, increase party respect for and confidence in the justice system.
Encourage the parties to use alternative methods in the future.
Encourage parties to use ADR earlier, including pre-filing.
Achieve moral education/transformation.
Educate/encourage/respond to needs of legal profession.
Change the legal culture.
2.9 Examples of statements of objects can be found in relation to US mediation schemes. For example, the New Jersey Rules of Court
invest the Administrative Office of the Courts with certain objects in relation to “Complementary Dispute Resolution Programs”
(“CDR programs”). These objectives, like those in the other list outlined above, are also aimed at court-connected mediation:
to promote uniformity and quality of CDR programs;
to monitor and evaluate CDR programs and assist managers in implementing them;
to serve as a clearinghouse for ideas, issues, and new trends relating to CDR, locally and in other jurisdictions;
to develop CDR pilot projects to meet new needs;
to monitor training and continuing education programs for mediators; and
to formalise relationships with the legal profession, the academic sector, and other providers of CDR services.
2.10 The Anti-Discrimination Board suggests the insertion of an objects clause that clearly sets out the principle that CJCs “should
provide services that are accessible and non-discriminatory”.
The CJCs has suggested that it may be useful to include a statement that CJCs aim to provide services to all parts of the New South
Wales community.
(a) Should an objects clause be included in the CJC Act?
(b) If, so, what objects should it contain?
Provision of other services?
2.11 The core activity of CJCs is the conduct of mediation sessions. However, the Act also refers to the provision of “mediation
which would seem to be broader than simply the conduct of mediation sessions. The CJCs Council has suggested that “provision
of mediation services” should at least read “provision of mediation and conflict management services”.
2.12 CJCs have provided input/assistance into the development of mediation schemes established in other contexts:
A program of
peer mediation in High Schools
was developed by the Department of School Education in partnership with CJCs in 1995.
pre-release mediation program for inmates
of correctional centres and their families was developed in conjunction with the Department of Corrective Services in 1994.
CJCs initially administered the
Community Youth Conferencing Program
(involving mediation between victims, offenders, families and other community members) in 1993/1994 and conducted training programs
for mediators (including police) to take part in the Program.
In 1998/1999 CJC mediators were contracted to undertake conciliation with parties prior to formal hearings before the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal.
2.13 In the United States there has been a similar experience with community mediation programs expanding the types of cases that
they deal with. Many of the developments have been the result of requests by local courts, prosecutors, bar associations and local
government. For example, family courts have sought assistance with custody disputes and local governments have sought assistance
with resolving disputes between street gangs. Some programs have broadened the services they provide to disputing parties at least
partly with a view to diversifying their funding bases. For example, some programs have provided assistance and training to organisations
that want to establish in-house mediations schemes. Programs have also moved into areas such as dispute prevention initiatives, public
policy disputes (for example, planning and environment matters) and victim-offender mediation.
2.14 It may be appropriate for CJCs to charge for services that do not constitute their core activities, especially in commercial
2.15 An argument could be made that the Act is only required to regulate the mediation activities of CJCs and that any other activities
can be carried out on an administrative level without the need for formal regulation (like many other business centres of the Attorney
General’s Department). However, the conflict management and community education roles of CJCs are also important and an argument
can be put for including them, at the very least, in a legislative objects clause.
(a) Should CJCs have functions beyond the provision of mediation services?
(b) If so, what recognition, if any, needs to be accorded in the CJC Act to services other than mediation?
Services to minorities or disadvantaged groups
2.16 It has been suggested that mediation, by providing an informal alternative to the formal justice system, may be an appropriate
means for resolving disputes that involve members of particular groups in society who may, for various reasons, be wary of the traditional
justice system. Examples include members of immigrant minorities, gay men and lesbians, people with disabilities and young people.
The needs of Indigenous people are considered separately in Chapter 6. The provision of flexible and culturally appropriate services
to minority cultural groups could be an important function of CJCs.
2.17 Recognition of the special needs of members of such groups might necessitate, for example, recruitment of suitable mediators
or special awareness training for existing mediators.
Should reference be made in the objects to the provision of mediation services to minorities or disadvantaged groups?
OF DISPUTES TO MEDIATION
2.18 This part of the chapter considers the types of disputes that are suitable for mediation in CJCs, the means of referring them,
and the CJCs’ relationship with other agencies in dealing with appropriate disputes.
2.19 CJCs were established to provide a means of settling the sort of disputes that conventional court-based procedures are unable
to resolve satisfactorily. The kind of disputes that the CJCs’ services aimed to resolve basically fell within a relatively
narrow range of domestic or neighbourhood disputes where the disputing parties had, or once had, an ongoing relationship.
Such disputes could include disputes between family members, partners, friends, workmates, members of an organisation, neighbours,
landlords and tenants.
In 2001-2002, of the 7,161 files opened by CJCs, 49% involved neighbour disputes, 25% were family disputes (one-quarter of which
involved separated or separating spouses and 16% involved children or young people and their parents). Fifteen percent of all dispute
files opened related to fences.
2.20 The Act provides that the CJC Council can determine what classes of disputes may or may not be the subject of mediation sessions.
The Director may also refuse to allow a particular dispute to be mediated at a Community Justice Centre.
2.21 An example of the exclusion of specific types of matters may be found in the New Jersey Court Rules which provide:
No referral to mediation shall be made if the complaint involves:
(1) serious injury,
(2) repeated acts of violence between the parties,
(3) clearly demonstrated psychological or emotional disability of a party,
(5) matters arising under the Prevention of Domestic Violence Act..., or
(6) a violation of the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Code.
2.22 The Victorian Dispute Resolution Project Committee, which recommended the establishment of a neighbourhood mediation pilot project
in 1985, stated that the following disputes were not suitable for community mediation:
Disputes where there is not a continuing relationship between the disputers.
Disputes where there is evidence of a gross imbalance of power.
Disputes involving serious criminal matters.
Disputes involving domestic violence (including child abuse).
Disputes of a family law nature which are covered by the jurisdiction of the
Family Law Act
Disputes where the mental health of one or both of the parties indicates that mediation is unlikely to be effective.
Disputes of the landlord/tenant type which concern occupancy.
2.23 The Commonwealth’s
Family Law Rules
include a list of considerations that an intake officer must have regard to in deciding whether a dispute is suitable for mediation:
(a) the degree of equality (or otherwise) in bargaining power of the parties; and
(b) the risk of child abuse (if any); and
(c) the risk of family violence (if any); and
(d) the emotional and psychological state of the parties; and
(e) whether one of the parties may be using the mediation option to gain delay or some other advantage; and
(f) any other matter relevant to the proposed mediation.
Such an approach leaves open the possibility that some aspects of a dispute may be suitable for mediation notwithstanding the presence
of violence in the relationship.
2.24 Generally the types of matters that are unsuitable for mediation are identified in regulations, rules or policy documents, that
is, lists that are more easily changed than statutory enactments.
Should any matters be specifically excluded from the range of matters that can be the subject of a CJC mediation?
Apprehended violence orders
2.25 In the period 1 September 2001-30 June 2002, of the 5,859 files opened by CJCs, 77 cases (1%) involved Apprehended Domestic Violence
and 347 cases (6%) involved Apprehended Personal Violence Orders.
2.26 There are serious concerns about bringing disputes involving violence to CJCs. First, there is a strong view that domestic violence
should not be subject to mediation and is not a negotiable issue. This has always been recognised by CJCs.
Secondly, where the violence involves control of one party over the other, there must be serious concerns about free participation
in the mediation process and consent to its outcomes.
Thirdly, there are practical concerns about the physical safety of participants in the mediation process, including the parties and
the mediators themselves. Finally, mediation is not a substitute for an AVO which is a protective order. Nevertheless mediation may,
in some cases, be able to assist parties to deal with the dispute which provoked the request for protection. Other mediation agencies
have developed careful protocols to identify disputes involving violence, to assess whether they are suitable for mediation, and
to decide what provisions and protections should be put in place in the mediation in cases where the parties opt to proceed with
the mediation.
To what extent should CJCs provide mediation in Apprehended Violence Order proceedings?
Commercial disputes
2.27 When Community Justice Centres were first established it was not intended for them to cover disputes arising from the dealings
of business organisations with individuals or other businesses. These commercial disputes were seen as better dealt with in the area
of consumer protection regulation.
For example, the current Act governing the Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal includes sections that promote conciliation, provide
for the appointment of mediators and for the payment of the costs of mediations.
However, by 1993, it was being reported that commercial disputes were in fact being mediated in CJCs:
Community justice centres are being used increasingly for the resolution of commercial disputes. More and more people who have disputes
with business houses or commercial organisations are achieving resolution of those disputes at community justice centres.
More and more organisations are seeking to make use of community justice centres... and now corporate clients are using them. In a
period of recession, people who would normally sue are using CJCs to resolve commercial disputes.
In 2001 it was observed:
The commercial sector also can access the program to resolve workplace disputes between employees and employers, small debt matters
between suppliers and service providers, and partnership disputes.
2.28 The CJC Memorandum of Understanding with the Local Courts observes that there are certain categories of disputes that are less
amenable to alternative dispute resolution processes, giving as an example “purely commercial disputes, particularly those
involving insurance companies or financial institutions”.
2.29 It can be argued that it is undesirable that a
service be made available to resolve
disputes. Commercial relationships are not necessarily of the same nature as other ongoing relationships. However, not all disputes
that have a “commercial” aspect are of the same nature. An argument could be made that some disputes involving small
business and disadvantaged people could be appropriate for mediation at CJCs, particularly small civil claims. The question therefore
arises as to what provision, if any, should be made to prevent certain types of commercial disputes being brought before CJCs for
Should any commercial disputes be excluded from CJC mediations?
Means of referring disputes
2.30 References may come from the disputing parties themselves, but also the courts (including chamber magistrates), police, welfare
bodies, welfare agencies, government departments and agencies (including local government, Legal Aid Commission, Department of Housing)
and other organisations. In 2001-2002, 46% of the 7,161 files opened by CJCs were referred from the Local Courts (by Magistrates,
Chamber Magistrates or Registrars); 14% were self referred; 13% were referred by State Government bodies (41% of these were from
the Police and 32% were from the Department of Housing) and 10% were from Local Government.
2.31 Various other instruments provide that some disputes may or must be referred to a CJC. For example, the model rules for incorporated
associations require that a dispute between members of an association must be referred to a CJC.
Adjoining landowners may go to a CJC in order to reach an agreement concerning the carrying out of fencing work.
2.32 The Acts relating to many judicial bodies and tribunals now make provision for the referral of matters for mediation provided
the parties to the proceedings have agreed. Such provisions either expressly state that they do not prevent referral of the matter
or imply this in a broader provision that does not exclude any other form of mediation.
2.33 Some provisions also allow courts to adjourn or make such other orders as are necessary to allow a matter to be mediated at a
None of these provisions appear to override the requirement of consent by the parties to a dispute.
OF MEDIATIONS
2.34 In practice the mediation sessions are conducted by two mediators assigned by an interviewing officer on behalf of the relevant
Centre Coordinator. The responsibility for assigning the mediators rests with the relevant Centre Coordinator on delegation from
the CJC Director. The Coordinators attempt to assign the most appropriate mediators to each session, with a view to equal distribution
of the workload but also bearing in mind such variables as client comfort and needs, the type of dispute, the mediators’ abilities,
availability and any requirements for specialised mediators.
AND PARTICIPATION OF THE PARTIES
2.35 A number of issues are dealt with in this section relating to the participation of parties in a mediation, including:
whether the parties can be compelled (or mandated) to participate in the mediation; and
the extent to which the parties need to be willing participants in the mediation process (regardless of whether their initial participation
is voluntary or not).
These issues raise the question of the consent of the parties to mediation. In discussing the consent of mediation participants,
a distinction is often drawn between the question of the consent of the parties to attend the mediation and the consensual nature
of the process once the mediation gets underway. However, these two issues are not necessarily so easily separated. It has been observed:
The degree of coercion to mediate is not simply a product of a statutory provision allowing the courts to compel the parties to mediate.
It is also a function of the social and political circumstances in which the parties must make decisions associated with their dispute.
Mandatory mediation
2.36 The issue of compelling parties to attend a CJC mediation has arisen from time to time.
For example, it was canvassed in the review of the pilot scheme in 1982. Some commentators believed that compulsion might make the
system more effective. It was also suggested that compulsion would reduce the administrative costs involved in CJCs attempting to
arrange mediations that do not go ahead because one party refuses to attend. The review, however, concluded that the purely voluntary
nature of the scheme was fundamental to its operation.
2.37 It has also been suggested that parties should be compelled to mediate particular types of dispute. For example, some Department
of Housing local client service teams have suggested that there are problems arising from the fact that tenants cannot be forced
to attend a mediation session. They suggested that CJC mediation should be compulsory where a public housing tenancy is at risk.
Some local Councils have also suggested that CJC mediation should be compulsory in some cases, for example, in relation to dividing
The Law Reform Commission’s report on dividing fences considered that compulsory mediation might be of “practical advantage
in getting parties to attend a mediation session” but declined to deal with the issue only in relation to dividing fences because
of the general “jurisprudential and practical issues raised”.
2.38 Some studies in the United States have suggested that voluntary participation does not appear to be determinative of a successful
leading one commentator to suggest that one way for community mediation to have an effective impact on court caseloads and court
costs is for mediation to be made mandatory as a precondition to litigation.
Such an approach presumes that mediation will produce faster and higher quality dispute resolution.
2.39 Compulsory mediation is not uncommon. In New South Wales it is available in varying degrees, for example, in the Supreme Court,
the District Court and in relation to farm debts.
Participation in mediation ordered by the Local Courts, however, continues to be voluntary.
2.40 In Queensland, Dispute Resolution Centres can deal with court-ordered mediations (required by what are called “referring
2.41 Potential problems with making compulsory mediation possible include:
the view that participation in mediation must be voluntary to be effective (even though the consensual nature of the process remains
unchanged);
the possibility that compulsory mediation at CJCs might appear to be forcing people into “second class justice” (in comparison
with formal court adjudication);
the need for CJCs to regulate the types of cases it accepts for mediation; and
the possible impact on CJC performance of cases of a type that have not previously been dealt with by CJCs.
2.42 If it is thought desirable that CJCs deal with compulsory mediation (this depends in part on what the objects of CJC mediations
are seen to be) and it is made possible, for example, by way of one of the statutes that governs a court or tribunal, this will have
an impact on some aspects of the CJC Act and may involve a significant change in focus for CJCs. Dealing with compulsory mediations
may lead to a change in culture and the way that mediations are approached. For example, short form mediation before a single mediator
might become necessary from a resource point of view. The potential for mediations conducted by CJCs to be mandatory may also necessitate:
the inclusion of provisions similar to those in Queensland in relation to court-ordered mediations;
a consideration of the resources needed to take on more mediation work in addition to the current non-compulsory workload;
the inclusion of mechanisms to ensure the quality of mandatory mediation for disputing parties,
including, for example, provisions for enforcement of standards and accountability (including complaints mechanisms).
The final point could be considered necessary because weaker parties may lose the procedural protections offered by the formal justice
(a) Should CJCs be required to deal with compulsory mediations?
(b) Should special provision be made to deal with the possibility that mandatory mediations may be referred to CJCs?
The good faith requirement
2.43 In cases where parties are compelled to take part in mediation they may also be required to participate in the mediation in a
particular way, usually “in good faith”. A good faith requirement may be imposed, for example, either contractually –
by way of an agreement to mediate, or by the courts – supported by statutory good faith provisions such as those found in the
Supreme Court Act 1970
There has been considerable debate in recent years about good faith requirements in the context of mediation, including their meaning,
their enforceability, and also whether good faith can in fact exist when the parties to a dispute necessarily act in their own interests.
2.44 A recent decision of the New South Wales Supreme Court has considered the question of the content of an obligation to mediate
in good faith (in the context of a contractual agreement between the parties):
These are matters to be determined depending always on the precise circumstances of each individual case. But the “certainty”
issue does require that the court spell out, even in non-exhaustive terms, the perceived essential or core content of an obligation
to negotiate or mediate in good faith. To my mind, but without being exhaustive, the essential or core content of an obligation to
negotiate or mediate in good faith may be expressed in the following terms:
(1) to undertake to subject oneself to the process of negotiation or mediation (which must be sufficiently precisely defined by the
agreement to be certain and hence enforceable).
(2) to undertake in subjecting oneself to that process, to have an open mind in the sense of:
(a) a willingness to consider such options for the resolution of the dispute as may be propounded by the opposing party or by the
mediator, as appropriate.
(b) a willingness to give consideration to putting forward options for the resolution of the dispute.
Subject only to these undertakings, the obligations of a party who contracts to negotiate or mediate in good faith, do not oblige
nor require the party:
(a) to act for or on behalf of or in the interests of the other party;
(b) to act otherwise than by having regard to self-interest.
Whether this statement achieves wide acceptance remains to be seen. Whatever meaning can be given to the good faith requirement will
depend on the circumstances of each case. However, if statutory schemes are established mandating participation in good faith, determinations
may need to be made as to whether the parties have in fact participated in good faith. Given the availability of provisions protecting
against disclosure of what occurs in mediations,
the courts will generally be unable to investigate or review the issue and will instead be compelled to rely on the determination
of the mediators in the matter.
If CJCs were to deal with compulsory mediations that are also subject to good faith requirements, the question arises as to whether
CJC mediators would be required to make a determination as to whether the parties in fact participated in the mediation in good faith.
It has been noted that in some parts of the United States mediators have been required to report to courts on the nature of the parties’
participation, notwithstanding the breach of confidentiality involved.
What implications would a requirement to mediate in good faith have for CJC mediators when dealing with compulsory mediations?
Continuing participation
2.45 It is considered important that the continued participation of parties to a mediation is voluntary. This accords with the US
Model Standards of Conduct for Mediators
which states:
Self-determination [by the parties] is the fundamental principle of mediation. It requires that the mediation process rely upon the
ability of the parties to reach a voluntary, uncoerced agreement. Any party may withdraw from mediation at any time.
2.46 The CJC Act ensures that such principles are adhered to by stating that a party may withdraw from a mediation session at any
A mediator or the Director may also terminate a mediation session at any time.
When the Act was introduced in 1983 it was noted that mediation sessions were, in fact, being terminated in instances:
where the respective bargaining positions of the parties to a dispute are manifestly unequal. It is well recognized that such cases
are not amenable to the mediation process, and the parties are rightly left to pursue their legal remedies.
2.47 An example of a specific list of circumstances in which mediators or parties may terminate a mediation session can be found
in the New Jersey Court Rules. Some of the grounds on which a mediation session can be terminated include where:
“there is an imbalance of power between the parties that the mediator cannot overcome”;
“there is abusive behavior that the mediator cannot control”;
“the mediator believes continued mediation is inappropriate or inadvisable for any reason”.
2.48 Submissions to the Australian Law Reform Commission’s review of the Federal justice system suggested that “the existence
of a power imbalance between the parties should not of itself render [primary dispute resolution] inappropriate if the facilitator
is skilled”.
Other specific concerns that could lead to the termination of a mediation include situations where there is a history of racial or
homosexual vilification or sexual harassment.
2.49 A mediation could also be terminated for the same reasons that disputes are refused by CJCs at intake if the relevant circumstances,
for example, the presence of domestic violence, become evident during the course of the mediation.
In what circumstances should a mediation be terminated?
INVOLVEMENT
OF OTHER PARTIES
2.50 On some occasions the question has arisen of the presence at a mediation of persons other than the parties to the dispute. The
issues of the presence of lawyers at a mediation and other agents to support or represent a party to a dispute are discussed below.
Presence of lawyers
2.51 It has been intended from the beginning that lawyers not be involved in the mediations conducted at CJCs.
Reasons for this include the need to maintain informality and the need to ensure that those who cannot afford lawyers are not disadvantaged
with respect to those who can. It is the practice in CJCs to advise the parties to a dispute to seek legal advice before they mediate.
The presence of legal practitioners might become more of an issue if, for example, more matters from Local Courts were referred to
CJCs for compulsory mediation.
2.52 On the other hand, there can be practical reasons for lawyers to be involved in a mediation process. For example, lawyers may
be useful in clarifying facts or assisting with inarticulate or stressed persons who are parties to a mediation.
Lawyers may also provide disputants with assessments of the likely outcome, or range of outcomes, if a matter is litigated, thus
giving parties information they need in order to assess offers to settle in mediation. There is some evidence to suggest, at least
in relation to family law matters, that the presence of lawyers in the process (to provide, among other things, advice and support)
can often be beneficial, being more likely to result in consensual agreements.
The question of representation of, or assistance to, people who are unable to articulate their position effectively, and the mechanisms
to achieve this, are dealt with later in this chapter.
2.53 However, despite the policy to exclude lawyers, there is currently no express provision prohibiting their participation.
Indeed, it has been observed that there is no bar to legal practitioners attending the mediation session (presumably in a non-representative
capacity) so long as the mediators and parties have consented. In practice, however, legal practitioners do not attend mediation
No problem would appear to have arisen from the absence of an express ban on the attendance of legal practitioners.
Should lawyers who are not parties to the mediation have any role in mediations conducted by CJCs?
Support and representation of parties
2.54 It is recognised that some persons, particularly those with a disability, may require an agent to represent their interests effectively
in mediation. In practical terms such a person’s role may vary depending on the needs of the person with the disability and
could range from being a support person who can assist in understanding what is going on or in presenting their own views, to being
an advocate who represents the perceived interests of the person with the disability.
This agent (whether a support person or advocate) need not be a lawyer.
2.55 One reason for restricting the situations where parties to a dispute can be represented by an agent (whether a lawyer or not)
is that it is sometimes thought that such representation is only really effective where the issues in dispute have been narrowly
confined. Such confinement of the issues restricts the processes of “explanation, exploration and negotiation” which
are said to be necessary to successful mediation.
2.56 The Act makes specific provision for allowing agents to take part in a mediation session in certain circumstances, subject to
the approval of the Director of CJCs.
In 1985 it was observed that:
There have been few occasions where the Director has approved representation by an agent. In almost every case, representation has
restricted the scope of the mediation to a narrow range of issues, has severely limited the effectiveness of the mediation and reduced
the satisfaction of all parties. In a comparatively few cases, an agent has effectively represented a disputant at a mediation session.
Without exception these were disputes involving a single issue with little or no emotional component.
However, the carefully considered use of such agents has the potential to protect the interests of people with disabilities. It has
been suggested that the agent should be somebody with knowledge of the person, his or her needs and interests, and the dispute, for
example, a guardian, a family member or a friend.
The CJC Act provides that the Director must be satisfied that agent “has sufficient knowledge of the matter in dispute to enable
the agent to represent the party effectively”.
There is also a question of conflicts of interest with some agents, for example, where there is a coercive relationship or where
there may be a financial interest in certain outcomes.
2.57 Consideration needs to be given as to whether the current provisions adequately allow for support persons to attend mediation
sessions. One submission particularly raised the issue of Department of Community Service workers.
The CJC Professional Reference Group has suggested that the Act could authorise a “representative agent to be present under
any Memorandum of Understanding or Agreement made between any Department or Authority with the CJCs”.
2.58 The Anti-Discrimination Board has suggested greater provision be made for representation of parties who might not otherwise be
able to participate effectively in mediation.
Current provisions in s 25 of the Act leave it to the discretion of the Director of CJCs. The Anti-Discrimination Board has suggested
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) as a model. This may, however, not be entirely appropriate because
deals with complaints lodged by one person against another in relation to contraventions of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
and some of the provisions deal with the participation of interest groups. However, some of the provisions that relate to a person
representing another person who is otherwise unable to look after their own interests effectively may provide a useful model. For
example, provision is made that a person may represent a party with a disability only if the President of the Anti-Discrimination
Board is satisfied the person consents and that the President may decline to continue with a matter if the President thinks that
the representative “has subsequently lost the confidence or authority of the complainant”. If the person is incapable
of consenting, the consent may be given by a parent or guardian or “by anyone else who the President is satisfied has a genuine
concern for the person’s welfare”.
What provision should be made for parties who are not able to take part in CJC mediations effectively on their own account, in particular
in relation to:
(a) the presence of support persons in the mediation; and
(b) the representation of their own interests in the mediation?
CULTURALLY-BASED
COMMUNITY-SPECIFIC SERVICES
2.59 Culturally-based community-specific CJCs have been proposed in addition to the existing geographically based services. Nothing
in the Act would appear to prevent this from occurring.
2.60 Suggestions have been put forward that CJCs should provide special services to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people as
well as ethnic communities and communities of interest (for example, housing tenants and young people).
The specific question of CJCs for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people is discussed in Chapter 6.
2.61 Mediation has the advantage of being flexible and able to respond to varying cultural assumptions and needs. It can be adapted
to the needs of various communities – for example, by the adoption of special procedures, by the identity and skills of the
mediator, by location, and by language.
2.62 If CJCs are expected to provide a service to “the community” this presumably means the community in all its diversity.
The question remains, however, as to how this can be best achieved. Establishing specific CJCs may be appropriate in some circumstances.
However, it can also be argued that the current regionally-based CJCs should be equipped to provide services to particular communities
and communities of interest in their regions, for example, through the recruitment of mediators who represent the particular communities
or by the training in relevant cultural issues of CJC mediators who do not come from the particular communities. Some of these issues
are already being dealt with by CJCs. For example, CJCs aim to recruit mediators taking into account “age, gender, availability,
ethnic and cultural background and any specific program needs”.
(a) Should there be CJCs that cater for particular communities in addition to the geographically based CJCs?
(b) Are there other ways in which CJCs can make better provision for the needs of particular communities?
INTERACTION
WITH OTHER AGENCIES
2.63 Interaction with other agencies is one specific way for CJCs to receive appropriate disputes for mediation. But the relationships
are more complex than that, with issues also arising concerning the use of resources, the provision of mediation services on a commercial
basis and the reference of various disputes to other relevant agencies in order to aid resolution.
2.64 Current provisions relate only to the use of resources and secrecy. One of the secrecy provisions of the Act deals specifically
with the reference of matters to another agency, allowing disclosure of information:
where the disclosure is reasonably required for the purpose of referring any party or parties to a mediation session to any person,
agency, organisation or other body and the disclosure is made with the consent of the parties to the mediation session for the purpose
of aiding in the resolution of a dispute between those parties or assisting any such parties in any other manner.
Memorandums of understanding
2.65 In 1999-2000 CJCs were able to report that they had:
forged partnerships with a variety of other agencies including local courts, legal aid, local councils, neighbourhood centres, and
government departments, to enhance effective whole of community responses to conflict. An added bonus has been easier access to local
venues for its mediation programs. This is vital if consumers are not to be disadvantaged by their ability to access a centre because
of cost, location, distance, disability and so on.
A number of “memorandums of understanding” have been entered into with other government agencies, including the Office
of the Public Guardian and Local Government.
2.66 CJCs have developed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Office of the Public Guardian (“OPG”) in July 2001.
The aim of the Memorandum is to help the OPG in responding to situations where family members of the person under guardianship are
in dispute, either among themselves, or with professionals and agencies that provide care for the person.
2.67 CJCs are a “provider” to the Department of Community Services.
In 2000/2001 a CJCs/Police project group established two working parties, one of these concentrated on community policing.
2.68 At a less formal level, the Department of Fair Trading arranges mediations (for example, through the Consumer, Trader and Tenancy
Tribunal, and Strata Schemes and Mediation Services Branch of the Department) and provides referrals to CJCs in some instances where
CJC mediations are more appropriate because of the after-hours service provided or because of the neighbourhood nature of the dispute
2.69 The Anti-Discrimination Board, in its preliminary submission, has proposed a memorandum of understanding whereby the Board and
CJCs may be able to deal more effectively with disputing parties where a dispute could feasibly be dealt with by either agency.
This form of referral of matters may not be appropriate in terms of confidentiality and consent of the parties. Informal referral
of parties to legal assistance does occur,
however formal reference of matters to other agencies may not be consistent with the aims and culture of mediation.
Relationship with Local Courts
2.70 There is a close relationship between CJCs and Local Courts in terms of both use of facilities and referrals.
These links have provoked some discussion over the years. The close relationship in terms of referrals has certainly ensured a steady
stream of cases that might not otherwise come to CJCs for resolution.
2.71 In past years some Local Courts have entered into informal local arrangements with CJCs. A formal Memorandum of Understanding
has now been entered by the Director of CJCs and the Director of Local Courts
which aims at offering clients an “enhanced client service by providing information, referrals and timely and efficient access
to mediation services”.
The early interventionist approach adopted by the Memorandum of Understanding aims to prevent the bringing of unnecessary and costly
matters before the Local Courts.
The Memorandum includes protocols for operation covering such matters as the transfer of information, the provision of venues for
mediation where feasible and training of CJC and Local Courts staff.
2.72 Ultimately the issue of CJCs’ relationship with Local Courts raises a number of broad questions, including whether:
CJCs should have a role and identity that are separate to the courts and the formal justice system;
mediation should be encouraged as the first port of call rather than relying on the formal justice system to refer matters on to mediation
at a later stage; and
CJC mediators should be able to refuse to mediate some matters.
These issues are discussed, where relevant, in the course of this paper.
Use of Local Courts facilities
2.73 Another vexed question is whether it is appropriate that CJCs use Local Court facilities. Obviously they are convenient and cost
effective. Often the Local Court is the only locally based outpost of the Attorney General’s Department in rural areas.
2.74 If mediation is about providing an alternative to traditional methods of dispute resolution and encouraging the participation
of people who may, for various reasons, be wary of the justice system,
close relationships with the courts (in terms of provision of venues etc) may not be a good idea.
This could be especially so in the case of groups who have a history of poor relations with the criminal justice system, for example,
Indigenous people. It was originally proposed that the Redfern CJC be located at the Redfern Local Court and operate “in a
fashion which could be more formal and more obviously allied to the traditional legal system”. However, consultations with
organisations and individuals in the area at the time revealed that this would be an “unpopular decision and one which might
well prejudice the ability of the centre to attract cases and clients”.
2.75 Close associations with alternative dispute resolution programs may also present problems for the standing and integrity of traditional
courts which “fill a highly specific role as custodians of the sovereign power of adjudication of disputes through the mechanism
of due process and by the application of principles and rules of law”. It is considered by some that ADR programs are “additional
or complementary to litigation” and should not be seen as “alternative procedures within the services provided by the
court system”.
Others have pointed out that confusion may result where “courts, identified with authoritative third party decision-making,
become the locus of dispute resolution services of an entirely different character”.
2.76 On the other hand, it has been suggested that close physical associations with the courts and other “legal” agencies
has made little difference to the types of clients who approach the CJCs:
It was in fact with some reluctance that CJCs initially used court houses or legal aid officers for local mediation sessions. To everyone’s
surprise, it did not seem to make any difference to the service users or the effectiveness of the process.
2.77 Physical proximity to court houses has also been seen as an effective way of increasing case loads for CJCs, at least in so
far as they deal with cases that have some connection with the formal legal system. Extensions to the Campbelltown Court House in
1989 incorporated accommodation for CJCs designed to “retain its own identity with totally separate access”.
This, however, might suggest little more than that the type of person who would be reluctant to attend a mediation at a court house
would not have made use of CJC mediations in any case.
2.78 An alternative venue to the Local Courts could be found in government schools which will also generally have a presence in most
large country towns. Regional Legal Aid Commission offices may also provide potential venues but the advocacy and “legal”
functions of the Legal Aid Commission may make them inappropriate for use by CJCs
and further, the Legal Aid Commission now offers its own family law conferencing program.
Should CJCs make use of court facilities for mediation and administrative support?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 13-14.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
See also J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 25.
Preliminary submission
at 2; J Hallinan,
Preliminary submission
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Annual report 2001-2002
Annual report 2001-2002
Legal Profession Act 1987
Disability Services Act 1993
Optometrists Act 2002
Community Relations Commission and Principles of Multiculturalism Act 2000
Quality in court connected mediation programs: an issues paper
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 2001) at 5.
NJ Court Rules 1969
r 1:40-3(b).
. Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
Preliminary submission
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
. CJCs Council,
Report to Legislation and Policy: review of the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(2001) at 7.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 30 October 1995 at 2581. School-based mediation schemes have spread rapidly across the US: D McGillis,
Community Mediation Programs: Developments and Challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 27-28.
. See CJCs,
Annual report 1993/1994
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 30 October 1995 at 2581.
. See CJCs,
Annual report 1993/1994
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Joint Estimates Committee (Attorney General and Justice), 20 October 1994 at 4302.
. D McGillis,
Community Mediation Programs: Developments and Challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 25-30.
. See, eg, Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly,
31 October 1990 at 1649. See also para 2.67 and para 5.42-5.45, below.
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute Resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 168.
. See H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute Resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 168-169. Services to Indigenous people and communities are dealt with below
in Chapter 6.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly,
19 November 1980 at 3147.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council,
26 November 1980 at 3696; Legislative Assembly, 19 October 1983 at 1881.
Annual report 2001-2002
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
NJ Court Rules 1969
r 1:40-8(a).
. “Neighbourhood mediation service pilot”
Law Institute Journal
Family Law Rules 1984
(Cth) O 25A r 5.
. Notwithstanding the view that “domestic violence is not in itself the subject of mediation, nor a negotiable issue and this
has always been recognised by the Community Justice Centre”: CJCs,
Annual report 1998-1999
Annual report 2001-2002
at 22. This number could be significantly increased if recommendations in the Law Reform Commission’s Report on Apprehended
Violence Orders are adopted:
see NSW Law Reform Commission,
Apprehended violence orders: review of part 15A of the Crimes Act
(Report 103, 2003) at chapter 5
Annual report 1998/1999
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 350-351.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 26 November 1980 at 3696.
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 14 September 1993 at 3033.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Estimates Committee No 5, 21 October 1993 at 4286.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 September 2001 at 16873.
Memorandum of understanding between NSW Local Courts and the Community Justice Centres, NSW
(28 January 2000).
. See also para 5.42-5.45 below.
Annual report 2001-2002
Associations Incorporation Regulation 1999
(NSW) Sch 1
rule 10(1).
Dividing Fences Act 1991
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Compensation Court Act 1984
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW) s 61A;
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) which provides for compulsory mediation also does not prevent referral of a matter to a Community Justice Centre:
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110H, s 110K.
. For example,
Legal Aid Commission Act 1979
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Rules 1988
(NSW) rule 8(2)(b);
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(in relation to summary criminal proceedings);
Residential Parks Act 1998
s 91(2)(d).
. CJCs, “Assigning mediators” (unpublished paper, 10 January 1996).
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 274.
. See, eg, H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 271-272. See also E Laginha,
Preliminary submission
. J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 194-195.
. NSW Department of Housing,
Preliminary submission
. Blacktown City Council,
Preliminary submission
at 2; Penrith City Council,
Preliminary submission
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
Community Law Reform Program: dividing fences
(Report 59, 1988) at para 3.31.
. J Pearson, “Evaluation of alternatives to court adjudication”
Justice System Journal
. Pearson at 439-441.
. D McGillis,
Community mediation programs: developments and challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 64.
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110K, s 110L;
District Court Act 1973
(NSW) s 164A, s 164B;
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
. Amendments allowing this were introduced by
Courts Reform Amendment Act 1997
(Qld) Pt 5. See also Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 30 April 1997 at 1176.
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 273; J Pearson, “Evaluation of alternatives to court adjudication”
Justice System Journal
. See J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 195.
. See para 1.28 above.
. See H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 275.
. On standards and codes of practice, see para 3.53-3.58 below.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the federal civil justice system
(Discussion Paper 62, 1999) at para 9.36.
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110L.
Aiton Australia Pty Ltd v Transfield Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 996
(1999) 153 FLR 236
at para 79-159; H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 193-202.
Aiton Australia Pty Ltd v Transfield Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 996
(1999) 153 FLR 236
at para 156 (Einstein J).
. See para 4.11-4.19 and para 4.26-4.32 below.
Gain v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(1997) 42 NSWLR 252
at 256 (Gleeson CJ), 262-263 (Cole JA) and 266 (Sheppard AJA);
State Bank of New South Wales v Freeman
(NSW SC, No 12670/1995, Badgery-Parker J, 31 January 1996, unreported) at 17; H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 202.
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 273-274.
Model Standards of Conduct for Mediators
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 October 1983 at 1882.
NJ Court Rules 1969
r 1:40-4(f)(1) and (2).
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the federal civil justice system
(Discussion Paper 62, 1999) at para 11.148.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 26 November 1980 at 3591.
. See W Faulkes, “Runs on the mediation scoreboard”
Law Institute Journal
at 207; J Williams, “Community Justice Centres: marking 10 years of service”
(1990) 28(11)
Law Society Journal
. M Thornton, “Equivocations of conciliation: the resolution of discrimination complaints in Australia”
Modern Law Review
. R Hunter “Adversarial mythologies: policy assumptions and research evidence in family law” (2003) 30
Journal of Law and Society
156 at 158-161, 176.
. See para 2.54-2.58 below.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 26 November 1980 at 3589.
. C McRobert, “Mediation in Local Courts: an alternative to contested hearings”
(1990) 28(11)
Law Society Journal
. J Simpson, “Guarded participation: alternative dispute resolution and people with disabilities” (unpublished report
on a research project carried out with funding from the Law and Justice Foundation of NSW, 2002) at 10-11.
. W Faulkes, “Pursuing the best ends by the best means”
Australian Law Journal
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 25.
. Faulkes at 458-459.
. J Simpson, “Guarded participation: alternative dispute resolution and people with disabilities” (unpublished report
on a research project carried out with funding from the Law and Justice Foundation of NSW, 2002) at 10.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 25.
. Simpson at 10.
Preliminary submission
. CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
. Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
, (2A), (2B), (2C).
Annual report 2001-2002
. See para 6.15-6.20.
. CJCs, “Becoming an accredited mediator with the Community Justice Centres” �http://www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/cjc.nsf/pages/training4�
(as at 1 September 2003).
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
s 29(2)(d).
Annual report 1999-2000
Annual report 2000-2001
Memorandum of understanding between the Office of the Public Guardian and the Community Justice Centres NSW
(July 2001).
Annual report 2000-2001
Annual report 2000-2001
Annual report 2000-2001
. Department of Fair Trading,
Preliminary submission
. See Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
. See W Faulkes, “Pursuing the best ends by the best means”
Australian Law Journal
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 23 September 1999 at 1133.
. See W Faulkes and R Claremont, “Community mediation: myth and reality”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
Memorandum of understanding between NSW Local Courts and the Community Justice Centres, NSW
(28 January 2000).
Annual report 2000-2001
Annual report 1999-2000
Memorandum of understanding between NSW Local Courts and the Community Justice Centres, NSW
(28 January 2000).
. For example, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, immigrants, gay men and lesbians, people with disabilities and young
people: H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 168.
. J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 197.
. Schwartzkoff and Morgan at 16.
. L Street, “Mediation and the judicial institution”
Australian Law Journal
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 270 referring to S Roberts, “Three models of family mediation”
in R Dingwall and J Eekelaar (ed),
Divorce mediation and the legal process
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1998) at 148.
. W Faulkes, “The Modern development of alternative dispute resolution in Australia”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
. Faulkes at 66.
. J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 197.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
3. Mediators
History of this Reference (Digest)
Mediator selection
Accreditation and training
Status and remuneration
Competency standards
Codes of practice
Enforcement of standards, codes and guidelines
Impartiality of mediators
Preventing undesirable outcomes
3.1 The ways in which mediators are appointed and conduct CJC mediations are important to the continued success of the program. Public
confidence and willingness to participate in CJC mediations may depend on such matters as the perceived competence and impartiality
of the mediator and their adherence to codes of practice and conduct.
3.2 There is also the potential for harm on various levels if mediators are not properly trained or do not follow appropriate standards,
codes and guidelines. Astor and Chinkin have observed:
The practice of ADR is not without potential for harm. Individuals and organisations can suffer if ADR is badly conducted, fails to
protect vulnerable parties or neglects the interest of vulnerable third parties. ... Bad practice may also involve risks to practitioners
and to the public interest.
3.3 The National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council (“NADRAC”) has identified a range of undesirable outcomes
in terms of the risks arising for disputants and third parties, risks to practitioners and organisations and risks to public interests.
The risks to disputants and third parties have been considered by NADRAC and include:
violence, unfair or unjust outcomes, non-resolution or escalation of disputes, being referred to the wrong process, needs not being
addressed and coercion by another party or the ADR practitioner.
The risks to practitioners and organisations include:
stress, loss of credibility, an oversupply of ADR practitioners and ADR training, fragmentation of the field and complaints from consumers.
The risks to public interests include:
unfair or unjust outcomes, undermining public interest, increased litigation, loss of faith in the justice system and loss of international
credibility.
These potential problems can be addressed at a number of levels, including mediator selection, accreditation and training, by the
setting of codes of practice, standards of competency and ethical standards and by the provision of mechanisms to ensure that appropriate
standards are met. These issues are highlighted below.
3.4 CJCs aim to appoint as mediators people from all walks of life, who are recruited from the communities which they intend to serve.
No special occupational or educational qualifications are required of mediators.
3.5 The selection process for CJC mediators involves a number of discrete stages. The initial stages are aimed at assessing the suitability
of applicants to take part in the basic mediator training program. Prospective mediators must first submit an application addressing
matters such as future availability, geographic location and ability to travel. An information session on CJCs and mediation is then
held for applicants followed by a group discussion which allows applicants to be observed interacting in a group. These activities
are followed by a half hour written exercise aimed at further testing the suitability of applicants. Following an assessment of applicants
based on the above together with relevant demographic criteria, applicants may be invited to attend a personal interview if one is
considered necessary. Successful applicants are then invited to attend a
72 hour basic mediator training course.
Successful completion of the course makes a trainee eligible for accreditation by the Attorney General.
Representativeness
3.6 When first established, the panels of mediators were intended to reflect the composition of the communities in which they operated:
Mediators are selected to reflect the ethnic origins of members of the community, their primary or basic language, their educational
and socio-economic backgrounds, their religious beliefs and cultural traditions.
3.7 The current aim is to get a wide cross-section. A more representative group of mediators may improve access for marginal groups
who might otherwise be discouraged from taking part in mediations.
Although it is sometimes regarded as important to match the culture of the mediator with that of the participants, there may be cases
where this is undesirable – for example where the parties and the mediator come from the same small community and have social
links which might provoke fears about confidentiality. It is sometimes the case that it is more desirable for a mediator to be highly
skilled at mediating cross-cultural issues rather than for them to belong to the same community as the parties. An issue of training,
rather than selection, is thus raised.
3.8 Assuming that the aim of recruiting mediators who reflect the composition of the community remains valid, consideration will need
to be given to any barriers to the appointment of appropriate mediators. For example, requiring particular qualifications may make
it difficult to appoint mediators who reflect the diversity of the local community, particularly members of minority groups.
Positive recruitment and appointment of members of disadvantaged groups may need to be an exception to unlawful discrimination.
It may be necessary to include a special measures provision in the Act.
One model can be found in the
Local Government Act 1993
(NSW) which provides that, in the event of any inconsistency between the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) and the provisions of an equal employment opportunity management plan, the provisions of the management plan prevail.
3.9 It has also been suggested that having lawyers or retired magistrates as mediators might prove intimidating for some potential
parties to CJC mediations.
The risk of conscious or unconscious coercive pressure arising from a judicial officer acting as a mediator is even greater when
the judicial officer has not retired.
(a) Are CJC mediators sufficiently representative of the communities in which they operate?
(b) Should the aim of recruiting mediators who reflect the community in which they operate be included in legislation?
(c) Should special provision be made for the representation of minority groups on CJC mediator panels?
ACCREDITATION
AND TRAINING
3.10 The accreditation of a mediator is on the recommendation of the Director subject to any policy guidelines and directions of the
Council. A mediator can be accredited for a term not exceeding three years and accreditation may be renewed upon expiration. Decisions
refusing to grant or revoking accreditation can be challenged in the Administrative Decisions Tribunal.
A person cannot be a mediator at a CJC unless they have been accredited.
The current practice is that mediators are accredited for a period of 12 months following their initial training and, after mentoring
and assessment, may be accredited for a further period of three years. The relevant CJC regional co-ordinator is responsible for
the supervision and assessment of mediators during the initial period of accreditation.
The performance of mediators is assessed on their compliance with a document referred to as “Competencies for Mediators”.
CJCs is currently developing new policies and processes for accreditation, reaccreditation, supervision, grievances and non-accreditation
of mediators.
3.11 By way of comparison, the Australian Capital Territory Act allows for “standards of competency” to be prescribed
for mediators before they can be registered.
The registration of a mediator lasts for three years
and may be renewed upon the relevant agency being satisfied that the mediator has “undertaken the further education in matters
relating to mediation that is approved by the agency”.
Qualifications, training and experience
3.12 Requiring particular qualifications for mediators may make it difficult to appoint mediators who reflect the diversity of the
local community, particularly members of minority groups.
This would especially be the case if tertiary qualifications were to be required.
It has also been observed that:
[Formal] qualifications can be cumbersome and complex to develop and maintain. Such a requirement may also make ADR more of a “profession”
and create greater exclusivity.
3.13 In 1991 the New South Wales Law Reform Commission concluded that training of mediators was necessary:
Failure to undergo training in the process increases the risk that a mediator’s behaviour will be incompetent and unethical
and of harm to clients.
However, it did not recommend that such training be made mandatory in legislation. There were two reasons for this position. First,
the need for mandatory provision had not been demonstrated. Secondly, it was premature to prescribe the training required by mediators
at what was then seen as an early stage of the development of the field.
The Commission preferred to leave the question of qualifications and training to the administering agencies (as is still the case
with respect to CJCs).
3.14 It has also been suggested there is a need to recognise training and experience gained in mediation beyond that conducted by
CJCs. This has become necessary because CJC mediators mediate for other panels which also have accreditation and training requirements.
The widely varying standards and criteria for accreditation will be problematic if some form of mutual recognition is to be provided
NADRAC has noted that the limited scope for mutual recognition within the ADR sector is consistent with the diversity of services
offered. However, it has also observed that “it is desirable for accrediting bodies to develop a degree of mutual recognition
... so that wastage of time and resources is avoided”.
(a) What qualifications, training and experience ought to be required for people to become CJC mediators?
(b) Should a system be established for the recognition of training and experience gained in mediation that is not conducted by CJCs?
Continuing education
3.15 The CJCs currently provide mediators with opportunities for learning and development with the aim of maintaining mediator competency
and standards. The CJC Directorate and regional co-ordinators develop training programs in consultation with the Training Group and
Professional Reference Group. Mediators can also seek approval from the regional co-ordinators to attend other programs of education
and training in alternative dispute resolution that CJCs will recognise. The CJCs have developed a system whereby a mediator must
accrue a certain number of “Continuing Mediation Accreditation points” in order to be considered for re-accreditation
as a mediator. The 100 CMA points that mediators must accrue each year represent the completion of activities in the areas of practice,
learning and development and organisational context.
There is currently no legislative backing for this system of Continuing Mediation Accreditation.
3.16 In 1991 the New South Wales Law Reform Commission concluded that continuing education was essential for mediators:
continuing education is essential for a practice such as mediation, which is only in its formative stages with standards of practice
and ethical codes yet to be established, and where initial training is not usually extensive.
3.17 The US
Model Standards of Conduct for Mediators
suggest that mediators “have a duty to improve the practice of mediation” and specifically that:
they have an obligation to use their knowledge to help educate the public about mediation; to make mediation accessible to those who
would like to use it; to correct abuses; and to improve their professional skills and abilities.
3.18 An example of legislatively-based continuing education requirements for mediators can be found in the New Jersey Court Rules
which require all mediators to attend four hours of continuing education each year. The continuing education must relate to at least
one of the following topics:
(A) reinforcing and enhancing mediation and negotiation concepts and skills,
(B) ethical issues associated with mediation practice, or
(C) other professional matters related to mediation.
3.19 The approach in the New Jersey Rules of Court can be likened to mandatory continuing legal education
which was introduced for lawyers in New South Wales in 1987.
Relevant parts of the New South Wales Solicitors’ Rules that relate to mandatory continuing legal education are as follows:
42.1.1 the course may consist of an education programme, seminar, workshop, lecture, conference or discussion group or a multimedia
or website based programme... or any combination of two or more of those events;
42.1.2 the course must be of significant intellectual or practical content and must deal primarily with matters directly related to
the practice of law;
42.1.3 the course must be conducted by persons who are qualified by practical or academic experience in the subject covered;
42.1.4 the course must be relevant to a practitioner’s immediate or long term needs in relation to the practitioner’s
professional development and to the practice of law.
3.20 Legal Practitioners in New South Wales are also required to undertake, at least once every three years, “a course in connection
with the management of the practice of law that deals only with the following issues”:
(a) equal employment opportunity,
(b) unlawful discrimination (including unlawful sexual harassment),
(c) occupational health and safety.
This provision was included in the
Legal Profession Regulation 2002
(NSW) in order to promote greater understanding of the significance of these issues to legal practice.
Similarly it has been suggested that any training of CJC mediators should cover anti-discrimination issues, disability awareness
and cultural awareness/sensitivity in relation to both Indigenous people and people of non-English speaking backgrounds.
A focus on issues relevant to the mediation of disputes in the communities served by CJCs might be particularly appropriate, especially
issues of cultural responses to disputes. The coverage of such issues aims to overcome systemic discrimination and to identify inequalities/power
imbalances in existing relationships; and also to improve access for disadvantaged groups.
(a) Should continuing education/training be required for CJC mediators?
(b) If so, what should be the content of such courses?
(c) Should legislation prescribe any such content?
Assessing the training programs
3.21 Some concerns have been raised about the quality, rigour and value of the training and continuing education programs offered
to mediators for the purposes of accreditation and continued accreditation.
Regulations governing the assessment and approval of various training courses may, therefore, be considered desirable. On the other
hand, in Report 67 the Commission made the following observations:
Government regulation of training courses is premature, will require considerable resources, and will create practical difficulties.
There are serious difficulties in establishing comparability among courses. It is likely to introduce an undesirable rigidity and
inflexibility for courses which are in a constant state of change as theory and practice develop. In addition, it is relatively common
for mediators to receive training outside the jurisdiction, both elsewhere in Australia and overseas, and international trainers
conduct courses here. There is no evidence to suggest regulation should operate to restrict training to that available locally. Regulation
which targets only courses in New South Wales will have a limited impact on the quality of training undertaken.
However, theory and practice have moved on in the ten or more years since these comments were made. Some action in this area may
no longer be considered premature.
Vocational Education and Training Accreditation Act 1990
(NSW) may provide a model for the assessment and approval of various training courses. It allows for education or training providers
to seek accreditation of their vocational courses either by the Vocational Education and Training Board or by an authorised accrediting
What provision, if any, should be made for the accreditation and evaluation of CJC mediator training programs?
AND REMUNERATION
Status of CJC mediators
3.23 Mediators are specifically not included within the category of “staff of Community Justice Centres” and are therefore
not appointed or employed under the
Public Sector Management Act 1988
As ministerial appointees they are not subject to an award. However, they are expected to comply with the Attorney General’s
Department’s Code of Conduct and the CJCs’ Mediators’ Code of Professional Conduct.
3.24 The status of mediators as ministerial appointees may be desirable because this status can help assure their clients that they
are independent and will carry out their work without fear or favour.
Should CJC mediators be employed under the
Public Sector Management Act 1988
(NSW) or should they continue to be ministerial appointees?
Remuneration
3.25 The Act provides that a mediator is “entitled to be paid such remuneration as is determined in respect of the mediator
by the Minister”.
When CJCs were originally established it was felt that, while mediators’ efforts should receive some financial recognition,
“there should be no encouragement to mediators to think of their CJC activities as a conventional job or as a major source
of income”.
3.26 Mediators are currently paid $23.47 per hour.
Despite not being covered by the
Public Sector Management Act
, mediators receive some of the benefits that would otherwise be available to public sector employees. In addition to an hourly rate,
mediators receive one-twelfth of annual gross earnings as a leave loading and also an employer contribution to superannuation based
on gross earnings and payment of expenses. In 1998 the Attorney General observed:
their pay is indexed in line with public service wage movements and they have many of the rights and benefits of government employees,
including workers compensation, pay in lieu of annual leave, superannuation, grievance procedures, training opportunities and ongoing
professional development at no cost to them.
3.27 It has also been suggested that as voluntary holders of statutory office, it cannot be said that they are subject to exploitation.
While it is true that CJC mediators are not being forced to accept the office they hold, their level of remuneration may, if insufficient,
amount to exploitation. One submission has drawn attention to the fact that the remuneration offered to CJC mediators is not in line
with other statutory mediation programs.
3.28 The Law Society’s Dispute Resolution Committee has made the following observation concerning the remuneration of mediators:
A review of the remuneration for mediators is timely in light of the importance of their role in the overall success of the CJC, the
market rate offered by other government funded ADR programs and the effort the mediators have put in to maintain their CJC accreditation.
3.29 There are a variety of options for the engagement of CJC mediators apart from bringing them under the
Public Sector Management Act
, such as making them casual employees of the Attorney General’s Department. It has also been suggested that CJC mediators should
have an award to govern their remuneration and other employment conditions, as is the case with some other ministerial appointees,
for example, Judges’ associates.
3.30 A further concern was raised in 1998 about mediators having to bear their own travel costs. At the time the Government noted
that mediators were intended to provide mediation services in their local area and that no mediator was required to travel outside
their local area.
While the policy of using local mediators where possible is still in place, there is now an interim travel policy (effective 1 September
2002) which makes provision for the reimbursement of travel and accommodation costs in certain circumstances when travelling time
exceeds 30 minutes travel each way.
This goes some way to addressing a serious issue that has arisen for mediators operating outside the urban areas of the State.
How should the remuneration of mediators be structured?
3.31 Standards are desirable to ensure appropriate levels of mediator competency.
Standards provide a means of assessing the competency of individual mediators and can cover a wide range of knowledge, skills and
abilities. The attainment of certain standards could also be a requirement for the accreditation or continuing accreditation of mediators.
For example, knowledge of and ability to adhere to codes of practice and ethical guidelines may be a standard that mediators should
be required to show competency in.
3.32 Because competency standards do not necessarily rely on formal qualifications they are more appropriate for mediators who conduct
community mediation.
However, even though competency standards may be more inclusive of mediators from different backgrounds, care must be taken to ensure
that they “do not import inappropriate cultural bias” when applied to members of minority or disadvantaged groups.
CJCs’ Competencies for Mediators
3.33 In October 1999 CJCs management adopted “Competencies for Mediators” which were adapted from the Australian Capital
Territory’s “Competency Standards for Mediators”.
The ACT standards are stated to “define the core competencies required of mediators in a wide range of settings and contexts”.
These competencies are contained in detailed lists of functions under seven major unit headings:
1. plan and prepare mediation (“functions involved in preparing to conduct a mediation”);
2. establish climate for mediation (“functions related to the introductory phases of the mediation process, which establishes
atmosphere to maintain neutral, impartial, non-judgemental relationship with parties”);
3. create a framework for discussion (“functions required to manage information exchange in order to identify, isolate and clarify
4. facilitate exploration of issues (“functions required to explore issues to develop options and ensure contributions to discussions
are balanced between the parties”);
5. promote negotiation (“functions involved in negotiation and problem solving”);
6. identify and establish outcomes (“functions involved in identifying and recording outcomes and closing mediation”);
7. maintain professional standards (“process of maintenance and review of professional standards”).
Each unit contains a detailed list of “performance criteria” to aid in assessment. The standards are also accompanied
by a detailed list of evidence that assessors must look to for each of the categories.
3.34 In the ACT these standards have been declared to be “standards of competency” required for the registration of mediators
Mediation Act 1997
In New South Wales the “Competencies for Mediators” have merely been adopted by CJCs for the purposes of internal assessment.
Other examples of systems for establishing/enforcing standards of competency follow.
3.35 NADRAC has adopted a framework for standards which groups standards into three broad categories. For the purposes of this Issues
Paper these categories relate to mediation practices, mediators themselves and mediation organisations.
There will obviously be some overlap between the categories, especially those relating to mediation practices and those relating
to the mediators themselves.
3.36 NADRAC has included the following areas within the category relating to mediators themselves: education, training, assessment,
selection, supervision, professional development and discipline.
3.37 In proposing a framework for the development of standards in alternative dispute resolution, NADRAC has proposed the treatment
of the “development of standards as an evolutionary process requiring long term commitment, not a one-off solution”.
NADRAC also noted the need to develop standards continuously “to improve the quality of ADR practice, and the credibility and
capacity of the ADR field”.
United Kingdom College of Family Mediators
3.38 The UK College of Family Mediators has established a procedure for assessing mediator competence whereby mediators are assessed
against standards and performance criteria. There are four units, each containing a number of elements for which evidence of competence
is required.
Each element is assessed against a set of performance criteria. The units are as follows:
Unit 1 Prepare and set up mediation
Element 1.1 Establish the appropriateness of the mediation process with each party
Element 1.2 Agree the conditions and boundaries of the mediation with the parties
Unit 2 Stage the mediation process
Element 2.1 Establish the issues for each party
Element 2.2 Explore concerns with the parties
Element 2.3 Assist in the identification and evaluation of potential options
Element 2.4 Build and secure agreements between parties
Unit 3 Manage the process of mediation
Element 3.1 Facilitate exchanges between the parties
Element 3.2 Manage conflict and address power imbalances
Unit 4 Evaluate and develop own work
Element 4.1 Evaluate own practice
Element 4.2 Ensure continuing professional development
Element 4.3 Operate within an agreed ethical code of practice
Each applicant must demonstrate, by written evidence, including case studies, how their knowledge has been applied in practice. Successful
completion of this procedure allows candidates to apply for full membership of the College. The Legal Services Commission also recognises
the results of these assessments when deciding whether mediators should undertake publicly funded family mediation work in England
(a) What standards should be applied to CJC mediators?
(b) How should these standards be imposed?
(c) How should CJC mediators’ compliance with standards be assessed?
OF PRACTICE
3.39 For the purpose of this paper “codes of practice” in relation to mediation refer to instruments and guidelines that
govern the way that mediators conduct mediations (sometimes also referred to as “codes of conduct”). The competencies
that mediators need to have to conduct mediations have already been dealt with above.
Mediation is increasingly governed by various policies, guidelines, codes of practice and standards. This is the result of increasing
professionalisation of the industry.
The role of codes of practice
3.40 In the United States the American Arbitration Association, the American Bar Association (Section of Dispute Resolution) and the
Society of Professionals in Dispute Resolution have developed
Model Standards of Conduct for Mediators
. The preface to the document states that the model standards are intended:
to serve as a guide for the conduct of mediators; to inform the mediating parties; and to promote public confidence in mediation as
a process for resolving disputes.
3.41 NADRAC has highlighted the need to “develop and implement particular standards, contained in a code of practice, to assist
in educating and protecting consumers and to build consumer confidence in ADR”.
These codes of practice are seen as complementary to other ADR standards that have been, or will be, developed.
3.42 The Australian Law Reform Commission has expressed the view that codes of practice should fulfil the following roles:
serve as a guide for the conduct of ADR sessions, particularly in assisting practitioners to identify and address ethical and other
issues that may arise during and after the sessions
assist ADR practitioners to develop a sense of commitment and responsibility towards their profession
educate consumers about ADR processes
promote public confidence in ADR.
CJC regulation of practice
3.43 The CJC Act itself provides for the setting of policies and guidelines. For example, the functions of the CJC Council includes
the determination of “policy guidelines for the operation of Community Justice Centres”.
More specifically, the Act provides that the CJC Council can determine policy guidelines for the “provision of mediation services
and for the operation and management of Community Justice Centres” and for “commencing and conducting” a CJC mediation
However, for the most part it appears that the CJCs’ policies, guidelines and codes are determined by CJCs, as a business centre
of the Attorney General’s Department, in the normal course of business.
Code of Professional Conduct for Mediators
3.44 The CJCs have adopted a Code of Professional Conduct for CJC Mediators without the need for legislative backing. The Code supplements
provisions in the Act and also complements protocols contained in the Code of Conduct and Ethics of the NSW Attorney General’s
Department. The Code of Professional Conduct is arranged under three broad headings:
Responsibility of mediators to the parties
: which includes ensuring the voluntary participation of the parties and that mediators act honestly and impartially in their interests;
Responsibility of mediators towards the mediation process
: which includes ensuring that processes are followed and that mediators maintain impartiality and neutrality, observe confidentiality
and terminate sessions where appropriate;
Responsibility of mediators towards CJCs and the profession
: which includes commitment to learning and development and observance of proper conduct towards other mediators.
Coverage of codes of practice
3.45 Codes of practice can cover a wide range of activities. Some of the possible areas that can be covered, or that are already covered
by various codes and guidelines, are also covered at a general level by provisions of the CJC Act, for example, those regarding confidentiality
of information disclosed at a mediation.
3.46 Numerous bodies have produced codes of practice to govern the conduct of mediations, the content varying depending on context.
NADRAC, for example, has identified some particular issues relating to ADR that should be addressed in codes of practice. These include:
informed and effective participation by the parties;
the appropriateness of the dispute for the process;
accessibility;
fairness in procedure;
termination of the process; and
maintenance of confidentiality.
3.47 Other commentators have divided matters to be dealt with by codes of practice into two areas:
ethical matters, which relate to mediator behaviour and include issues such as neutrality, fairness and impartiality;
practical standards, including requirements of confidentiality, informing parties about the nature of mediation and conflicts of interest.
Duty to third parties
3.48 Consideration must also be given to the extent that mediators have a duty to third parties to a mediation. This is particularly
so in relation to vulnerable third parties who may be affected by the outcome of the mediation, for example, children and other people
under a disability, either in family relationship or financial disputes.
Examples include where separating parents come to an agreement that threatens the welfare of their children or where claimants to
a deceased estate come to an agreement that does not take into account other parties who may also be entitled to provision under
Family Provision Act 1982
(NSW). NADRAC has recognised the potential risks to third parties that may arise from the way that some mediations are conducted,
in particular the possibility of violence, the escalation of the dispute, and failure to meet legitimate needs.
What issues should be addressed in codes of practice for CJC mediations?
Establishing codes of practice
3.49 The content of codes of practice can be imposed in various ways, for example, by statute, by regulation or by codes and guidelines
developed at an administrative level. The requirement to develop codes and guidelines can also be imposed by legislation or regulation.
Such provisions can also dictate the way in which the codes and guidelines are further developed.
3.50 There is considerable debate on the question of who should be responsible for mediation standards.
There is support for both government regulation and industry self-regulation. One argument in favour of at least some government
regulation is the need to ensure that particular standards are met in cases where mediation is mandatory.
Proposals have also been mooted for a national peak body to determine ADR standards, however, it has been noted that there is “presently
no body with a mandate and the necessary independence to establish a peak body”.
However, failing the existence of a national body to determine standards, some provision needs to be made to set standards of practice
and conduct for CJCs.
3.51 In addition to the current position for CJCs, one approach is to make specific reference in legislation allowing for the development
of codes of practice. The Anti-Discrimination Board supports legislation enabling the development of standards or codes of practice
for the conduct of mediation by CJCs.
Legislative provisions could, for example, entrench a role for the CJCs Council in the development of codes of practice.
3.52 A recent example in the New South Wales statute book can be found in the
Osteopaths Act 2001
(NSW) which provides that the Osteopaths Registration Board “may establish a code of professional conduct setting out guidelines
that should be observed by registered osteopaths in their professional practice”.
The Act also gives the responsible minister the power to order the Board to establish, amend or replace a code of professional conduct
where the minister considers such to be necessary. The procedures that the Board is to follow in establishing, amending or replacing
a code of conduct are also outlined in the Act and include requirements to put drafts on exhibition and to seek public comment.
The above procedures are necessary because, ultimately, the Board can enforce adherence to the code by the possibility of deregistration.
This is not currently the case with mediators, although breaches of a code for CJC mediators could be dealt with by declining to
offer them further work. The question of enforcement of codes is dealt with in the following section.
(a) What provision, if any, should be made for the development of codes of practice for CJC mediations?
(b) Who should have a role in developing these codes of practice?
ENFORCEMENT
OF STANDARDS, CODES AND GUIDELINES
3.53 It has been observed, in relation to mediation in Australia generally, that “existing standards are educational, for the
most part, rather than enforceable”.
Is it then desirable to move to an enforceable, rather than an educational model? For example, should codes of practice include mechanisms
for dealing with complaints, or for assessing the performance of mediators? This is a major question for the ADR profession generally.
Currently there is no one body responsible for enforcing mediation standards. There are some mechanisms in place, for example, the
Law Society could conceivably discipline solicitors who breach their mediation guidelines,
and the courts will have a supervisory role in relation to mediators who have been included on their lists. For example, the Chief
Justice may amend the Supreme Court’s list of mediators “for any reason that the Chief Justice considers appropriate”.
3.54 The New South Wales Law Society’s
Charter on Mediation Practice
provides an opportunity for participants to provide feedback on the mediation process under the Law Society Mediation Program. The
Charter states:
Your positive, constructive and informed feedback will help us to maintain the standard of mediation service provided by the Law Society
Program at the highest possible level.
3.55 Any provisions aimed at enforcing standards of practice and conduct will have to take into account the issues of admissibility
and confidentiality of information disclosed during the course of a mediation. It is possible that the admissibility and confidentiality
provisions may prevent review of the conduct of a mediation.
Review by the Ombudsman of the conduct of mediators during mediation is already expressly excluded by the CJC Act.
(a) Should provision be made for participants to provide feedback concerning the conduct of CJC mediations?
(b) Should provision be made for the enforcement of codes of practice for CJC mediations?
Consumer choice/market regulation
3.56 One means of encouraging the use of suitably qualified mediators is to allow the parties to make their own assessment of the
mediator’s qualifications and abilities before consenting to enter the process. The commentary to the US
Model Standards of Conduct for Mediators
suggests that “mediators should have available for parties information relevant to training, education and experience”
and that “the requirements for appearing on a list of mediators must be made public and available to interested persons”.
This approach is necessary for parties to give as fully informed consent to a mediation as is possible.
3.57 For most parties, however, the assessment of a mediator’s qualifications may not be an informed one. Many members of the
community do not have a high awareness of mediation and may be subject to various external pressures (institutional and personal)
to participate.
The qualifications of mediators may mean little to them and they may not be able to differentiate between good and poor qualifications.
3.58 It may also be administratively difficult to make available a pool of mediators to meet the requirements of some parties. It
must also be remembered that CJC mediators provide their services on a voluntary basis, are not remunerated at market rates and their
services are provided free of charge to most clients.
IMPARTIALITY
OF MEDIATORS
3.59 It is essential that mediators be able to conduct mediations in an impartial manner. If a mediator is not impartial or appears
not to be impartial, the confidence of the disputing parties in the process can be undermined.
Failure to be impartial can arise from personal relationships and interests or from prejudices and biases (that may also amount to
unlawful discrimination). The impartiality of mediators is an issue that could be included in the list of matters to be dealt with
by codes of practice and other similar instruments.
3.60 Conflicts of interest and other factors impinging on a mediator’s impartiality and neutrality are rather more likely to
arise in small rural communities where there may only be a limited panel of mediators available to choose from. Resource implications
also tend to come up in such circumstances, for example, where the cost or inconvenience of getting an “impartial” mediator
from another locality may be great.
3.61 However, it should also be noted that in some instances impartiality may not be desirable to some groups. In some cultures the
use of a neutral “stranger” may not be considered appropriate,
or may not even be practically possible. Strategies may have to be developed, for example in Indigenous communities, that acknowledge
the close community ties that parties to a mediation may share with their mediators.
In some cases it can be said that “neutrality and confidentiality are non-issues”, for example, in some Indigenous communities.
3.62 There are a number of strategies that may be employed to help avoid the possibility of mediator partiality. A basic mechanism
to avoid some conflicts is a provision that allows a mediator to terminate the mediation session at any time. Such a mechanism is
provided for in the CJC Act.
The provision, however, relies on the mediator identifying potential conflicts and biases. Another option is, therefore, to allow
the parties to challenge the impartiality of the mediator. An example of a specific provision can be found in the New Jersey Court
Rules which stipulate that a mediator or either one of the parties may terminate a mediation session if “a party challenges
the impartiality of the mediator”.
3.63 In some cases it may be desirable that the conflict be fully declared and for it be left to the parties to consent to the continuation
of the mediation having taken into account all of the circumstances. The US
Model Standards of Conduct for Mediators
state that mediators should disclose all actual and potential conflicts of interest and should decline to act unless all parties agree
to continue.
The NSW Law Society’s
Revised Guidelines for Solicitors who act as Mediators
require full disclosure of any potential issues with the possibility of the parties agreeing to proceed with the mediation.
3.64 Appropriate education and training may also help mediators overcome biases that are more subtle and less easy to identify but
which nonetheless give rise to partial treatment of particular parties to a mediation.
What provisions, if any, are required with respect to the impartiality of CJC mediators?
UNDESIRABLE OUTCOMES
3.65 Another discrete issue that can be included in the matters dealt with by codes of practice is whether mediators should be able
to prevent mediation outcomes that may be discriminatory, unethical, illegal or otherwise against public policy.
3.66 CJCs were originally intended to “assist parties to a dispute to find their own solution, thereby ensuring that the result
is acceptable to the parties”.
This approach may prove problematic when the parties agree to an outcome that could be seen as involving prejudice, discrimination
or being in some other way contrary to public policy. Indeed, it has been suggested that the informal nature of mediation, particularly
community mediation, may make it easier for some parties to express prejudices which they might refrain from expressing in more formal
environments.
3.67 The problem exists on a continuum ranging from the outcome of a mediation implying support of, for example, the entrenchment
of traditional gender roles, right the way to agreements amounting to the continuation of an abusive relationship or unlawful activity.
One case study from the US illustrates the problem at one end of the continuum:
Mr Valdez offered to paint the curb a foot and a half on either side of the driveway. If a Valdez car ever extended over that point,
then Mr Janaslav was to tell Mr Valdez, and the car would be moved. Mr Valdez said the communication should be between the two heads
of the households because “men understand these things better.” The women of the two families agreed to the plan. The
mediation panelists swallowed hard – they clearly did not share the views of the two families that “men understand these
things better,” yet they remained nonjudgmental to make the agreement work. The program reported that the agreement was successful;
the families reported that the problem was solved.
3.68 Various questions arise from this and many similar circumstances, such as when should mediators act to prevent outcomes that
are not desirable? To what extent should anti-discrimination principles override the ability of the parties to reach a solution?
Is mediation at CJCs intended to overcome discrimination? One possible approach to these situations has been for mediators to withdraw
from the mediation if they find the outcome of the mediation ethically unacceptable.
Such matters are clear when the agreement involves illegal action, however, matters are less clear when the outcomes are unfair or
What provision, if any, should be made to prevent mediation outcomes that are discriminatory, unethical, illegal or otherwise against
public policy?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 205.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 31.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 32.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 32.
Interim policy – recruitment and selection of mediator trainees
(December 2001).
. On accreditation of CJC mediators see para 3.10-3.11 below.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 22 November 1983 at 3025.
. Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
. The training of CJC mediators is dealt with at para 3.12-3.22 below.
. See D McGillis,
Community mediation programs: developments and challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 70.
. See Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
. Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
Local Government Act 1993
. J C Price,
Preliminary submission
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
Training and accreditation of mediators
(Report 67, 1991) (“NSWLRC Report 67”) at para 6.29.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Policy and procedures on mediator accreditation
(November 2001).
. See para 3.33-3.34 below.
Mediation Act 1997
Mediation Act 1997
Mediation Act 1997
. See D McGillis,
Community mediation programs: developments and challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 70.
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 212. See also National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
Primary dispute resolution in family law
(A Report to the Attorney General on Part 5 of the Family Law Regulations, 1997) at para 4.20-4.23.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 57.
. NSWLRC Report 67 at para 3.6.
. NSWLRC Report 67 at para 3.7-3.8.
. NSWLRC Report 67 at para 3.9.
. M S Dewdney,
Preliminary submission
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 232-233.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 83.
Policy and procedures on mediator accreditation
(November 2001). For example, the conduct of 6 mediations amounts to 60 points, completion of one core compulsory training course
(of 6 hours) amounts to 10 points.
. NSWLRC Report 67 at para 3.35.
Model standards of conduct for mediators
NJ Court Rules 1969
r 1:40-12(b)(3).
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Regulation 2002
(NSW) cl 142.
Legal Practitioner (Amendment) Act 1987
(NSW) Sch 1.
. Law Society of NSW,
Revised professional conduct and practice rules 1995
Regulation 42.
Legal Profession Regulation 2002
(NSW) cl 142.
. NSW Attorney General’s Department,
Regulatory Impact Statement:
Legal Profession Regulation 2002
(2002) at 64.
. See Coalition of Aboriginal Legal Services,
Preliminary submission
at 2; Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
. Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
. Confidential 1,
Preliminary submission
at 3; G Barclay,
Preliminary submission
. NSWLRC Report 67 at para 5.22.
Vocational Education and Training Accreditation Act 1990
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 12.
. Confidential 1,
Preliminary submission
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 12(2).
. J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 15.
. Information supplied by D Sharp, Director, CJCs (20 August 2003).
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 16 June 1998 at 5883.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 2 June 1998 at 5478.
. M S Dewdney,
Preliminary submission
at 3. Another submission has provided a detailed salary structure proposal for CJC mediators: J Hallinan,
Preliminary submission
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
. J Hallinan,
Preliminary submission
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 16 June 1998 at 5883.
Policy: interim travel policy
(effective 1 September 2002).
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 September 2001 at 16873.
. See H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 214.
. On codes of practice, see para 3.39-3.52 below.
. Astor and Chinkin at 216. On the question of formal qualifications in community mediation, see para 3.12 above.
. Astor and Chinkin at 216.
. ACT Community Services and Health Industry Training Advisory Board,
ACT competency standards for mediators
. Compare National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 105-109.
Mediation Act 1997
Declaration of Standards of Competency
, Instrument No 65 of 2000 (ACT).
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 51-52.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at para 1.44-1.52.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 55.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 70.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 70.
. UK College of Family Mediators,
Competence assessment for family mediators:
portfolio guidelines, specification and template
(effective from 1 January 2003) at 6.
. UK College of Family Mediators,
Competence assessment for family mediators:
portfolio guidelines, specification and template
(effective from 1 January 2003) at 2.
. Para 3.31-3.38.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 70.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of the adversarial system of litigation: ADR – Its role in federal dispute resolution
(Issues Paper 25, 1998) at para 8.6.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Code of professional conduct for CJC mediators
. See H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, 2002) at 220-221. A list of Australian practice standards may be found at National Alternative
Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 43.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 98-99.
. See para 3.59-3.64 below.
. Astor and Chinkin at 224-225.
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, 2002) at 229-230.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 31-33.
. Astor and Chinkin at 222-224.
. See para 2.36-2.42.
. Astor and Chinkin at 223.
. Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
Osteopaths Act 2001
Osteopaths Act 2001
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 224.
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 224.
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110O(5). See also
District Court Act 1973
(NSW) s 164E(5);
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
. “The Law Society of NSW Charter on mediation practice: A guide to the rights and responsibilities of participants”
(1997) 35(11)
Law Society Journal
. On the provisions relating to admissibility and confidentiality, see para 4.11-4.19 and para 4.26-4.32 below.
. See para 4.20-4.22.
Model standards of conduct for mediators
. See H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 158, 203, 207, 222.
Model standards of conduct for mediators
. See para 3.39-3.52 above.
. Astor and Chinkin at 154.
. L Behrendt,
Aboriginal dispute resolution: a step towards self-determination and community autonomy
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1995) at 63.
. See M Sauv�, “Mediation: towards an Aboriginal conceptualisation”
[1996] AboriginalLawB 17
(1996) 3(80)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
at 10. See also para 6.5 below.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
NJ Court Rules 1969
r 1:40-4(f)(1)(B).
Model standards of conduct for mediators
. On continuing education, see para 3.20 above.
. Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 October 1983 at 1882.
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 40-41.
. D McGillis,
Community mediation programs: developments and challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 13.
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 230-231.
. Astor and Chinkin at 229-230.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
4. Protections
History of this Reference (Digest)
Exoneration from liability
Confidentiality
Non-enforceability of outcomes
4.1 The Act has put in place a number of protections for those involved in the mediation process, including mediators, the parties
to the mediation and referring agencies. These protections have been enacted with the general aim of ensuring that people can take
part in the mediation process without fear of any legal or other consequences that may arise. When Neighbourhood Mediation Centres
were introduced in Victoria in 1987 it was suggested that experience in New South Wales and New Zealand showed that:
mediation will be less likely to succeed if parties fear that what they say in a mediation session may be used against them in later
proceedings or if mediators are free to disclose statements a party may make to a third party.
Experience in New South Wales and New Zealand was also said to have shown that:
mediators may feel and, in fact, may be compromised if they believe that their activities as mediators may expose them to civil or
criminal prosecution.
The provisions outlined below aim to overcome some of these concerns.
EXONERATION
FROM LIABILITY
Mediators and other officers and staff of CJCs
4.2 The Act exonerates a number of people from liability arising from its execution, so long as they acted in good faith. These people
include members of the Council, mediators and the Director and Staff of a CJC.
4.3 Similar provisions with respect to exoneration were added to the statutes of various courts in 1994 and apply in relation to mediators
and neutral evaluators where the courts have referred matters for mediation or neutral evaluation under their respective statutes.
4.4 Queensland has enacted a provision that is, in all essential respects, the same as that in New South Wales.
Victoria has also enacted a broadly similar provision.
The Australian Capital Territory Act, however, gives a mediator, acting in good faith, “the same protection and immunity as
a judge of the Supreme Court”.
In some Commonwealth statutes mediators are granted more extensive immunity,
having “the same protection and immunity as a Judge has in performing the functions of a Judge” but without the “good
faith” requirement.
4.5 One question is whether similar protections ought to be extended to the “officers, employees or other staff, of any Department
of the Government or of any local or public authority or other organisation” who may be engaged by the Council for the purposes
of the Act.
It is possible that the exoneration already applies to them since the current protection extends to “a person acting under
the direction of or with the authority of, the Council”.
4.6 The appropriateness of the immunity for mediators is the subject of some debate. Arguments in favour of a general immunity include:
it allows mediators to act impartially without fear of legal action from either side;
it ensures finality in mediation in so far as it prevents litigation arising from the process of mediation.
However, the interests of participants also need to be taken into account. While it has been noted that the parties are essentially
responsible for any outcomes and that mediators should, therefore, not be liable for any mediated agreement or its consequences,
it has been suggested that some provision should be made to guard against bad practice:
should there be liability for gross misconduct by a mediator during the mediation process, for procedural aspects of the mediation,
or for a breach of ethical obligations, for example failure to deal effectively with power relationships between parties, or even
for sexual harassment?
4.7 NADRAC has proposed that the protections offered by immunity provisions be reduced in favour of increased consumer protection.
It has suggested that the immunity provisions should only be available to providers with an appropriate code of practice in place.
Such a code of practice would include a mechanism for consumer redress.
The question of consumer input and redress has been dealt with in chapter 3.
(a) Should the scope of the immunities currently offered by the Act be increased or reduced?
(b) What account should be taken of the rights of the parties to a CJC mediation in providing any immunities?
Members of the Police Service
4.8 The Act also exonerates members of the police service from any liability arising in respect of the referral of a matter to mediation
rather than proceeding with charge or prosecution.
4.9 The provision was inserted at the request of the police authorities who were concerned about laws making it an offence for police
officers not to charge persons in certain circumstances.
Presumably the concern was in relation to the common law misdemeanours of misprision of felony and compounding a felony (that is,
preventing the prosecution of a crime) which have since been replaced by statutory offences of concealing serious indictable offences.
It has also been said that police were concerned about being charged with false imprisonment if they arrested someone and took him
or her to a CJC instead of to a justice as was required by law.
The provision is therefore aimed at encouraging “officers to refer all appropriate cases to mediation rather than using criminal
proceedings where they are not appropriate”, for example cases of minor assault where a criminal sanction is “unlikely
to resolve a continuing dispute”.
Queensland has also enacted a similar provision.
Domestic violence offences
4.10 Exoneration of police officers from liability does not extend to domestic violence offences within the meaning of the
Crimes Act 1900
This reflects the policy of the government at the time the Act was passed that all domestic violence offences ought to be brought
before the courts.
Queensland has also enacted a similar provision.
CONFIDENTIALITY
4.11 It has been said that mediation is essentially a private process and that “confidentiality lies at the heart of the mediation
process and is one of its defining characteristics”.
On a more practical level, the personal nature of many disputes brought to CJCs requires the existence of some guarantees of confidentiality
for the parties. Such guarantees of confidentiality help to build the community’s trust in CJCs.
4.12 Confidentiality may be provided for in a number of ways, including by way of a confidentiality clause to an agreement to mediate,
by codes of conduct for mediators and by legislation.
Model Standards of Conduct for Mediators
suggest that a mediator “shall not disclose any matter that a party expects to be confidential unless given permission by all
parties or unless required by law or other public policy”.
These principles appear to be adequately provided for by the CJC Act.
4.13 The Act provides that mediators must swear an oath or make an affirmation of secrecy in relation to disclosures related to a
mediation session.
However, there are some necessary exceptions to this. For example, a mediator or other officer may disclose information “where
there are reasonable grounds to believe that disclosure is necessary to prevent or minimise the danger of injury to any person or
damage to any property” or where the disclosure is “in accordance with a requirement imposed by or under a law of the
State (other than a requirement imposed by a subpoena or other compulsory process) or the Commonwealth”.
This would appear to anticipate the availability of other statutes that encourage disclosure, for example,
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) which places penalties on people who fail to disclose the commission of serious indictable offences by others.
Disclosure is also permitted with the consent of the party from whom the information was obtained.
4.14 Similar confidentiality provisions (without the requirement of an oath) have now been introduced for other mediation schemes
in various New South Wales courts.
Queensland has enacted the New South Wales provisions verbatim (including the oath requirement).
Victoria has enacted similar provisions (but without the requirement of an oath).
The Australian Capital Territory Act also contains a comparable provision (again without the requirement of an oath).
However, it also goes further than the New South Wales Act in that it not only allows disclosure when injury or property damage are
threatened but also when it is necessary to report the commission or threat of such offences to the appropriate authorities.
4.15 The Commission’s provisional view is that the additional oath provisions in the CJC Act appear to be unnecessary to the
enforcement of secrecy relating to mediation proceedings and as such, should be removed.
Should the requirement that CJC mediators swear an oath be removed from the confidentiality provisions of the CJC Act?
4.16 The New Jersey Court Rules make similar provision with respect to confidentiality but add:
No mediator may participate in any subsequent hearing or trial of the mediated matter or appear as witness or counsel for any person
in the same or any related matter.
Such a protection could have the effect of allowing the parties to be completely open in their dealings with mediators, particularly
in any pre-mediation sessions conducted by the mediator where each party is allowed to put their position to the mediator in a private
4.17 No problem was identified with the CJC confidentiality provisions when they were introduced into other New South Wales legislation
The Law Society at the time proposed that disclosure should be permitted with the consent of all parties – not just the party
who supplied the information being disclosed. The proposal was rejected for the following reason:
To require ... that all parties must agree to the disclosure would provide a third party who may have no substantive interest in the
information with a right to confidentiality that he would not have in the ordinary course of events. That could have the effect of
undermining the process of mediation.
The confidentiality provisions may ultimately be a reason why CJCs cannot work too closely with other government agencies, such as
the Anti-Discrimination Board, so far as referral of matters goes.
4.18 One additional issue is whether any specific acknowledgement should be made of the need to protect children from harm. Some of
this will no doubt be covered by the permission to disclose where it is “necessary to prevent or minimise the danger of injury
to any person”. However, the special vulnerability of children may necessitate the inclusion of mandatory reporting requirements
such as those contained in the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
(NSW). If certain people who have professional dealings with children have, in the course of their work, reasonable grounds to suspect
that a child is at risk of harm, the Act requires that they report these suspicions to the Director General of the Department of
Community Services as soon as practicable.
Such matters might especially come to the attention of mediators during the mediation of disputes between family members.
4.19 In family law matters the protection of children is specifically covered so that a mediator is required
to swear or affirm that they will not disclose any communication to them in their capacity as a family and child mediator unless
they believe it is reasonably necessary in order:
(a) to protect a child; or
(b) to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent threat to:
(i) the life or health of a person; or
(ii) the property of a person; or
(c) to report the commission, or prevent the likely commission, of an offence involving:
(i) violence or a threat of violence to a person; or
(ii) intentional damage to property of a person or a threat of damage to property; ...
(a) What exceptions, if any, should apply to the confidentiality provisions under the CJC Act?
(b) Should any list of exceptions specifically include the protection of children?
(c) When confidentiality is waived by consent, whose consent should be required?
Review by the Ombudsman
4.20 A further outcome of the confidentiality requirements is that the New South Wales Ombudsman may not investigate “conduct
of a mediator at a mediation session under the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
4.21 Similar protections are in place in Queensland where the Ombudsman may not investigate administrative actions taken by “a
mediator at a mediation session under the
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
4.22 An argument against oversight of the mediation process by the Ombudsman is that it might lead to mediators acting in a more legalistic
Should the Ombudsman be able to investigate the conduct of CJC mediators during mediations?
4.23 The Act provides that mediation, and any related activities before and after a mediation, are the subject of certain privileges
or immunities.
4.24 The same privilege with respect to defamation that exists with respect to judicial proceedings also applies to mediations.
This means that participants in a mediation conducted by a CJC enjoy the protections of absolute privilege.
4.25 Similar provisions in relation to defamation were added to the statutes of various courts in 1994 and apply in relation to mediations
and neutral evaluations where the matters have been referred by the courts under their respective statutes.
The Australian Capital Territory has a comparable provision.
Admissibility of evidence
4.26 Documents prepared in relation to a mediation session and evidence of anything said or any admission made in a mediation session
are “not admissible in any proceedings before any court, tribunal or body”.
Evidence is, however, admissible, “where the persons in attendance at, or named during, the mediation session and, in the case
of a document, all persons named in the document, consent to admission of the evidence or document”,
and also where there are proceedings arising from a situation where a mediator has disclosed information to “prevent or minimise
the danger of injury to any person or damage to any property”.
These protections are important from a public policy perspective in that they promote and safeguard the processes of mediation undertaken
by the CJCs
and promote a sense of trust and credibility among the Centres’ clients.
4.27 Similar provisions in relation to admissibility of evidence were added to the statutes of various New South Wales courts in 1994
and apply where the courts have referred matters to mediations and neutral evaluations under their respective statutes.
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
(NSW) also provides that evidence of what was said in a mediation session or in documents prepared for the mediation of a dispute
that comes under its jurisdiction is not admissible.
4.28 The Victorian provisions cover similar ground to the New South Wales provisions except that only the consent of the persons present
at the mediation is required to waive the privilege.
Some Commonwealth statutes make no provision for the admissibility of evidence with the consent of any parties.
The Australian Capital Territory statute contains comparable provisions
but also incorporates the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) with respect to settlement negotiations.
A question therefore arises concerning the interaction of the provisions relating to the admissibility of evidence under the CJC
Act and those contained in the
Evidence Act 1995
4.29 Compared with the provisions in Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory, the CJC Act makes it more difficult to get evidence
admitted where all the parties to the mediation consent as it requires the consent of all persons named in a document to be obtained
before the evidence can be admitted.
The New South Wales Act also makes no provision for implied consent.
4.30 However, use of a document in a mediation session should not quarantine it from production in legal proceedings. This would appear
to be the case at common law. In 1992, Justice Rolfe drew a distinction between seeking to prove directly or indirectly what was
said at a mediation, which was inadmissible, and seeking to prove:
by admissible evidence, a fact to which reference was made at mediation, not by reference to the statement but to the factual material
which sourced the statement. A finding to the contrary would mean that irrespective of relevance to issues the statement at mediation
made the factual material upon which it was based immune from subsequent consideration by the Court.
In 1994 Justice Rogers also observed:
as a matter of principle it would be entirely too easy to sterilise otherwise admissible, objective, evidence simply by saying something
be contemplated.
4.31 An example of a provision clarifying the position may be found in the
Ohio Revised Code
This section does not prevent or inhibit the disclosure, discovery, or admission into evidence of a statement, document, or other
matter that is a mediation communication but that, prior to its use in a mediation proceeding, was subject to discovery or admission
under law or a rule of evidence or was subject to disclosure as a public record pursuant to section 149.43 of the Revised Code.
4.32 The possibility has also been raised that evidence of mediation proceedings may be admissible in cases where the mediator or
one of the parties has engaged in fraud, where there has been a “substantial failure” by the mediator to discharge his
or her functions, or where there is an allegation of “very serious misconduct” or that there was effectively no mediation
(a) In what circumstances should it be possible to allow evidence raised in or in relation to a CJC mediation to be admitted in legal
proceedings?
(b) If evidence is to be admissible with consent, whose consent should be required?
Concealing a serious indictable offence
4.33 Finally, the Act provides that officers of CJCs are “not liable to be proceeded against for
concealing a serious indictable offence without reasonable cause
in respect of any information obtained in connection with the administration or execution of [the] Act”.
There does not appear to be any equivalent provision in other New South Wales statutes.
Should officers of CJCs have immunity if they conceal a serious indictable offence without reasonable cause in respect of any information
obtained in connection with the administration or execution of the CJC Act?
NON-ENFORCEABILITY
OF OUTCOMES
4.34 The Act provides that any agreement reached at a mediation session “is not enforceable in any court, tribunal or body”.
This provision was included because court enforcement of such resolutions would not be “consonant with the basic concept”
that resorting to a CJC is a “real alternative to the court system”.
However, there is nothing to prevent the parties, if they wish, from concluding an enforceable legal agreement at a later date.
Such outcomes are common in other areas, for example, agreements incorporated into consent orders in family law cases.
4.35 Concerns have been raised in the literature about the non-enforceability of mediated agreements. Some commentators consider that
making agreements enforceable would make CJCs more effective.
However, there are a number of problems with such a proposal. For example, the question arises as to how such agreements are to be
enforced. There is also the issue that if the parties are able to enter into a formal settlement with an enforceable outcome, they
must be able to refer to legal advisors, otherwise some agreements might be unconscionable.
4.36 Queensland adopted the New South Wales provision verbatim in 1990. However, in 1997, the following proviso was added to the non-enforceability
of any agreement reached at a mediation session:
unless the parties agree in writing that the agreement is to be enforceable.
This may have been necessitated by the move towards court-referred mediations which were formalised in the Queensland Act in 1997.
In many of these cases the parties will already have legal practitioners to advise them.
Should it be possible to enforce agreements entered into at the end of a CJC mediation?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 29 April 1987 at 1536.
. Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 29 April 1987 at 1536.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
. See, for example,
Compensation Court Act 1984
District Court Act 1973
(NSW) s 164H;
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW) s 61K;
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110R.
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 21N.
Mediation Act 1997
. See H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 189.
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) s 19M.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 26 November 1980 at 3587.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
s 27(1)(b).
. Astor and Chinkin at 190-191. See also R Carroll, “Mediator immunity in Australia”
[2001] SydLawRw 8
Sydney Law Review
at 205-219.
. Astor and Chinkin at 191.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at para 4.28, 4.36.
. See para 3.56-3.58.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 26 November 1980 at 3700.
Crimes Act 1900
See NSW Law Reform Commission,
section 316
Crimes Act 1900
(Report 93, 1999) at para 2.2.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 26 November 1980 at 3701.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 October 1983 at 1882.
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
Crimes Act 1900
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 October 1983 at 1882.
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
. H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 178.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
19 November 1980 at 3149.
. Astor and Chinkin at 178.
Model standards of conduct for mediators
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
s 29(2)(f).
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 10 May 1994 at 2144.
Courts Legislation (Mediation and Evaluation) Amendment Act 1994
(NSW). See, for example,
Compensation Court Act 1984
District Court Act 1973
(NSW) s 164G;
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW) s 61J;
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110Q. See also
Legal Aid Commission Act 1979
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
This section even includes reference to the disclosure of information for evaluation purposes even though that provision is no longer
contained in the Queensland Act:
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
(Qld) s 34 was repealed by
Courts Reform Amendment Act 1997
(Qld) s 35.
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 21M.
Mediation Act 1997
Mediation Act 1997
s 10(2)(d)(ii).
NJ Court Rules 1969
r 1:40-4(c).
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 10 May 1994 at 2144.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 10 May 1994 at 2144.
. See Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) s 19K.
Family Law Regulations 1984
(Cth) reg 66, reg 67.
Ombudsman Act 1974
(NSW) Sch 1 cl 18 and
Ombudsman Act 2001
s 16(2)(f).
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 22 November 1983 at 3024.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
. NSW Law Reform Commission,
(Report 75, 1995) at para 11.28-11.29.
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110P(1)-(3);
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW) s 61I(1)-(3);
District Court Act 1973
(NSW) s 164F(1)-(3);
Compensation Court Act 1984
Mediation Act 1997
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
s 28(6)(a).
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
s 28(6)(b).
AWA Ltd v Daniels
(1992) 7 ACSR 463 at 469;
Lukies v Ripley (No 2)
(1994) 35 NSWLR 283
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly,
19 November 1980 at 3149.
Compensation Court Act 1984
District Court Act 1973
(NSW) s 164F(4)-(6);
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW) s 61I(4)-(6);
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110P(4)-(6).
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Evidence Act 1958
(Vic) s 21L. See also
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 1996
(Vic) r 50.07(6).
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) s 19N;
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Mediation Act 1997
Evidence Act 1995
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
s 28(6)(a).
Evidence Act 1995
s 131(2)(b)
s 131(2)(c).
AWA Ltd v Daniels
(NSW SC, No 50271/1991, Rolfe J, 18 March 1992, unreported) at 12.
AWA Ltd v Daniels
(1992) 7 ACSR 463 at 468.
Ohio Revised Code
�2317.023(D).
Gain v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(1997) 42 NSWLR 252
Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia Ltd v Cassegrain
[2002] NSWSC 940
at para 12 and 13.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 November 1980 at 3149.
. See W Faulkes, “Runs on the mediation scoreboard”
Law Institute Journal
. J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 194; W Harris, “Consumer disputes and alternative dispute resolution”
(1993) 4(3)
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
. See R P Meagher,
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane’s equity: doctrines and remedies
(4th edition, Butterworths, 2002) at 16-035.
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
as amended by
Courts Reform Amendment Act 1997
(Qld) s 34.
Courts Reform Amendment Act 1997
(Qld) Pt 5.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
5. Administrative framework
History of this Reference (Digest)
Community Justice Centres Council
Reference groups and networks
Directors and deputy directors
Payment for services
Evaluations
Renaming Community Justice Centres?
5.1 When the CJC pilot scheme Act was introduced it was stated that the new legislation did:
not attempt to prescribe hard and fast operational rules and principles for the centres which may prove unworkable in practice. The
bill is therefore drafted to allow flexibility so that the centres will be able to apply the knowledge they gain from experience.
This philosophy appears to have been carried over into the 1983 Act. However, it is now timely to examine whether the structures
that were put in place continue to be appropriate.
JUSTICE CENTRES COUNCIL
5.2 The Act establishes the CJCs Council and provides for its constitution, procedures and functions.
5.3 The Act states that the functions of the Council include the following:
(a) to determine policy guidelines for, and give directions with respect to, the operation of Community Justice Centres,
(b) to make such reports or recommendations to the Minister on any matter relating to Community Justice Centres, or on any other matter
to which this Act relates, as the Council considers necessary or appropriate,
(c) to report on and make recommendations concerning the need for an evaluation under section 26 and to assist with the making of
such an evaluation, and
(d) to do such supplemental, incidental and consequential acts as may be necessary or expedient for the exercise of its functions
or the establishment and operation of Community Justice Centres.
5.4 Other parts of the Act also provide for functions of the Council. For example, the Director determines the activities of mediators
and other activities conducted at CJCs but “subject to the policy guidelines determined by, and any directions of, the Council”.
The Council may also determine that “specified classes of disputes are not to be the subject of mediation sessions, or that
specified classes of disputes may be the subject of mediation sessions”.
Also, the records of a CJC may be disposed of only in accordance with directions of the Council.
5.5 Despite these clearly delineated roles identified in the Act, it appears to have become a common belief that the Council exists
only as a ministerial advisory body:
The reasoning behind the Council’s existence was that it would be a body of people who are independent of the direct service
providers (the Department, the public servants and the mediators) and, as a representative sample of the wider community, would provide
a community voice directly to the Minister.
Relationship to current management structure
5.6 The Council is stated to be subject to the “control and direction” of the Attorney General “except in relation
to the contents of a report or recommendation made by it” to the Attorney General.
The Director of CJCs is stated to be “subject to the control and direction of the Council”.
However, CJCs are also stated to “operate within and as parts of” the Attorney General’s Department.
The reality is that the Centres are operated as a business centre of the Attorney General’s Department and this determines
the substantive financial and policy decisions of the organisation. This effectively makes the Council an advisory body within a
departmental structure.
The Council last performed an advisory role at the time when the current CJC regions were established in 2001.
5.7 The Council comprises the Director of CJCs (who is an ex officio member)
and the following persons appointed by the Attorney General:
a magistrate nominated by the Chief Magistrate;
a person nominated by the Council of Social Service of New South Wales;
two officers selected by the Attorney General; and
not more than five persons selected “by reason of their having such special interests or experience as the [Attorney General]
considers would be of assistance in the administration of [the] Act, at least one of whom is to have expertise in training”.
5.8 The composition of the Council is different to the composition of the original co-ordinating committee under the pilot scheme
Act. The original co-ordinating committee also included a member of the Police Force (nominated by the Commissioner), persons nominated
by the Council of the Law Society of New South Wales and the Ethnic Affairs Commission, as well as members of the Departments of
Corrective Services, Youth and Community Services and Technical and Further Education (nominated in each case by the relevant Minister).
Future role for the Council
5.9 A number of questions arise with respect to the future of the Council, including:
whether the Council is needed at all;
whether the Council requires a statutory base to operate;
what functions the Council should carry out.
5.10 The Council itself has proposed its own abolition and the establishment of a community advisory committee to advise the Director.
It was suggested that this new committee have a “community base, a service delivery focus and a consumer focus”.
It was also suggested that the Attorney General may require a “broader advisory council on dispute resolution” which
is not only limited to CJCs. The New South Wales Law Reform Commission recommended the establishment of a dispute resolution advisory
council to advise the government about dispute resolution practice in 1991.
An example of such a body at the Federal level is the National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council (“NADRAC”),
an independent body charged with providing the Commonwealth Attorney General with “coordinated and consistent policy advice
on the development of high quality, economic and efficient ways of resolving disputes without the need for a judicial decision”.
As an advisory body, NADRAC’s activities may overlap with any State-based advisory bodies. NADRAC’s charter provides:
As the council’s time and resources permit, it may provide comment on matters relevant to its charter to any Commonwealth, State
and Territory or private organisations with an interest in alternative dispute resolution.
5.11 The current management of CJCs, while acknowledging the problems with the current arrangements, considers that there is still
a need for an “external consultative and advisory mechanism”. Under this model the Council would provide appropriate
advice to the Minister on matters pertaining to conflict resolution and mediation. The CJCs has also suggested that, while an advisory
body is necessary, consideration might be given to a less formal appointment process and a more flexible structure in order “to
meet changing or evolving needs” as they arise.
5.12 The Queensland Act, which also makes provision for a council, merely states that “the principal function of the council
is to provide advice to the Minister on the operation of [the] Act, dispute resolution generally and the provision of mediation services
under [the] Act”.
Possible functions
5.13 Possible functions for the Council cover a wide range from acting merely as an advisory body to setting guidelines, standards
and codes of practice. The Council could potentially carry out some or all of these functions. NADRAC has, however, noted that some
of the various functions may not be compatible if carried out by the same body. For example, should the same body be responsible
for handling complaints as well as promoting mediation?
5.14 Some suggested models include the Privacy Advisory Committee and the Anti-Discrimination Board. The functions of the Privacy
Advisory Committee are stated to be:
(a) to advise on matters relevant to the Privacy Commissioner’s functions,
(b) to recommend material to the Privacy Commissioner for inclusion in guidelines to be issued by the Privacy Commissioner in exercising
the Commissioner’s functions,
(c) to advise the Minister on such matters as may be referred to it by the Minister.
The functions of the Anti-Discrimination Board are stated to be “for the purpose of eliminating discrimination and promoting
equality and equal treatment of all human beings” and to:
(a) carry out investigations, research and inquiries relating to discrimination ...
(b) acquire and disseminate knowledge on all matters relating to the elimination of discrimination and the achievement of equal rights,
(c) arrange and co-ordinate consultations, discussions, seminars and conferences,
(d) review, from time to time, the laws of the State,
(e) consult with governmental, business, industrial and community groups and organisations in order to ascertain means of improving
services and conditions affecting minority groups and other groups which are the subject of discrimination and inequality,
(f) hold public inquiries, and
(g) develop human rights programmes and policies.
Based on such models the Council could simply be established to provide advice on mediation policy and practice to the Director of
CJCs and the Attorney General when required.
5.15 Other Councils carry out certain quasi-legislative functions. For example, one of the principal functions of the Air Transport
Council is “to determine, with the concurrence of the Minister, application and license fees under [the
Air Transport Act 1964
The Osteopaths Registration Board, in addition to having the functions of promoting and maintaining standards of osteopathy practice,
advising the Minister and publishing and distributing information, also has the functions of recognising courses of study and accreditation
bodies and of establishing and maintaining a code of professional conduct.
Some of these functions could conceivably be adapted to CJCs, so that the Council could be responsible for developing codes of practice
regarding, for example, the appropriateness of disputes, termination of ADR, confidentiality and accreditation requirements. The
CJC Professional Reference Group supports accreditation and reaccreditation being the subject of policy guidelines approved by the
CJCs Council.
This is consistent with the functions, identified by NADRAC, that peak bodies might appropriately perform:
to oversee the development and implementation of standards for ADR organisations and practitioners;
to provide quality assurance, accreditation or registration for ADR trainers, practitioners, organisations or programs;
to receive, monitor and publicise complaints about ADR service providers;
to act as a clearinghouse to collect and disseminate information about good practice in ADR;
to provide training and ongoing professional development;
to facilitate or conduct ADR research and evaluation;
to promote ADR.
5.16 However, the functions for peak bodies identified by NADRAC and Acts such as the
Osteopaths Act
are intended to operate at a much broader level than CJCs. The
Osteopaths Act
establishes the necessary infrastructure for registration and oversight of a profession at a State level. Mediation is not a registered
profession and it would not be the function of a CJCs Council to regulate such a profession. However, in the absence of a State-wide
body, a CJCs Council could be responsible for regulating CJC mediators.
5.17 Some of the functions outlined above are already being carried out by CJCs without apparent input from the Council but in some
cases with input from various reference groups and networks.
The question remains as to how many of these functions ought to be performed by the CJCs Council rather than carried out under current
arrangements.
(a) Should the CJCs Council be retained?
(b) If so, what should its role(s) be?
(c) Should it have a more general role of advising the Attorney General on dispute resolution matters?
Possible composition
5.18 The CJCs Council has suggested that a reconstituted advisory committee could contain the following:
A chairperson “high profile” community representative with standing in the community (legal, government and/or non government);
A Magistrate;
A non judicial Local Courts representative;
Representatives from one or two State Government Departments (such as DoCS and/or Police);
An academic or other person with particular expertise in dispute resolution theory and practice;
A representative from NCOSS;
A representative with particular expertise in training;
A mediator nominated by the CJC professional reference group.
5.19 The CJCs also proposed a broadly similar list but have omitted the representative with particular expertise in training and
added an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network representative and a client representative.
The inclusion of Indigenous people on the Council is discussed in Chapter 6.
5.20 Another submission suggested three broad categories of membership:
representatives of government agencies whose clients use CJCs, for example, Local Courts, Police, Departments of Housing, Community
Services, Aboriginal Affairs, Health and Education, and the Public Guardian;
representatives of non-government agencies such as NCOSS, ATSIC and the Ethnic Communities Council;
expert mediators who provide CJC services, with one representative each from metropolitan, regional and isolated communities.
5.21 The omission of mediators from the current list is considered by some to be a serious oversight.
However, if the Council is to regulate mediators in some way, it may also be necessary to consider the propriety of allowing mediator
representatives to dominate the Council.
5.22 The Anti-Discrimination Board has suggested that a person with expertise in discrimination matters be included in the list.
There would, however, appear to be no legislative precedents for this course of action.
5.23 Finally, if proposals to establish a broader advisory council on dispute resolution not limited to CJCs were to be adopted, the
composition of such a council would have to take into account interests other than those currently associated with CJCs. For example,
if the council was also to provide advice to the Attorney General about court-connected alternative dispute resolution in New South
Wales courts and tribunals, the fact that this is the biggest area of ADR in practice would mean that these bodies would have to
be strongly represented on the Council.
(a) Who should be members of the CJCs Council?
(b) If there is to be a broader advisory council on dispute resolution matters, who should its members be?
GROUPS AND NETWORKS
5.24 Two reference groups were formed in 2001/2002:
Professional Reference Group
which comprises managers, staff and mediators and has the aim of looking at “quality issues regarding the theory and practice
of alternative dispute resolution”;
Training Group
which comprises managers and mediators and was formed “to provide trainers to conduct the statewide training program”.
CJCs have also established an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network.
This is discussed in Chapter 6.
5.25 These groups have no legislative base, being established by CJCs as a business centre of the Attorney General’s Department.
Their main aim is to provide forums for dealing with practical matters relating to the operation of CJCs. They are not necessarily
intended to cover the policy advice and standard setting roles of the CJCs Council. However, in a number of instances these groups
would appear to have objectives and roles that could duplicate potential objectives and roles of the CJCs Council.
Is the CJCs Council, however constituted, necessary in light of the role and functions of the CJCs Professional Reference Group, Training
Group and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network?
Professional Reference Group
5.26 CJCs have established a Professional Reference Group. The Act makes no provision for the establishment or constitution of the
Professional Reference Group. The Group’s functions are governed by a charter which states that the Group is subject to the
direction of the Director of CJCs “in consultation with the CJCs management team”.
5.27 The Professional Reference Group’s Charter states that its purpose is:
to provide support and advice to the CJCs to ensure a mediation and conflict management service to regional New South Wales which
conforms with best practice principles and which is the recognised industry leader in mediation and related conflict management process.
To achieve this, the Group will aim to strengthen links between the management of the CJCs, mediators, staff and the community, develop
links with other dispute resolution providers, research mediation and conflict management practices and develop frameworks and principles
for the provision of mediation and conflict management services.
5.28 The Group’s Charter further states that its members shall do the following with respect to mediation and conflict management
theory and practice:
ensure best practice standards are met
inform CJC mediators and staff about current issues
respond to requests for advice from staff and mediators
identify training opportunities and advise the Training Group
conduct and/or [oversee] research
write and present papers for conferences, seminars, etc
write papers to be published in industry journals
assist the Director and the Business Development and Training Manager as required.
Some of these functions overlap with the functions that could be carried out by the CJCs Council.
5.29 Provision is currently made for 21 members of the Professional Reference Group. Three officers of the CJCs are ex-officio, namely
the Director, the Business Development and Training Manager and the Executive Officer. The following are appointed by endorsement
by their peers:
two CJC coordinators;
two CJC interviewing officers;
one member of the CJC Directorate’s administrative staff;
one Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander CJC mediator; and
one representative of the CJC Training Group.
Eight mediators (not being CJC employees) are selected on application, two from each CJC region and three mediator specialists are
selected by invitation of the Director of CJCs.
Members of the Group who do not receive a salary are paid the current hourly rate for mediation for their attendance. Travel and
accommodation expenses are also met where necessary.
5.30 The majority, if not all, of the positions on the Professional Reference Group are internal appointments. Without adequate external
representation it may be argued that the Reference Group cannot perform some of the functions that could possibly be performed by
the CJCs Council.
Training Group
5.31 The Training Group is an informal group that currently consists of about 20 people including the CJCs Business Development and
Training Manager, the regional co-ordinators and accredited mediators who have completed “train the trainer training”.
5.32 Objectives of the Training Group include:
participation in writing, designing, identifying and evaluating courses;
offering best practice training in order to provide consistency and uniformity across the State; and
meeting accreditation and re-accreditation requirements.
Mediators from the Training Group are now conducting the CJCs’ training program.
5.33 The activities of CJCs may be carried on at a number of different venues. The Act currently draws distinctions between these
venues. CJCs may be “established at such premises as the Governor may determine by order published in the Gazette”.
Such a gazetted premises would appear to be a “principal office” of a particular CJC.
However, the activities of a CJC may also be carried on at such other places as the Director approves from time to time.
Such premises, apparently, do not require gazettal.
5.34 The current procedures are cumbersome and probably unnecessary.
CJCs ought to be able to open offices anywhere in the same way that other offices of the Attorney General’s Department are
established.
Should the requirement for gazettal of CJCs be removed?
Statewide services
5.35 CJCs are now administered in four regions – the northern, southern, western and Sydney regions
and every effort is made to provide coverage to all parts of the State. In 2000/2001 services were expanded to the Central West of
the State with mediators available to work in Bathurst, Orange, Lithgow, Parkes, Condobolin, Narromine and Dubbo. A CJC service was
also launched in the Riverina with mediators available to work in Griffith, Darlington Point, Yenda, Colleambally and Leeton.
In 2001/2002 panels were established at Monaro, the Murray and the Far West.
One issue is whether improved access to CJC services is required for country and regional areas. Submissions have suggested that
new centres are required in country towns.
A different view is that rural areas are unlikely to need CJCs because in country centres there is “a greater degree of person
to person tolerance and neighbourly co-operation”,
however, without any evidence to support such a view, the Commission doubts that this is likely to be the case. Another submission
has noted that the CJC in the Wollongong region could be expanded having regard to the population in the southern districts and the
“current limited use of mediation and ADR in these areas”.
Local government authorities in the north east of the State have suggested that the Centre in Newcastle is too remote for initial
5.36 There are various ways of approaching the need for further resources in country regions of the State. For example, each CJC regional
office has a 1800 toll-free telephone number which may obviate the need for a more decentralised system of administration. At one
stage it was proposed to spread the CJCs program throughout the State under the auspices of the clerk of the local court.
Such an approach, while desirable in terms of efficient use of government resources, may not be desirable for other reasons.
5.37 Although it can be argued that a centralised system, whether wholly centralised in the State capital or partly centralised in
regional centres (for example, Newcastle and Wollongong) means that the organisation, even if it does technically serve all areas
of the State, may be less responsive to the needs of particular local communities.
(a) Is there a need for greater coverage by CJCs?
(b) If so, how should the need be met?
AND DEPUTY DIRECTORS
5.38 When CJCs were first established there was one Director for each of the three Centres.
This was really a way of coping with the pilot/development phase where early plans included the possibility that each Centre might
develop along different lines as a sort of controlled experiment.
In 1983 it became possible to have one person as a Director of multiple Centres. In 1992, amendments were passed to reflect the reality
that there was in fact one Director for all CJCs, and also to provide for the appointment of Deputy Directors.
5.39 According to the Act a Deputy Director has no specific role that could not also be allocated to any other member of staff. As
such, references to a “Deputy Director” are unnecessary since a Deputy Director need not be appointed for the Director
to be able to delegate such functions under the Act to that officer as a “member of staff”. All references to a “Deputy
Director” could, therefore, be removed from the Act.
Should references to the “Deputy Director” be removed from the Act?
5.40 The Act provides that the Director is, “in the exercise of his or her functions, subject to the control and direction
of the Council”.
This does not reflect the reality that CJCs are part of the departmental structure of the Attorney General’s Department and,
as such, the Director of CJCs reports directly to the Assistant Director-General and the Director-General of the Department.
It is also inconsistent with the CJCs Council being, in effect, an advisory body. Assuming that the effective role of the CJCs Council
is not substantially changed, the removal of this provision would leave the current arrangements untouched in light of the further
provision already in the Act which states that CJCs “operate within and as parts of” the Attorney General’s Department.
The question of whether or not to remove this provision, however, depends on the role that is ultimately determined for the CJCs
Should the Director of CJCs be “subject to the control and direction of the Council”?
5.41 The Act makes provision for the keeping of CJCs’ records and for the CJCs Council’s access to them.
It has been suggested that the provision that the Council is entitled to inspect any records of a CJC should be repealed because
Should the provision relating to the keeping of records and access to them be removed from the CJC Act?
FOR SERVICES
5.42 There are a number of services offered by CJCs for which payment could be requested. For example, in recent years CJCs has entered
into agreements whereby specific institutions undertake to pay for the provision of certain mediation services.
5.43 In Queensland the Alternative Dispute Resolution Branch of the Department of Justice and Attorney General (which operates the
Dispute Resolution Centres) also offers “fee-based conflict-management training to individuals and organisations outside the
Department”.
5.44 There is some controversy over whether government should fund alternative dispute resolution. For example, it could be argued
that disputing parties who obtain the benefit of mediation should be required to bear some of the costs where they are able. However,
the imposition of charges would discriminate against people who cannot afford them and could have the effect of sending some disputes
actually does divert matters from the overburdened traditional court system and whether mediation offers other benefits to the community.
5.45 In relation to other institutions paying for the provision of certain mediation services, one preliminary submission has observed:
This process has not been consistent nor transparent and should be a matter for resolution to ensure that all members of the community
have equal access to the services of the CJC.
Another preliminary submission has also expressed concerns about the transparency of these arrangements.
(a) Should it be possible for CJCs to require payment for its services?
(b) For what services and in what circumstances should payments be allowed?
EVALUATIONS
5.46 The Act currently provides that “The Minister may cause or arrange for an evaluation to be made, at such times and in respect
of such periods as the Minister thinks fit, of Community Justice Centres and of their operation and activities”.
Some submissions noted that periodic reviews are a good thing.
Current drafting practice in New South Wales now includes stricter review requirements (since 1992), specifying dates for commencement
of reviews and for the tabling of reports in Parliament. A standard statement, in addition to the time limits, is:
The Minister is to review this Act to determine whether the policy objectives of the Act remain valid and whether the terms of the
Act remain appropriate for securing those objectives.
CJCs support placing the onus on the Minister to conduct a review of the Act after a set period of time.
Should a clause requiring periodic review be inserted in the CJC Act?
5.47 Many preliminary submissions noted that CJCs do not have a very high profile and suggested that something should be done about
The lack of awareness of CJCs and what they do may affect the take up rate of mediations when parties are referred to CJCs from other
There is probably not a legislative response that can force action, given that adequate publicity will depend on the availability
of resources. It is also possible that successful publicity might place too great a strain on resources if it were to lead to more
people seeking to resolve disputes through CJC mediations. The question needs to be asked whether CJCs would have the resources to
cope with increased demand caused by effective publicity.
5.48 It is also the case in the United States that public awareness of community mediation services is relatively low. Three reasons
have been suggested for this:
the media have paid little attention to them;
program caseloads have been relatively small so few members of the public get the opportunity to experience community mediation;
extensive public education campaigns have been rare.
Do CJCs need to raise their profile?
COMMUNITY JUSTICE CENTRES?
5.49 Some view the current nomenclature of “Community Justice Centres” as inappropriate. A number of problems can be identified
with the current terminology.
5.50 The term “Community Justice” does not adequately reflect the activities currently undertaken by CJCs.
CJC documentation now refers to its services as “mediation and conflict management services”. This description in intended
to cover the full range of mediation services presently offered by CJCs, including “facilitation, pre-mediation, dispute analysis,
dispute counselling, mediation and post-mediation”.
5.51 Some submissions have supported the retention of “Community Justice” because the term is grounded in the history
of the community mediation movement and refers to a system of informal justice as opposed to the formal justice system of the courts.
This is, however, an esoteric point. Potential users of the services of CJCs should not need an understanding of the background and
history of community mediation to understand what “Community Justice” denotes. If potential users or organisations do
not clearly understand what “Community Justice” entails they will often fail to refer appropriate cases.
The use of “Community Justice” does not, by itself, sufficiently distinguish itself from the formal justice system. Further,
the use of the word “Justice” may, in fact, lead some potential users to think of CJCs as part of the criminal justice
For example, a submission from the Department of Housing (based on responses from local client service teams) noted:
Whilst there is some awareness among [Department of Housing] clients about what the CJC does, the majority would appear to be unclear
This can cause problems when attempts are made to include groups who have not traditionally had a good experience in the formal criminal
justice system.
5.52 “Centres” are really part of an outmoded structure, when the model was more along the lines of 1970s style neighbourhood
centres. CJCs are no longer so locality based and now provide “services” to a range of clients.
Objections that the word “Centre” does not only refer to a “physical locale”
cannot be sustained by the plain meaning of the word.
5.53 An alternative might be “Community Mediation Services”. However, in Victoria it was noted that “Mediation”
in their Neighbourhood Mediation Centres was sometimes mistakenly taken to be “meditation” or “medication”.
5.54 Another alternative might be “Community Dispute (or Conflict) Management Services”. This is preferable to “Community
Dispute (or Conflict) Resolution Services” which could be seen as promising too much. Another proposal, “Community Mediation
and Conflict Management Service”
could be seen as too cumbersome.
5.55 Other preliminary submissions, however, expressed the view that the name should not be altered because CJCs already have a profile
and changing the name now would only cause confusion.
However, it must be noted that a large proportion of matters are referred by Local Courts (46%) and State and Local Government bodies
(24%). These government agencies are unlikely to be confused, or remain confused for long, by the name change of another government
agency. More information is required to assess what level of knowledge of CJCs the parties had in the 14% of matters that involved
self-referral.
(a) Should Community Justice Centres be renamed?
(b) If so, what should they be called?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 26 November 1980 at 3585. See also J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 25.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 16(2),
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 17(3).
Annual report 2001-2002
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 10.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Preliminary submission
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) Sch 1 cl 1(3).
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) Sch 1 cl 1(2).
Community Justice Centres (Pilot Project) Act 1980
(NSW) Sch 1 cl 1(2).
. CJCs Council,
Report to Legislation and Policy: review of the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(September 2001) at 3.
. See NSW Law Reform Commission,
Training and accreditation of mediators
(Report 67, 1991) at para 7.1-7.16.
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
Annual report 2001-2002
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
Annual report 2001-2002
Preliminary submission
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 88.
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Air Transport Act 1964
(NSW) s 2B(b).
Osteopaths Act 2001
. CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
. National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
A framework for ADR standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney General, 2001) at 88.
. See para 5.24-5.32 and para 6.12-6.13 below.
. CJCs Council,
Report to Legislation and Policy: review of the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(September 2001) at 5.
Preliminary submission
at 3. See also CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
. Para 6.24-6.30.
. J Hallinan,
Preliminary submission
. M S Dewdney,
Preliminary submission
. See NSW Law Reform Commission,
Training and accreditation of mediators
(Report 67, 1991) at para 4.8.
. Anti-Discrimination Board,
Preliminary submission
Annual report 2001-2002
Annual report 2001-2002
. See CJCs,
Annual report 2001-2002
. At para 6.12-6.13.
Professional Reference Group Charter
Professional Reference Group Charter
. See also CJCs Profession Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
at 1; CJCs,
Annual report 2001-2002
Professional Reference Group Charter
Professional Reference Group Charter
. See para 5.3-5.23 above.
Professional Reference Group Charter
Professional Reference Group Charter
. Information supplied by D Sharp, Director, CJCs (29 August 2003).
. CJCs Training Group,
Minutes of meeting
(3 June 2002).
Annual report 2001-2002
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 15.
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 16(1).
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 16(2).
. See CJCs,
Preliminary submission
. See CJCs,
Annual report 2001-2002
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 18 September 2001 at 16691.
Annual Report 2001-2002
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
at 1; Severn Shire Council,
Preliminary submission
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 22 November 1983 at 3023.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
. Subregional Group of Local Government Authorities (NE NSW),
Preliminary submission
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 20 April 1994 at 1417.
. See para 2.70-2.78 above.
Community Justice Centres (Pilot Project) Act 1980
(NSW) s 9. See also NSW,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 19 October 1983 at 1881.
. The proposals were never followed through. See W Faulkes, “The modern development of alternative dispute resolution in Australia”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
at 63-64; J Schwartzkoff and J Morgan,
Community Justice Centres: a report on the New South Wales pilot project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of NSW, 1982) at 9-10, 13, 31.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No 3) 1992
(NSW) Sch 1.
. Community Justice Centres,
Preliminary submission
at 1; CJCs Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 10(2).
Preliminary submission
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) s 17.
at 4; CJCs Professional Reference Group,
. For example, a formal tender relationship was entered with Warringah Council: CJCs,
Annual report 2000-2001
. Queensland, Department of Justice and Attorney General,
Annual report 2001-2002
. See NSW Law Reform Commission,
Training and accreditation of mediators
(Report 67, 1991) at para 6.36.
. City of Newcastle,
Preliminary submission
. Confidential 1,
Preliminary submission
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
. See, eg, D Oldfield,
Preliminary submission
Preliminary submission
. See especially: Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary submission
at 1; NSW Department of Housing,
Preliminary submission
at 2-4; G Barclay,
Preliminary submission
at 1; Wyong Shire Council,
Preliminary submission
; Blacktown City Council,
Preliminary submission
at 1; Orange City Council,
Preliminary submission
; Cessnock City Council,
Preliminary submission
; Subregional Group of Local Government Authorities (NE NSW),
Preliminary submission
; Severn Shire Council,
Preliminary submission
. NSW Department of Housing,
Preliminary submission
. See Ballina Shire Council,
Preliminary submission
. D McGillis,
Community mediation programs: developments and challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997) at 86-87.
. M S Dewdney,
Preliminary submission
Preliminary submission
. CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
at 1; J Hallinan,
Preliminary submission
. M S Dewdney,
Preliminary submission
. Cessnock City Council,
Preliminary submission.
. NSW Department of Housing,
Preliminary submission
. Coalition of Aboriginal Legal Services,
Preliminary submission
Preliminary submission
. J Hallinan,
Preliminary submission
at 1; CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
. Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 30 October 1990 at 1572.
at 1. See also M S Dewdney,
Preliminary submission
. CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
. CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
6. Services to Indigenous people
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of reference
Mediation and the needs of Indigenous people
Current provision
Indigenous CJCs
Liaison with Indigenous people
Representation on the CJCs Council
Inclusion in an objects clause?
TERMS OF REFERENCE
6.1 The terms of reference for this review include the requirement that the Commission consider:
Whether the current structure of Community Justice Centres
sufficiently meets the needs of the indigenous community of New South
This chapter considers the current and potential involvement of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the operation of
6.2 Some submissions suggested that if specific reference were to
be made to the needs of Indigenous people there would also need
recognition of other ethnic groups in order to avoid the appearance of
bias against these and other communities of interest.
view, however, ignores the fact that Indigenous people are the original
inhabitants of Australia and the particular history
of dispossession of
Indigenous people and inappropriate treatment by the justice system.
In many cases this requires a response that is different to that which
needs to be adopted for immigrant cultural, ethnic and other
groups. This is reflected in the four principles contained in the New
South Wales Attorney General’s Aboriginal Justice
1. Accepting that Aboriginal people know their own problems and
issues and that Aboriginal people are best situated to solve those
2. Actively encouraging and supporting local Aboriginal community
innovation which aims to address justice problems and concerns.
3. Recognising and respecting the significant cultural
diversity in the NSW Aboriginal communities and recognizing that each
has its own distinct problems and needs.
4. Acknowledging that crime in Aboriginal communities has a
deep set of underlying causes and that we share responsibility in
these causes.
The four overall aims of the Aboriginal Justice Agreement are:
1. To improve Aboriginal access to justice.
2. To improve the quality and relevance of justice that Aboriginal people receive.
3. To provide a framework for ongoing partnership between the
Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council and the Attorney General in
justice issues.
4. To allow Aboriginal people to take a leadership role and make key decisions in solving their own justice concerns.
It is therefore appropriate that the terms of reference
specifically identify the needs of the Indigenous community of New
South Wales
and that a separate chapter in this Issues Paper be devoted
to the issues arising.
AND THE NEEDS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
6.3 In light of the dispossession and oppression of Indigenous
people, the provision of mediation services to Indigenous communities
is important because it may allow for the resolution of disputes for
some Aboriginal people without recourse to the formal justice
There is the potential, within community mediation, for Indigenous
people to develop methods of resolving disputes that are appropriate
Indigenous culture and needs.
However, this is not to say
that community mediation currently does, or will, deal adequately with
Indigenous culture and needs.
Questions also arise as to
what type of government agency, if any, should be involved in helping
Indigenous people to develop methods
of mediation that are appropriate
to their culture and needs.
6.4 Commentators have highlighted the problems associated with
imposing the forms of mediation developed for the general community
a “solution” for Indigenous people:
A reading of anthropological and related literature in regard to
Australian Aboriginal studies leaves little doubt that the traditional
Aboriginal world views are ... ontologically and epistemologically
different; Aboriginal culture and non-Aboriginal Australian culture
their conceptualisation of how people relate to each other and how
people relate to the universe are fundamentally different.
therefore follow that a transplanted mainstream dispute resolution
process will not necessarily strike.
Put simply, it is possible, that Indigenous conceptions of
“mediation” may be vastly different to those accepted more
6.5 Particular adaptations may be necessary for mediation to work in Indigenous communities, for example, in the areas of:
voluntary participation, which may need to be reassessed in light
of the needs of the welfare of a particular community as opposed
those of particular individuals within it;
confidentiality of disputes, which may prove difficult to
achieve if a dispute becomes a multi-party dispute, involving family,
and other community members;
neutrality of mediators, which may be difficult to achieve if
the mediators come from the same community as the disputants, or if
mediator is expected to carry “moral authority” within the
relevant community;
the scope of matters appropriate for mediation, for example,
in some communities, issues of domestic violence may be suitable for
mediation, especially given the close-knit nature of some Indigenous
communities and also the unwillingness of some victims to seek
protection from the formal justice system (in light of the historical
experience of Indigenous people in the justice system).
6.6 This chapter is intended to provide the opportunity for Indigenous
people to respond to issues that are relevant to them. A number
general questions aimed at identifying the needs of Indigenous people
in mediation arise at this initial stage. These questions
intended to be taken in any way as being limited by the more specific
issues that are raised in the remainder of this chapter.
(a) What are the needs of Indigenous people in relation to the activities of CJCs?
(b) Are the services that are currently provided to Indigenous people by CJCs appropriate?
(c) How could CJCs better meet the needs of Indigenous people?
6.7 CJCs currently make some provision for the needs of Indigenous
people and communities, principally through their mediation and
training program and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander network.
This is consistent with one of CJCs’ “key objectives”
which is to provide:
Tailored services and programs which meet the needs of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander communities, people from culturally diverse
backgrounds, and people with disabilities.
Mediation and training program
6.8 In recognition of the fact that the usual recruitment and
training methods were not providing adequate services to Indigenous
people, CJCs have recently recruited and trained 15 Aboriginal
mediators in the CJCs’ northern region.
The training program was based on the CJCs’ basic mediation training
and was adapted for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, the
aim being to meet the needs of participants and provide culturally
appropriate mediation. The training was made possible by funding from
the Department of Community Services which was linked to an
that CJCs would mediate care and protection orders under the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Sixty percent of Department of Community Services clients in these cases are Indigenous people.
The Aboriginal mediators were accredited in May 2003 and are now mediating through the northern region CJC office.
6.9 This approach would appear to be similar to that which was
adopted in Queensland in 1992 when a program of mediation training
accreditation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people was
established. The program, which was based on the Dispute Resolution
Centres’ community justice program, was also adapted to the needs
of Indigenous people.
The aim was to train Indigenous people to go into the communities and mediate disputes.
Broader provision for Indigenous mediators
6.10 In addition to the 15 Aboriginal mediators working in the
northern region, there are also some other Indigenous mediators in
other CJC regions. However, more Indigenous mediators are needed in all
regions, not only to assist with disputes within Indigenous
communities
but also in situations where only one of the parties to a dispute is of
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander background.
The presence of
Indigenous mediators may help to counter such factors as historical and
structural power imbalances when non-Indigenous
people are also parties
to the mediation.
6.11 The need for mediators with Indigenous backgrounds was
highlighted by the Department of Housing’s submission. Responses
from their local client service teams suggested that a mediator with an
Indigenous background would be useful so that Indigenous
clients would
feel “supported”.
The Coalition of Aboriginal
Legal Services also emphasised the need to train mediators who reflect
the diversity of Indigenous communities
in the State, having regard to
age, sex, tribe, language and background.
The program in the northern region needs to be evaluated before consideration can be given to expanding the service.
What provision, if any, should be made to ensure there are adequate numbers of Indigenous mediators for CJCs?
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network
6.12 CJCs have established an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Network to advise the CJCs Directorate on matters concerning Indigenous
communities and mediation. The Network has no formal status within the
Attorney General’s Department. Membership of the Network
originally based on current status as a CJC mediator and
self-identification as an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person.
However, the requirement of self-identification has recently been
replaced by the three-part test required for Aboriginal Land Council
membership, namely, that the mediator must be:
a member of the Aboriginal race of Australia;
identify as an Aboriginal person; and
be accepted by the Aboriginal community as an Aboriginal person.
Members of the network elect a chairperson and a secretary annually.
Network members have a primary obligation to the self-determination and
well-being of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities
the Network.
6.13 The Network has undertaken a number of tasks, including:
“work on the design of the most appropriate model of service
delivery to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities”;
involvement in training programs for Indigenous staff of the Attorney General’s Department.
Is the CJCs Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network the best
mechanism for CJCs to identify and meet the needs of Indigenous
Other agencies
6.14 The New South Wales Legal Aid Commission has established an
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Family Mediation project. The
project has been operating in south west Sydney and Dubbo since April
2002. Each location has an Aboriginal field officer who provides
intake and promotion service. Twenty four mediators have been trained
for the program, 18 of whom are Indigenous.
6.15 The possibility of culturally-based community-specific CJCs
has been raised in recent years, in particular it has been suggested
that an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander CJC be established to
better meet the needs of Indigenous people.
commentator has suggested that “the Aboriginal community needs
more than to have programs of mediation ... which exist
dominant legal structures merely transferred into the Aboriginal
community with mediators who have had cultural training
so that they
are sensitive to Aboriginal concerns”.
6.16 One of the main questions that arises in the context of
such proposals is the extent to which an Indigenous CJC should be
on under the umbrella of a government department and the extent
to which it should be directed by Indigenous people themselves.
communities are clearly able to develop their own methods of
resolving disputes.
6.17 One commentator has observed that for Indigenous mediation projects to work:
it is vital that an approach other than a bureaucratic and
impersonal one be adopted. The literature is strewn with dismal
of impositions upon Aboriginal communities essentially telling
them what has been good for them. The present mode is to adopt an
extensive consultative approach requiring high levels of physical
endurance, patience and the ability to listen.
6.18 A separate CJC that specifically provides services to Indigenous
people and communities might also be desirable to provide a
any special adaptations that may need to be made to the general model
for CJCs in order to meet the needs of Indigenous
communities better.
6.19 Another commentator has suggested that it may be preferable to
attach mediation services to existing Indigenous community
infrastructure,
for example, Local Aboriginal Land Councils, community
justice programs and health and housing agencies.
6.20 At present, future directions with regards to Indigenous
CJCs will depend, in part, on an assessment of the current program
operated by the northern region CJC.
(a) Should Indigenous CJCs be established?
(b) If so, who should be involved in their operation and to what extent?
(c) What adaptations should be made to meet the needs of Indigenous people?
WITH INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
6.21 Rather than proceeding with developing Indigenous CJCs, it can
be argued that each of the current CJCs, organised as they are
geographic regions, should be equipped to provide services to, and meet
the needs of, Indigenous communities in their regions.
6.22 One approach would be to have staff dedicated to liaison
with Indigenous communities and people across the State. For example,
in 1994 CJCs employed an Aboriginal employment co-ordinator. The
co-ordinator was to be involved in statewide liaison with Aboriginal
communities and was intended to “involve Aboriginal communities
in all aspects of Community Justice Centre processes”.
roles of the position included:
analysis of the mediation recruitment process;
development of programs relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people;
community liaison and education;
preparation and development of cultural awareness training relevant to CJC mediators; and
representation of CJCs at meetings and conferences.
The co-ordinator was based in Sydney and was to “travel to
all key regions to ensure that the needs of Aboriginal communities
The position was active until September 1995 and was eventually terminated in 1998 due to budget cuts.
6.23 Even if a distinct Indigenous CJC were to be established, a
liaison officer would be a useful way of maintaining strong links
between the Indigenous and non-Indigenous services, so that each could
learn from the other.
How should CJCs liaise with Indigenous people and communities?
REPRESENTATION
ON THE CJCs COUNCIL
6.24 Indigenous representation is currently not provided for on the
CJCs Council. Assuming that a role is preserved for the CJCs Council,
the issue of the representation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people needs to be addressed. One submission has drawn
to this fact and suggested that such representation
“would further enhance the current focus on improving outcomes
for Aboriginal
people within the Criminal Justice agencies”.
There is currently specific provision for one Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander mediator in the CJCs’ Professional Reference
6.25 In New South Wales legislation an Aboriginal person is generally defined as follows:
Aboriginal person
means a person who:
(a) is a member of the Aboriginal race of Australia, and
(b) identifies as an Aboriginal person, and
(c) is accepted by the Aboriginal community as an Aboriginal person.
6.26 Appointing persons to represent Indigenous interests may help overcome systemic discrimination.
There are many precedents for the representation of Indigenous
interests on boards, councils and other government bodies established
by statute.
6.27 In some cases the provisions specify, amongst other necessary
qualifications, that the person must be an Aboriginal person or
Strait Islander. For example:
the Law and Justice Foundation Board must include four persons
“who have, in the opinion of the Attorney General, special
at least one of whom must be an Aboriginal person or
Torres Strait Islander;
the Boards of Management under Division 6 of
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
must consist of “at least 11, but not more than 13, members
appointed by the Minister with the concurrence of the Minister
administering the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
majority of whom “are to be Aboriginal owners of the lands
concerned nominated by themselves or by another Aboriginal
owner of the
lands with the consent of the nominee” the Minister having had
“regard to such matters as the gender of
the nominees and their
cultural affiliations and family groupings in an endeavour to ensure
that a representative group of members
is appointed”;
regional advisory committees under the
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
are to include “at least 2 Aboriginal persons” and such
other persons who, in the opinion of the Minister, have
qualifications
in any nine specified areas of expertise including “expertise in
Aboriginal Cultural Heritage”;
the Board of the Nature Conservation Trust must consist of ten
part-time members “at least one of whom must be an Aboriginal
the Jenolan Caves Reserve Trust Board is to include “2
members nominated by the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council, each
of the persons nominated being: (i) a person who is a member of a Local
Aboriginal Land Council in any area in which any of the Jenolan
Reserve Trust lands is located, or (ii) a person who is, in the opinion
of the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council, a traditional
in such an area”;
the Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Advisory Committee which
consists of “one member nominated by the New South Wales
Land Council and 10 other members appointed from the
(a) nominees of Aboriginal elders groups, (b) registered native
title claimants, (c) Aboriginal owners listed on the register under
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
management committees under the
Water Management Act 2000
must include at least two members who are “Aboriginal persons
appointed to represent the interests of Aboriginal persons”.
6.28 However, many of the statutory provisions leave open the
possibility of appointing a non-Indigenous person to represent
interests. For example, some provisions merely require that
the representative be nominated by an external person or body with a
particular interest in Indigenous people:
the Coastal Council must include “a person nominated by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs”;
the Fisheries Resource Conservation and Assessment Council is
to include “indigenous representatives” appointed by the
Minister following nominations sought from the New South Wales
Aboriginal Land Council;
the Geographical Names Board must include “a person nominated by the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council”;
the Marine Parks Advisory Council must include “one member to represent the interests of Aboriginal people”;
an Arbitration Panel under the
Mining Act 1992
“to consist of one or more members appointed by the Minister
after consultation with the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
Minister for Agriculture”;
the Native Vegetation Advisory Council and a Regional Vegetation Committee under the
Native Vegetation Conservation Act 1997
must include “2 representatives of Aboriginal interests nominated
by the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council”;
the Western Lands Advisory Council is to include two people
“to represent the interests of Aboriginal people, of whom one is
to be appointed on the nomination of the New South Wales Aboriginal
Land Council”;
the Youth Justice Advisory Committee is to have “a
representative nominated by the Aboriginal Justice Advisory
6.29 Finally, there are provisions which require that the
representative have a particular expertise or interest in issues
to Indigenous people. For example:
the Board of Studies should include (“as far as
practicable”) “at least one member who has professional
or demonstrated interest in Aboriginal education”;
the Marine and Estuarine Recreational Charter Management
Advisory Committee must include “a person who, in the opinion of
Minister, has expertise in Aboriginal culture”;
the Heritage Council must include six persons who “in
the opinion of the Minister, possess suitable qualifications, knowledge
and skills” relating to any nine specified areas of interest,
including “Aboriginal heritage”;
the National Parks and Wildlife Advisory Council is to include
one person “with expertise and experience in Aboriginal cultural
heritage conservation” and two persons “who are members of
the Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Advisory Committee and have
nominated by that Committee”.
6.30 The preferable approach may be to combine the qualifications of
expertise in the field of mediation together with the requirement
the representative be an Aboriginal person or Torres Strait Islander,
as is the case with the Law and Justice Foundation Board
and regional
advisory committees under the
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
(a) Should provision be made for the representation of Indigenous people on the CJCs Council?
(b) If so, what should the criteria be for such a representative?
IN AN OBJECTS CLAUSE?
6.31 In considering whether special provision needs to be made for
Indigenous people and communities in relation to the activities
CJCs, the question arises as to whether there should be specific
reference to the provision of services to Indigenous people in
objects clause. The answer to this question will depend on what is
determined as being the best way of providing mediation services
Indigenous people, including issues of Indigenous control of the
The principles contained in the NSW Attorney General’s Aboriginal Justice Agreement,
for example, could be adapted for inclusion in an objects clause.
Should reference be made, by way of an objects clause in the CJC
Act, to the provision of mediation services to Indigenous people
communities?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. CJCs Professional Reference Group,
Preliminary submission
at 8; J Hallinan,
Preliminary submission
. See, for example, L Behrendt,
Aboriginal dispute resolution: a step towards self-determination and community autonomy
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1995) at 41-50. See also NSW Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Aboriginal offenders
(Report 96, 2000) at para 1.6-1.17; J Lock,
The Aboriginal child placement principle
(NSWLRC RR 7, 1997) at para 2.2-2.32.
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council,
Aboriginal Justice Agreement
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council,
Aboriginal Justice Agreement
. L Behrendt,
Aboriginal dispute resolution: a step towards self-determination and community autonomy
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1995) at 51-72; H Astor and C Chinkin,
Dispute resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002) at 170.
. See H Astor, “Mediation initiatives and the needs of Aboriginal women” paper delivered at
Second International Mediation Conference: mediation and cultural diversity
(Adelaide, South Australia, 18-20 January 1996) at 3-4.
. See, eg, P R Grose, “Towards a better
tomorrow: a perspective on dispute resolution in Aboriginal communities
in Queensland”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
at 38; M Dodson, “Power and cultural difference in Native Title mediation” paper delivered at
Second International Mediation Conference: mediation and cultural diversity
(Adelaide, South Australia, 18-20 January 1996).
. See, eg, P R Grose, “Towards a better
tomorrow: a perspective on dispute resolution in Aboriginal communities
in Queensland”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
. P R Grose, “Towards a better tomorrow: a
perspective on dispute resolution in Aboriginal communities in
Queensland”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
. See also, for example, M Sauvé, “Mediation: towards an Aboriginal conceptualisation”
[1996] AboriginalLawB 17
(1996) 3(80)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
. Grose at 31-32.
. On the multi-party nature of Aboriginal dispute
management, see M Sauvé, “Mediation: towards an Aboriginal
conceptualisation”
[1996] AboriginalLawB 17
(1996) 3(80)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
. See M Sauvé, “Mediation: towards an Aboriginal conceptualisation”
[1996] AboriginalLawB 17
(1996) 3(80)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
at 10-11; L Behrendt,
Aboriginal dispute resolution: a step towards self-determination and community autonomy
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1995) at 63.
. Sauvé at 11-12.
Annual report 2001-2002
. Information supplied by D Sharp, Director, CJCs (25 August 2003).
. See para 3.5 and para 3.10 above.
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
. “Pathways to Australian Indigenous Dispute Settlement Forum” (2002) No 20
Legal Aid News
. Information supplied by D Sharp, Director, CJCs (4 September 2003).
. P R Grose, “Towards a better tomorrow: a
perspective on dispute resolution in Aboriginal communities in
Queensland”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
at 29. See also L Behrendt,
Aboriginal dispute resolution: a step towards self-determination and community autonomy
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1995) at 61-63.
. See, eg, M Dodson, “Power and cultural difference in Native Title mediation” paper delivered at
Second International Mediation Conference: mediation and cultural diversity
(Adelaide, South Australia, 18-20 January 1996); Behrendt at 64-65.
. NSW Department of Housing,
Preliminary submission
. Coalition of Aboriginal Legal Services,
Preliminary submission
. CJCs, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network,
(March 2003). See
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
Charter of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network
Charter of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Network
Annual report 2001-2002
Annual report 2001-2002
. “Pathways to Australian Indigenous Dispute Settlement Forum” (2002) No 20
Legal Aid News
Annual report 2001-2002
. L Behrendt,
Aboriginal dispute resolution: a step towards self-determination and community autonomy
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1995) at 6.
. Behrendt at 74.
. P R Grose, “Towards a better tomorrow: a
perspective on dispute resolution in Aboriginal communities in
Queensland”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
. See para 6.3-6.5 above.
. K M Hazlehurst, “Resolving conflict:
dispute settlement mechanisms for Aboriginal communities and
neighbourhoods” (1988)
Australian Journal of Social Issues
309 at 312.
. See para 6.8 above.
. Information provided by C Starkis, former CJCs Aboriginal employment co-ordinator (5 September 2003).
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 19 April 1994 at 1324.
. Information provided by C Starkis, former CJCs Aboriginal employment co-ordinator (5 September 2003).
. NSW Police,
Preliminary submission
. See para 5.29 above.
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
This definition is also adopted in exact terms or by reference in other statutes:
Aboriginal Housing Act 1998
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Fisheries Management Act 1994
Law and Justice Foundation Act 2000
(NSW) Sch 1 cl 1.
. See also para 3.20 and 3.64 above.
Law and Justice Foundation Act 2000
(NSW) Sch 1 cl 2.
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
(NSW) Sch 8 cl 1(2).
Nature Conservation Trust Act 2001
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
(NSW) s 58ZA.
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
(NSW) Sch 9 cl 1(2).
Water Management Act 2000
s 13(1)(e).
Coastal Protection Act 1979
(NSW) s 9(2)(j).
Fisheries Management Act 1994
(NSW) s 228A(2)(f);
Fisheries Management (General) Regulation 2002
(NSW) cl 344.
Geographical Names Act 1966
Marine Parks Act 1997
s 32(2)(d).
Mining Act 1992
Native Vegetation Conservation Act 1997
s 54(3)(e).
Western Lands Act 1901
s 8B(2)(c).
Young Offenders Regulation 1997
(NSW) cl 5(b).
Education Act 1990
(NSW) Sch 1 cl 3(c).
Fisheries Management (General) Regulation 2002
(NSW) cl 318(3)(b).
Heritage Act 1977
s 8(2)(b)(i).
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
(NSW) Sch 7 cl 1(2)(c) and (m).
. See para 6.3-6.6 above.
. See para 6.2 above.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
Appendix A: Preliminary submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Anti-Discrimination Board of NSW, 21 February 2003
Ballina Shire Council, 17 January 2003
Barclay, Gay, 19 March 2003
Bega Valley Shire Council, 10 January 2003
Blacktown City Council, 3 February 2003
Byron Shire Council, 17 February 2003
Cessnock City Council, 10 January 2003
Coalition of Aboriginal Legal Services, 15 January 2003
Community Justice Centres (NSW), 11 April 2003
Confidential 1, 4 April 2003
Coonamble Shire Council, 18 February 2003
Deniliquin Council, 24 January 2003
Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care (NSW), 11 February 2003
Department of Corrective Services (NSW), 31 January 2003
Department of Fair Trading (NSW), 10 February 2003
Department of Housing (NSW), 17 March 2003
Department of Local Government (NSW), 10 February 2003
Fairfield City Council, 3 January 2003
Glachan, Ian, MP, 28 January 2003
Hallinan, Janet, 30 March 2003
Hornsby Shire Council, 12 February 2003
Laginha, Ed, 31 March 2003
Lake Macquarie, City of, 3 March 2003
Law Society of New South Wales, 8 April 2003
Micheline Sarah Dewdney, 25 March 2003
Newcastle, City of, 11 February 2003
Oldfield, David, MLC, 21 January 2003
Ombudsman (NSW), 30 January 2003
Orange City Council, 30 January 2003
Penrith City Council, 24 January 2003
Pezzutti, Brian, MP, 22 January 2003
Pittwater Council, 5 February 2003
Police (NSW), 24 March 2003
Price, John C, 28 January 2003
Professional Reference Group, Community Justice Centres, 31 March 2003
Richmond Valley Council, 22 January 2003
Saliba, Marianne MP, 8 May 2003
Seaton, Peta, MP, 23 January 2003
Severn Shire Council, 14 April 2003
Sham-Ho, Helen, MLC, 28 January 2003
Subregional Group of Local Government Authorities (NE NSW), 8 April 2003
Weddin Shire Council, 7 February 2003
Wollongong City Council, 25 February 2003
Wyong Shire Council, 28 February 2003
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
Table of legislation
History of this Reference (Digest)
COMMONWEALTH
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Act 1975
s 19K ... 4.19
s 19M ... 4.19
s 19N ... 4.28
Family Law Regulations 1984
reg 66, reg 67 ... 4.19
Family Law Rules 1984
O 25A r 5 ... 2.23
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
NEW SOUTH WALES
Aboriginal Housing Act 1998
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983
Administrative Changes (Departments) Order 1995
cl 8 ... 1.22
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Agricultural Tenancies Act 1990
Div 3 ... 1.34
Air Transport Act 1964
s 2B(b) ... 5.15
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Associations Incorporation Regulation 1999
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Coastal Protection Act 1979
s 9(2)(j) ... 6.28
Community Justice Centres (Pilot Project) Act 1980 ... 1.17, 5.1
s 9 ... 5.38
Sch 1 cl 1(2) ... 5.8
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
... 1.1, 1.17, 5.1
... 2.3, 3.10
... 1.20, 4.5
s 10 ... 1.21, 5.6
s 10(2) ... 5.40
... 1.21, 3.10
s 12 ... 1.21, 3.23
s 12(2) ... 3.25
s 15 ... 1.22, 5.33
s 16 ... 1.22
s 16(1) ... 5.33
s 16(2) ... 5.4, 5.33
s 17 ... 1.22, 5.41
s 17(3) ... 5.4
... 1.22, 5.6, 5.40
... 2.2, 2.11
... 3.43, 5.4
... 1.23, 2.2
... 3.43, 5.4
... 2.20, 5.4
... 2.46, 3.62
s 25 ... 1.23, 2.56
... 1.24, 5.3, 5.46
... 4.26, 4.29
Sch 1 cl 1 ... 5.7
Community Land Management Act 1989
Div 2 ... 1.34
Community Relations Commission and Principles of Multiculturalism Act 2000
Compensation Court Act 1984
-(3) ... 4.25
-(6) ... 4.27
... 1.33, 4.14
Conciliators Appointment Bill 1881 ... 1.16
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
Div 2 ... 1.33
Courts Legislation (Mediation and
Evaluation) Amendment Act 1994 ... 1.19, 1.33, 4.14
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Crimes Act 1900
... 4.9, 4.13
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Disability Services Act 1993
District Court Act 1973
s 164A, s 164B ... 2.39
s 164E(5) ... 3.53
s 164F(1)-(3) ... 4.25
s 164F(4)-(6) ... 4.27
s 164G ... 1.33, 4.14
s 164H ... 4.3
Dividing Fences Act 1991
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989
Education Act 1990
Sch 1 cl 3(c) ... 6.29
Evidence Act 1995
Family Provision Act 1982
Farm Debt Mediation Act 1994
Fisheries Management (General) Regulation 2002
cl 318(3)(b) ... 6.29
cl 344 ... 6.28
Fisheries Management Act 1994
s 228A(2)(f) ... 6.28
Geographical Names Act 1966
Heritage Act 1977
s 8(2)(b)(i)
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
s 61A ... 2.32
s 61I(1)-(3) ... 4.25
s 61I(4)-(6) ... 4.27
s 61J ... 1.33, 4.14
s 61K ... 4.3
Law and Justice Foundation Act 2000
Sch 1 cl 1 ... 6.25
Sch 1 cl 2 ... 6.27
Legal Aid Commission Act 1979
... 1.19, 1.34
... 1.33, 4.14
Legal Practitioner (Amendment) Act 1987
Sch 1 ... 3.19
Legal Profession Act 1987
Div 4 ... 1.34
Legal Profession Regulation 2002
cl 142 ... 3.19, 3.20
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
-(3) ... 4.25
-(6) ... 4.27
... 1.33, 4.14
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Rules 1988
rule 8(2)(b) ... 2.33
Local Government Act 1993
Marine Parks Act 1997
Mining Act 1992
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974
Div 6 ... 6.27
Sch 7 cl 1(2) ... 6.29
Sch 8 cl 1(2), Sch 9 cl 1(2) ... 6.27
Native Vegetation Conservation Act 1997
Nature Conservation Trust Act 2001
Ombudsman Act 1974
Sch 1 cl 18 ... 4.20
Optometrists Act 2002
Osteopaths Act 2001
... 3.52, 5.15
Public Sector Management Act 1988
... 3.23, 3.26, 3.29
Residential Parks Act 1998
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No 3) 1992
Sch 1 ... 5.38
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
Supreme Court Act 1970
s 110H ... 2.32
s 110K ... 2.32, 2.39
s 110L ... 2.39, 2.43
s 110O(5) ... 3.53
s 110P(1)-(3) ... 4.25
s 110P(4)-(6) ... 4.27
s 110Q ... 1.33, 4.14
s 110R ... 4.3
Vocational Education and Training Accreditation Act 1990
Water Management Act 2000
Western Lands Act 1901
Young Offenders Regulation 1997
cl 5(b) ... 6.28
Courts of Conciliation Act 1892 ... 1.14
s 14 ... 1.16
Courts Reform Amendment Act 1997
Part 5 ... 2.40, 4.36
s 34 ... 4.36
s 35 ... 4.14
Dispute Resolution Centres Act 1990
... 1.27, 5.12
s 34 ... 4.14
Ombudsman Act 2001
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
District Court Act 1991
Magistrates Court Act 1991
Supreme Court Act 1935
Evidence Act 1958
s 21K ... 1.29
s 21L ... 4.28
s 21L-21N ... 1.29
s 21M ... 4.14
s 21N ... 4.4
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 1996
r 50.07(6) ... 4.28
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Declaration of Standards of Competency, Instrument No 65 of 2000 ... 3.34
Mediation Act 1997
... 1.30, 4.28
... 1.30, 4.14
s 10(2)(d)(ii)
... 1.30, 4.25
... 1.30, 4.4
UNITED STATES
New Jersey Court Rules 1969
r 1:40-3(b) ... 2.9
r 1:40-4(c) ... 4.16
r 1:40-4(f)(1) ... 2.47
r 1:40-4(f)(1)(B) ... 3.62
r 1:40-4(f)(2) ... 2.47
r 1:40-8(a) ... 2.21
r 1:40-12(b)(3) ... 3.18
Ohio Revised Code
�2317.023(D) ... 4.31
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
Table of cases
History of this Reference (Digest)
Aiton Australia Pty Ltd v Transfield Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 996
(1999) 153 FLR 236
... 2.43, 2.44
AWA Ltd v Daniels (1992) 7 ACSR 463 ... 4.26, 4.30
AWA Ltd v Daniels (NSW SC, No 50271/1991, Rolfe J, 18 March 1992, unreported) ... 4.30
Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia Ltd v Cassegrain
[2002] NSWSC 940
Gain v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(1997) 42 NSWLR 252
... 2.44, 4.32
Lukies v Ripley (No 2)
(1994) 35 NSWLR 283
at 289 ... 4.26
State Bank of New South Wales v Freeman (NSW SC, No 12670/1995, Badgery-Parker J, 31 January 1996, unreported) ... 2.44
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 23 (2003) - Community Justice Centres
Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
“Neighbourhood mediation service pilot”
Law Institute Journal
“Pathways to Australian Indigenous Dispute Settlement Forum” (2002) No 20
Legal Aid News
“Society adopts charter on mediation practice”
(1997) 35(11)
Law Society Journal
“The Law Society of NSW Charter on mediation practice: A guide to the rights and responsibilities of participants”
(1997) 35(11)
Law Society Journal
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION,
Report of Pound Conference Follow-up Task Force
ASTOR, H and CHINKIN, C,
Dispute Resolution in Australia
(2nd edition, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2002)
ASTOR, H, “Mediation initiatives and the needs of Aboriginal women” paper delivered at
Second International Mediation Conference: Mediation and Cultural Diversity
(Adelaide, South Australia, 18-20 January 1996)
Quality in Court Connected Mediation Programs: An Issues Paper
(Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, 2001)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY, Community Services and Health Industry Training Advisory Board,
ACT Competency Standards for Mediators
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Review of the Adversarial System of Litigation: ADR-Its Role in Federal Dispute Resolution
(Issues Paper 25, 1998)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
(Discussion Paper 62, 1999)
BEHRENDT, L,
Aboriginal Dispute Resolution: A step towards self-determination and community autonomy
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1995)
Mediation: Principles, Process Practice
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1996)
CARROLL, R, “Mediator Immunity in Australia”
[2001] SydLawRw 8
Sydney Law Review
CORBYN, C A,
Sydney Revels (The Eighteen-Fifties) of Bacchus, Cupid, and Momus
(Ure Smith, Sydney, 1970)
DODSON, M, “Power and cultural difference in Native Title mediation” paper delivered at
Second International Mediation Conference: Mediation and Cultural Diversity
(Adelaide, South Australia, 18-20 January 1996)
DUNNE, B, “Community Justice Centres: A Critical Appraisal”
Legal Service Bulletin
FAULKES, W, “The Dispute Resolution Industry – Defining the Industry and Establishing Competencies”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
FAULKES, W and CLAREMONT, R, “Community Mediation: Myth and Reality”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
FAULKES, W, “Pursuing the Best Ends by the Best Means”
Australian Law Journal
FAULKES, W, “Runs on the Mediation Scoreboard”
Law Institute Journal
FAULKES, W, “The Modern Development of Alternative Dispute Resolution in Australia”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
GROSE, P R, “Towards a better tomorrow: A perspective on dispute resolution in Aboriginal communities in Queensland”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
HARRIS, W, “Consumer Disputes and Alternative Dispute Resolution”
(1993) 4(3)
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
HAZLEHURST, K M, “Resolving conflict: Dispute settlement mechanisms for Aboriginal communities and neighbourhoods” (1988)
Australian Journal of Social Issues
HUNTER, R, “Adversarial Mythologies: Policy Assumptions and Research Evidence in Family Law” (2003) 30
Journal of Law and Society
LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
Mediation and Evaluation Information Kit
The Aboriginal Child Placement Principle
(NSWLRC RR 7, 1997)
McGILLIS, D,
Community Mediation Programs: Developments and Challenges
(US National Institute of Justice, 1997)
McROBERT, C, “Mediation in Local Courts: An Alternative to Contested Hearings”
(1990) 28(11)
Law Society Journal
MEAGHER, R P,
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane’s Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(4th edition, Butterworths, 2002)
MERRY, S E, “Going to Court: Strategies of Dispute Management in an American Urban Neighborhood” (1979) 13
Law and Society
NATIONAL ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION ADVISORY COUNCIL,
A Framework for ADR Standards
(Report to the Commonwealth Attorney-General, 2001)
NATIONAL ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION ADVISORY COUNCIL,
ADR Terminology: A Discussion Paper
NATIONAL ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION ADVISORY COUNCIL,
Alternative Dispute Resolution Definitions
NATIONAL ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION ADVISORY COUNCIL,
Primary Dispute Resolution in Family Law
(A Report to the Attorney-General on Part 5 of the Family Law Regulations, 1997)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Apprehended Violence Orders: Review of
(Report 103, 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Community Law Reform Program: Dividing Fences
(Report 59, 1988)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
(Report 75, 1995)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Section 316
Crimes Act 1900
(Report 93, 1999)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
(Report 96, 2000)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Training and Accreditation of Mediators
(Report 67, 1991)
NEW SOUTH WALES, Attorney General’s Department,
Regulatory Impact Statement:
Legal Profession Regulation 2002
PEARSON, J, “Evaluation of Alternatives to Court Adjudication”
Justice System Journal
ROBERTS, S, “Three Models of Family Mediation” in R Dingwall and J Eekelaar (ed),
Divorce Mediation and the Legal Process
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1998)
SAUV�, M, “Mediation: towards an Aboriginal conceptualisation”
[1996] AboriginalLawB 17
(1996) 3(80)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
SCHWARTZKOFF, J and MORGAN, J,
Community Justice Centres: A Report on the New South Wales Pilot Project, 1979-81
(Law Foundation of New South Wales, 1982)
SIMPSON, J, “Guarded Participation: Alternative Dispute Resolution and People with Disabilities” (unpublished report on
a research project carried out with funding from the Law and Justice Foundation of NSW, 2002)
STREET, L, “Mediation and the Judicial Institution”
Australian Law Journal
THORNTON, M, “Equivocations of conciliation: the resolution of discrimination complaints in Australia”
Modern Law Review
TILBURY, M, NOONE, M and KERCHER, B,
Remedies: Commentary and Materials
(2nd edition, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1993)
UNITED KINGDOM COLLEGE OF FAMILY MEDIATORS,
Competence assessment for family mediators:
portfolio guidelines, specification and template
(effective from 1 January 2003)
WILLIAMS, J, “Community Justice Centres: Marking 10 Years of Service”
(1990) 28(11)
Law Society Journal
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter