URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTLRC/2003/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Substitute Parentage Agreements [2003] ACTLRC 20
SUBSTITUTE PARENTAGE AGREEMENTS
INTRODUCTION
THE EMERGENCE OF SURROGACY ARRANGEMENTS
ATTITUDES TO SUBSTITUTE PARENTAGE AGREEMENTS
ATTITUDES TO LEGISLATIVE INTERVENTION
THE SUBSTITUTE PARENT AGREEMENTS ACT
SHOULD SUBSTITUTE PARENT AGREEMENTS BE PROHIBITED?
THE ARTIFICIAL CONCEPTION ACT
ISSUES RELATING TO CHILDREN BORN DUE TO ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION OR IVF
ISSUES RELATING TO SUBSTITUTE PARENT AGREEMENTS
RECOMMENDATIONS
A.C.T. Law Reform Commission
SUBSTITUTE PARENTAGE AGREEMENTS
Report No. 20
December 2003
INTRODUCTION
In May 2000, the ACT Supreme Court heard an application for a declaration that Debra and Shane Ryan were the parents of a little boy
named Hamish who was then approaching his second birthday. He was clearly their biological child in the sense that he had been
conceived from an egg provided by Debra and fertilised by Shane’s sperm. However, his birth was the product of a surrogacy
arrangement. Sharon Ryan, who was married to Shane’s brother Brendan, became pregnant as a result of the implantation of the
fertilised egg and carried Hamish until his birth.
There was no suggestion that Sharon had entered into this arrangement as a result of coercion or pressure. On the contrary,
the arrangement to have a child in this manner had been suggested by Sharon and Brendan. Furthermore, both couples had
proceeded responsibly, discussing the matter at length and then receiving appropriate counselling before agreeing
to proceed. Debra was admitted to hospital with Sharon and was present for Hamish’s birth. She and Shane then
took him home and proceeded to care for him as his parents. When the matter came to court Sharon and Brendan confirmed
that they related to Hamish as aunt and uncle and supported Debra and Shane’s contention that they should be declared Hamish’s
For practical as well as emotional reasons, the Court was satisfied that it would have been in Hamish’s best interests to grant
the declaration and have Hamish’s birth registration records amended to reflect the fact that Debra and Shane were his parents.
However, that was prevented by the terms of
Artificial Conception Act 1985
which was then in the following terms:
(1) Where a married woman has, with the consent of her husband undergone a procedure as a result of which she has become
(a) her husband shall, for all purposes, be conclusively presumed to be the father of any child born as a result of the pregnancy;
(b) if any of the semen used in the procedure was produced by a man other than the woman’s husband – that man shall, for
all purposes, be conclusively presumed not to be the father of any child born as a result of the pregnancy.
(2) In any proceedings in which the operation of subsection (1) is relevant, the consent of a husband to the carrying
out of a procedure in respect of his wife shall be presumed, but that presumption is rebuttable.
Conversely,
provided that:
Where a woman has undergone a procedure as a result of which she has become
(a) the woman shall, for all purposes, be conclusively presumed to
be the mother of any child born as a result of the pregnancy;
(b) if the ovum used in the procedure was produced by another woman
– that other woman shall, for all purposes, be conclusively presumed
not to be the mother of any child born as a result of the
Since the presumptions created by
were conclusive rather than rebuttable, the Court was bound to accept that the woman who gave birth to the child was his mother and
that her husband was his father, regardless of all other considerations. Accordingly, the Court was bound to refuse the application.
In doing so, the court observed that:
The conclusions which I am compelled to reach will please no one. Sharon and
Brendan do not wish to be regarded as Hamish’s
parents. Sharon
gave birth to him and she and Brendan no doubt love him but they always intended
that he would be the child of Debra
and Shane. What they have done has
reflected outstanding compassion and generosity of spirit. Yet, regrettably, I
am unable to
respect their wishes by making the declaration and order
sought. On the other hand, there are compelling reasons to regard
and Shane as Hamish’s parents. Debate as to who may be considered a
child’s “real” parents usually
involves the competing views
that it is those who provided the genetic inheritance or those who provide the
parental nurture, love
and attention. In the present case, Debra and Shane have
provided both. Yet the intractable terms of the statute compel me to
against their wishes and contrary to undisputed facts, that Sharon and Brendan
are Hamish’s parents and
Debra and Shane are not.
Accordingly, Debra and Shane will be forced to make an application to
adopt their own
child. This is obviously a most unsatisfactory
The Court also noted that whilst other statutes concerned with parentage or custody of children provided that the welfare
of the child should be the paramount consideration, there is nothing in the
Artificial Conception Act
which permitted a judge to even take the child’s welfare into account.
Fortunately, the case had a happy ending. Section 11 of the Act was subsequently amended to permit a parentage
order to be made if the Court was satisfied that the making of the order was in the best interests of the child and that both “birth
parents freely, and with a full understanding of what is involved agree to the making of the order”. The parties reapplied
and on 13 December 2000 orders were made that Shane and Debra “be” the parents of Hamish and that the birth registration
records be amended to reflect the fact.
However, the case provided a further catalyst for reflection on important questions relating to children born as a result of
surrogacy arrangements. Much of the discussion about this area of the law has related to issues about whether surrogacy
agreements should be prohibited, at least when they have been commercially motivated, and whether adequate steps have
been taken to prevent the exploitation of people who might agree to bear a child for others due to coercion or emotional
manipulation. These are issues of vital importance and in this Territory the
Substitute Parent Agreements Act 1994
prohibits entry in commercial surrogacy agreements and certain other acts intended to procure even non-commercial surrogacy agreements.
There has been considerable debate as to the need for or adequacy of these provisions. There has also been debate about
how to ensure that the interests of children like Hamish are appropriately recognised and protected.
In 1997 the ACT Community Law Reform Commission, which was the Commission’s predecessor, provided a report to the then Attorney-General,
Gary Humphries MLA, but the legislation remained substantially unamended. However, the Ryan case and a subsequent case arising from
a similar situation generated further debate concerning the relevant issues and on 27 June 2002 the present Attorney-General,
Jon Stanhope MLA, authorised the Commission:
TO REVIEW the law in force in the Territory in regard to substitute parent
agreements AND TO REPORT on desirable changes concerning
the existing law and
practise of this law.
In making its review and report the Commission will consider:
(a) the need for, and desirability of, the current restrictions on
substitute parent agreements in the Substitute Parent
Agreements Act
(b) the need for, and desirability of, parentage orders under
Artificial Conception Act 1985
(c) whether these laws properly take account of the interests of all parties
In making its review and report the Commission is to have regard to any views
of government agencies, the community and individuals
on the subject matter of
this reference.
The Commission is to report on this reference by 1 October
The Commission duly embarked upon a research program and proceeded to consider the relevant issues. A discussion paper
was prepared in June 2003 though its distribution was inadvertently delayed and, when it was released, some interested parties
sought further time to respond. Submissions were received until mid October 2003.
In providing this Report, the Commission acknowledges the debt of gratitude it owes to those who made formal submissions
and others who were willing to discuss relevant issues privately. However, the views expressed are, of course, those of the
Commission.
The Commission has not understood that the scope of the issues covered by this reference extended to any question of the adequacy
of laws regulating the use of artificial reproductive technology for the purpose of enabling women to bear children that
they and their partners intend to raise. The focus of this report is the law governing the parenthood of children whose conception
was facilitated with the intention that they would be raised not by the birth mother but by others.
Furthermore, whilst the
Parentage Bill 2003
has recently been presented to the Legislative Assembly, the Commission’s terms of reference have not
been extended to authorise it to embark upon any analysis of its terms and the Commission has taken the view
that it should base this report upon an examination of the existing law. It may be noted, however, that the section
11 of the Bill would, if enacted, maintain the conclusive presumption that the birth mother is the mother of the child
presently provided by
Artificial Conception Act
, section 26 would continue to require the consent of both birth parents to any parentage order unless dead, incapacitated
or unable to be contacted and sections 40 to 44 would provide for substantially the same offences as those presently created
by sections 5 to 8 of the
Substitute Parent Agreements Act
THE EMERGENCE OF SURROGACY ARRANGEMENTS
Surrogacy arrangements have existed for many centuries. The most famous is probably that which is said to have resulted in
Hagar bearing a son, Ishmael, for Abraham and his wife, Sarai.
Some forms of surrogacy seem to have occurred within many cultures at various times throughout human history and it has been suggested
that such practices are culturally determined.
It certainly appears that Native American, West African and Pacific Island societies adopt practices which involve children growing
up in different households. In Queensland the Torres Strait Islander community exercises a form of traditional giving
and receiving of children (formerly known as Torres Strait Islander traditional adoption) as part of their child rearing practices.
This gives infertile couples opportunities to raise children and is thought to strengthen alliances between families.
Even artificial insemination appears to have been practised for about a century.
It is only the availability of in vitro fertilisation (IVF) and other reproductive technologies that is new. However,
the development of those technologies has occurred at a time of declining birth rates, at least in the developed countries,
and a paucity of children becoming available for adoption. The first infant was conceived from IVF in the United States in
1983. Since then, the use of IVF and related procedures (including intracytoplasmic sperm injection and pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis) has increased substantially. The incidence of substitute parent agreements in Australia is not known but as early as 1988
the NSW Law Reform Commission stated that:
We believe we have enough evidence, from media reports and submissions made
to us, to indicate that surrogacy has been practised regularly
in this State in
recent years. We believe that it will continue to be practised to some extent
whatever measures are introduced into
Yet, as Anita Stuhmcke has pointed out
, surrogacy now presents western societies with issues that would not have been thought possible 20 years ago. The
internet has been used to find women willing to bear children for both heterosexual and homosexual couples, baby
making has plainly been seen by some as a potentially profitable enterprise, women have given birth to their own grandchildren
and there has been an inevitable splitting of the concepts of biological, social and legal parentage. Perhaps even more
startling, developments in medical technologies such as cytoplasmic
egg donation now permit a woman to have donor cytoplasm injected into her own eggs or those of another donor and,
as a consequence, a child to be conceived from biological material contributed by
3 separate people.
The existence of such technology and the use of substitute parent agreements together create a potential for a child to
be born to a small group of people, each of whom could legitimately claim to have made some biological or gestational
contribution to the creation of his or her life.
ATTITUDES TO SUBSTITUTE PARENTAGE
Discussion about substitute parent agreements has sometimes been featured in the national press, usually because public attention
has been captured by some well publicised event such as the occasion in August 1996 when a baby girl was born in the ACT as a result
of in vitro fertilisation of gametes from a commissioning couple. This pattern has been repeated overseas. The most recent example
is probably the report in “Japan Today” on 10 December 2003 that an American woman had given birth to twin
boys on behalf of a Japanese television personality, Aki Mukai, who had earlier been forced to have a hysterectomy due
to cancer while pregnant, and her husband, Nobuhiko Takada, a former professional wrestler.
The ethical implications of such agreements have sometimes been fiercely debated, with trenchant supporters and vehement
opponents trading arguments relating to the welfare of children born as a result of such agreements, issues about
whether they are inevitably exploitative of the birth mothers, and questions about whether they are ultimately contrary to the interests
of women generally or society as a whole.
Those opposing such agreements have sometimes expressed a deep revulsion at the entire concept, suggesting that it involves
playing God and ignoring the importance of traditional family structures and belief systems that have undergirded social order
for millennia. It has also been suggested that support for any form of surrogacy presupposes that children may be treated
as tradeable commodities.
On the other hand, sentiments of this kind tend to outrage both infertile couples desperate to experience the joys of parenthood and
women who have endured a full term pregnancy to give life to a child who would not otherwise have been born. It is sometimes argued
that the debate is really about whether the potential for new life should be withheld from those who want a child but are unable
to conceive one through normal means.
It has also been contended that children are at risk of psychological harm due to being placed in socially constructed family relationships
rather than those that are perceived to be more natural. Some commentators have suggested that the experience must be akin
to that of adopted children and point to cases in which children taken from their birth mothers for that purpose have suffered real
anguish. Others counter that adoption is usually in the child’s best interests and point to many “success
stories”. Yet others suggest that the comparison is simply invalid. A child born pursuant to a substitute parent agreement
is the biological child of the commissioning parents. Furthermore, such a child has been planned and wanted.
Opponents of the agreements frequently protest that they necessarily involve the exploitation of women. They suggest that birth
mothers may participate only because of financial or emotional coercion or manipulation and may suffer considerable
trauma as a consequence. Supporters argue that arguments of this kind are based upon a misguided assumption that potential birth
mothers cannot be trusted to make responsible decisions about their own lives and that women should be free to do what
they wish with their own bodies.
Supporters also argue that everyone should have the right to parenthood and that it should not be denied to some merely because they
are infertile. Arguments of this kind have recently achieved some prominence following a well publicised case in which a lesbian
couple successfully challenged laws purporting to restrict the availability of IVF procedures to heterosexual couples. The
case did not directly address the question of surrogacy but did involve important issues as to whether people who were unable to
have children by “natural” means might nonetheless claim a right to become parents.
There has been some discussion about the effect of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
which states that: "all children have the right to be cared for by their parents" and requires nations to "respect the right of
the child to preserve his or her identity, including nationality, name and family relations". However, these provisions
have not been seen as having any restrictive effect in relation to adoptions and there does not appear to be any reason
to construe them as preventing substitute parent agreements. The provisions do not address the potentially decisive question
of who are the child’s real parents. Nonetheless, advertence to the terms of the convention may provide a
useful reminder of the obligations of signatory nations to uphold the rights of children. It may be thought that those rights
include the proposition, reflected in other domestic laws of Australia, that in determining any question of parentage
or custody, the interests of the child should be paramount. Furthermore, whatever position is ultimately taken in
relation to substitute parent agreements, children should not be left in a situation in which there is a potential
uncertainty with respect to their parentage and related rights.
ATTITUDES TO LEGISLATIVE INTERVENTION
Anita Stuhmcke has suggested that there has been a growing legislative approval of altruistic surrogacy
and there does appear to have been at least some amelioration of the proscriptive approach previously adopted
in the United Kingdom and Australia. In considering the evolution of community attitudes and legislative policy, however,
it is important to bear in mind there has been a significant shift in focus from procedures undertaken for the purpose
of enabling childless women to bear children with the intention that they would be raised by them and their husbands or partners
and those undertaken for the purpose of enabling the children to be brought into the world so that they might be raised by
Following a report of the Warnock Committee in 1985, the United Kingdom enacted the first legislation in the world directed
to dealing with issues relating to surrogacy. The
Surrogacy Agreements Act 1985
, which is still in force, prohibits commercial surrogacy and advertising in respect of such arrangements but does not purport to
restrict or regulate altruistic surrogacy. In 1990 the
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act
was enacted and the
Surrogacy Agreements Act
was amended to make it clear surrogacy agreements were unenforceable. In 1994 the
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990
was amended to permit couples to apply for parentage orders recognising them as the legal parents of children born as
a result of a surrogacy arrangement. However, there are strict conditions, including a requirement that no money must have
changed hands other than for reasonable expenses.
In 1998 a committee chaired by Professor Brazier made a number of recommendations, including the provision of a central registration
point for non-profit agencies involved in surrogacy arrangements and the adoption of a code of practice.
The NSW Law Reform Commission has published a number of reports, including “Artificial Conception – Human Artificial
Insemination” in 1986, “Artificial Conception – Surrogate Motherhood” in 1988
and “Review of the
Adoption of Children Act 1965
(NSW)” in 1997. The 1988 report included recommendations that surrogacy should be discouraged, commercial surrogacy
and advertising relating to surrogacy prohibited, agreements rendered void, and surrogate mothers conclusively presumed to be the
mothers of any children born as a result of such arrangements. The 1997 report included a recommendation that legislation should
neither specifically prohibit nor specifically allow commissioning parents to adopt a child born of a surrogacy arrangement.
There have been three inquiries in Western Australia concerning surrogacy. The first, conducted by the IVF Ethics Committee,
reported in October 1986,
recommending that "surrogacy should at this time not be permitted or recognised as an acceptable procedure for the alleviation
of infertility."
The second, conducted by the Western Australian Reproductive Technology Working Party
reported in 1988, recommending the prohibition of both altruistic and commercial surrogacy. The third, conducted by a Select
Committee on
Human Reproductive Technology Act 1991
, reported in 1999, stating that it had “considered the question of surrogacy based upon humanitarian
grounds and acknowledged the availability of new technology”. It recommended statutory provision for altruistic surrogacy
and amendments to
Adoption Act 1994
(WA) to enable adoptions where surrogate births had occurred pending the introduction of that legislation.
In Queensland, the report of the Taskforce on Women and the Criminal Code published in 2003 stated that its members “
overwhelmingly” supported prohibiting commercial surrogacy only. It revealed that “opinions were quite divided
and people reached this decision for different reasons, but it was generally felt that it was inappropriate and unhelpful to
involve the criminal justice system in this intensely private matter between relatives and friends”.
Artificial Conception Act
which is still in force in the ACT was enacted by the Commonwealth Parliament in 1985 and became a Territory enactment by virtue of
Australian Capital Territory (Self Government) Act 1988
(Cth). In May 1989 the Council of Social Welfare Ministers considered substitute parent agreements, expressed opposition to any
agreements of a commercial nature, proposed uniform legislation, and drew attention to the need to address “a number
of ethical issues surrounding the use of reproductive technology clinics and programs relating to surrogate motherhood arrangements”.
The ethical issues were referred to a committee which issued successive reports in 1989 and 1990 which concluded
that the “preferred option” was for substitute parent agreements to be allowed but controlled by requirements for
approval, supervision and regulation through state-approved agencies by uniform State and Territory legislation.
However, a further meeting of the Australian Health and Social Welfare Ministers in March 1991 resolved that States and Territories
enact legislation including provisions to:
make any surrogacy contract or agreement void and unenforceable;
make it an offence to arrange or agree to arrange surrogacy services or contract to provide technical or professional
services to facilitate the creation of the pregnancy;
make it an offence to arrange or agree to arrange surrogacy services or contract to provide technical or professional
services to facilitate the creation of the pregnancy;
make it an offence to induce a person to become pregnant for the purposes of surrendering custody and guardianship of, or rights in
relation to, a child born
as a result of the pregnancy;
make it an offence to publish, or cause to be published, a statement, advertisement, notice or other document to the effect
that a person is or may be willing to enter into a
surrogacy contract;
that a person is seeking a person willing to enter
into a surrogacy contract; or
that a person is willing to negotiate, arrange or obtain
the benefit of a surrogacy contract on behalf of
The Ministers also resolved that penalties and sanctions against third parties be applied through:
• the classification of any form of assistance in the arrangement of surrogacy as instances of professional misconduct
subject to penalty by the appropriate professional bodies, boards or tribunals; and
• the withdrawal of licences or approval to practise reproductive medicine from medical organisations which participate in
facilitating surrogacy arrangements.
In response, the ACT enacted the
Substitute Parent Agreements Act
THE SUBSTITUTE PARENT AGREEMENTS ACT
Substitute Parents Agreements Act
is the enactment which imposes restrictions on surrogacy agreements and conduct intended to facilitate such agreements.
It is a relatively short Act but it contains a number of potentially important provisions. It begins by creating a series
of statutory offences. The full text of each of the substantive provisions is quoted below under the relevant explanatory
subheading.
Commercial substitute agreements prohibited
Section 5 of this Act provides that:
A person shall not enter into a commercial substitute parent agreement.
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or
A “commercial substitute parent agreement” is defined by section 3 to mean:
a substitute parent agreement under which a person agrees to make or give to
another person a payment or reward, other than
for or on account for
expenses connected with—
(a) a pregnancy (including any attempt to become pregnant) that is
the subject of the agreement; or
(b) the birth or care of a child born as a result of that
The term “substitute parent agreement” is in turn defined to mean:
a contract, agreement, arrangement or understanding under
(a) a person agrees to become, or to attempt to become, pregnant
and that a child born as a result of the pregnancy
is to be taken
to be (whether by adoption, agreement or otherwise) the child of
another person; or
(b) a person who is pregnant agrees that a child born as a result
of the pregnancy is to be taken to be (whether
by adoption, agreement
or otherwise) the child of another person.
The provision makes it an offence for any person to enter into a commercial agreement as broadly defined. Hence, it is possible for
both the birth mother as well as those seeking to raise the child to be convicted and punished.
Procuration of substitute parent agreements
Section 6 provides that:
A person shall not procure another person to enter into a substitute parent
agreement with a third person unless the firstmentioned
person intends to be a
party to the agreement.
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or
This provision effectively prohibits acting as an agent either for couples seeking a person prepared to bear them a child, even on
a voluntary basis. The provision is not limited to cases in which the agent is paid but applies to anyone acting as an intermediary.
On the other hand, it would not seem to prevent counselling about the emotional and other implications of a decision
to enter into such an arrangement at least so long as the counsellor does not effectively “procure” the other
person to do so.
Advertising in relation to substitute parent agreements
Section 7 provides that:
A person shall not publish an advertisement, notice or
(a) intended or likely to induce a person to enter into a substitute parent
agreement; or
(b) seeking or purporting to seek a person who is willing to enter
into a substitute parent agreement; or
(c) stating or implying that a person is willing to enter into a
substitute parent agreement.
Maximum penalty:
(a) if the offence relates to a commercial substitute parent
agreement—50 penalty units, imprisonment for 6 months or both;
(b) in any other case—50 penalty units.
This provision may have been prompted by the public outcry following a well publicised incident in the United States when
a young woman advertised a “womb for rent” but it also serves the purpose of prohibiting couples from advertising for
people prepared to bear a child for them.
Facilitating pregnancy
Section 8 provides that:
A person shall not knowingly provide any professional or technical services
to another person to facilitate a person who is, or intends
to be, a party to a
commercial substitute parent agreement becoming pregnant for the purpose of the
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units, imprisonment for 1 year or
Whilst the provisions of sections 5,6 and 7 are directed to restricting the conduct of potential participants in surrogacy agreements,
this provision is intended to prohibit medical practitioners and technicians from taking any step to facilitate a person becoming
pregnant in order to have a child pursuant to a commercial surrogacy agreement.
The Act also contains two provisions dealing with the non-criminal consequences of surrogacy agreements.
Substitute parent agreements void
Section 9 succinctly enacts that:
A substitute parent agreement is void.
Despite its brevity this is a potentially important provision which makes it clear that a surrogacy agreement cannot be enforced
No woman who has entered into such an agreement need fear being sued for damages should she change her mind and
decline to proceed with the arrangement and, conversely, no-one can be forced to pay any agreed fee. Furthermore, there can
be no suggestion that parenting rights may be sold or bartered. Any agreement, whether or not commercially motivated,
is simply void.
Welfare and interests of child paramount
Finally, section 10 provides that:
(1) Despite section 9, in any action or proceeding in connection
with a substitute parent agreement, the welfare and interests
of the child born
as a result of a pregnancy that was the subject of the agreement shall be
regarded as the paramount consideration.
(2) For subsection (1), an action or proceeding in connection with
a substitute parent agreement does not include
a proceeding on an
application for a parentage order under the
Artificial Conception
This provision is in marked contrast to the approach taken in the
Artificial Conception Act
which, until the 2000 amendments, did not permit the welfare and interests of the child to be taken into account at all and even in
its present form permits a court to make a parentage order in the best interest of the child only with the informed consent of the
birth mother and her husband.
SHOULD SUBSTITUTE PARENT AGREEMENTS BE
PROHIBITED?
The Act prohibits commercial but not so called “altruistic” agreements, though it is an offence to procure or advertise
with a view to procuring such agreements. Hence, it remains lawful for one member of a family to agree to bear a child for
an infertile sister or some other relative or friend. The agreement has no legal effect and, unlike the position that has existed
in some American states, cannot of itself affect either the parentage of the children or expose any of the parties to actions for
damages. It does not confer any rights upon the individuals or couples seeking to acquire the children and affects the rights of
those children only by insisting that in any proceedings concerning such agreements, other than proceedings under the
Artificial Conception Act
, their welfare and interests shall be the paramount consideration.
Issues arise as to whether the underlying philosophy of prohibiting commercial agreements but not altruistic agreements
should be retained and, if so, whether any further restrictions should be imposed on the availability of such agreements.
Furthermore, even if one were to take the view that such agreements were undesirable, would the imposition of criminal
sanctions be appropriate?
The desire to have children seems endemic to many and childless couples frequently experience a profound sense of loss,
particularly as they see others so obviously thrilled and excited at the birth of new babies. It is understandable that they should
seize an opportunity to have their dreams of parenthood fulfilled. The position of a birth mother who bears a
child for others due to altruistic considerations may be even more poignant. A woman who endures both a full
term pregnancy and the pain of separation to give life to a child who would not otherwise have been born and
the privilege of parenthood to an otherwise childless couple has clearly displayed great generosity of spirit. Should she
then be punished?
Conversely, it may be asked whether the present restrictions on payment should be relaxed and, to take one example, a woman with
several children of her own who offers to bear a further child for an infertile but professionally more successful sister should
not be entitled to at least receive an amount equal to the wages she has lost during confinement. Furthermore, there is a serious
issue as to whether the welfare and interests of the child should be the paramount consideration irrespective of the
statutory framework within which parentage or custody is considered.
It should be recognised that these are profoundly difficult questions and that those on both sides of the ethical debate about
particular issues may have valid concerns. Furthermore, they cannot be adequately addressed merely by making a judgment about
what is likely to be most desirable in the majority of cases and assuming that there should be a blanket rule to that
effect supported by criminal statues.
Social norms and structures
It may be understandable that some people support such an approach because it places an emphasis upon the maintenance of social norms
and structures. This approach seems to be reflected in the submission made on behalf of the Australian Catholic Bishop’s
conference which suggests that the proposal to restructure presumptions of parenthood, however understandable in the circumstances
of the Ryan case, is a “band aid solution to the much larger, unaddressed issue of a permissive statutory regime
in favour of surrogacy in the ACT”. Whilst acknowledging that some people may be desperate to experience the joys of parenthood,
the submission asserts that as a matter of philosophy, jurisprudence and public policy, desperate desire is no foundation
for enacting laws for the common good of the community. At the highest, such desires are liberties, not legally recognised
rights. It also suggests that the judgment in the Ryan case recognises the social and legal complexities created when
altruistic surrogacy is permitted and people “give expression to their unbridled liberty in entering into such
contentious and fraught agreements”.
Whilst the views put forward on behalf of the Australian Catholic Bishop’s conference are obviously entitled to considerable
respect, there are a number of points which should properly be made in response.
First, and perhaps most obviously, the suggestion that the participants in altruistic surrogacy agreements have given expression
to unbridled liberty suggests that only libertines would do so. In fact, there is no reason to believe that people
approach such decisions in an irresponsible manner. Indeed, as mentioned earlier, a woman who is moved by compassion for
the plight of others to undertake a pregnancy on their behalf and who proceeds with that course after counselling, contemplation
and soul searching, should not be dismissed as a libertine but recognised as a person with great generosity of spirit.
Second, respect for civil liberties is one of the fundamental values that undergird modern democratic societies. Unlike its American
counterpart, the Australian
Constitution
does not contain any statements affirming that we have been endowed by our Creator with inalienable rights to life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness, respect for human freedom has long been accepted as one of the philosophical,
jurisprudential and public policy foundations of our laws. Hence, any proposal to curtail individual freedom should not be
approached by reference to some perceived presumption that conduct should be prohibited unless some justification can
be demonstrated but, rather, with the presumption that it is incumbent upon those seeking to curtail the freedom of others
to demonstrate that the public good requires the enactment of laws making it a criminal offence to act in a particular manner.
The world might be a better place if people ate more sensibly and exercised more regularly. Failure to act responsibly
in these areas, not only endangers the health and, ultimately, the lives of those concerned, but imposes added burdens
on public health budgets and otherwise impinges upon the interests of society as a whole. Nonetheless, there are no Australian
statutes that purport to make either gluttony or indolence a punishable offence. A balance has to be drawn between respect for individual
freedom and the protection of the community from anti-social behaviour.
Some have argued that there is a stark choice to be made: one must either condone such agreements or prohibit them.
However, it is plainly illogical to posit such extreme alternatives since there is obviously a wide range of intermediate
positions. To return to the previous example, society does not “condone” gluttony or indolence merely by refraining
from imposing criminal sanctions upon those whose conduct is seen as undesirable.
Views that a failure to prohibit all forms of surrogacy arrangements may undermine social norms and structures seem to be based primarily
upon rarely articulated but nonetheless real concerns that such arrangements will prove to be subversive of the family unit. Whilst
many would readily accept that family units may be regarded as the basic building blocks of society, these fears
appear to be groundless. It seems unlikely that the number of women willing to bear children to be raised by others would be
sufficiently large to have any significant impact on the prevalence of traditional families. It may even be argued that
measures intended to assist otherwise childless couples to have children would tend to strengthen rather than diminish
familial bonds. More fundamentally, families are neither created nor maintained merely by preventing people from conceiving
children by non traditional means. They are sustained by such qualities as love, affection, and loyalty which cannot be imposed
by legislation.
The possibility of people having children as a result of surrogacy arrangements should not be seen as endangering
traditional families any more than the recognition of homosexual relationships should be seen as endangering marriage. The
real threats to families are posed not by the emergence of reproductive technology but by such problems as domestic
violence, child abuse, drug and alcohol dependency, mental illness and poverty. However one may feel about what some
deride as the “brave new world” of reproductive technology, it will produce children with the same need
to be absorbed into families as those conceived in the conventional manner. There is no need to see them as threats.
The welfare and interest of the child
The Family Law Council’s oft cited comment that “as a matter of public policy, surrogacy arrangements are
seen to be contrary to the welfare and interests of the child . . .”
is difficult to understand, even in the context of the attitudes of concern and suspicion apparently prevailing in 1985. Strictly
construed, the statement suggests that such a perception had been embraced as a matter of public policy irrespective of its
validity, like belief in the emperor’s new clothes, but it seems unlikely that this was the intended meaning.
However, it is equally difficult to imagine that the Family Law Council really believed that surrogacy arrangements were actually
contrary to the welfare of the children born as a consequence of them when, in the absence of such agreements, they would
presumably not have been born at all.
It may, perhaps, have been intended to suggest that such children would not enjoy the advantages of others born by more conventional
means. However, there is no apparent reason to assume that parents who have gone to the lengths of arranging surrogacy
agreements will not raise them in an attitude of love and affection and be duly attentive to their welfare and
interests. There may be different answers to the question “what makes a good parent”? Behavioural psychologists
might invoke debates as to the competing influence of nature and nurture whilst most members of the community would probably suggest
qualities such as love, patience and perseverance. It seems unlikely that many would nominate the act of giving birth as
the decisive factor, however important that may be, and it is difficult to imagine that the Family Law Council would have believed
that that it was all that counted. It that were the Council’s view, then it is difficult to see how adoptive parents could
have escaped being similarly stigmatised.
Ultimately, whilst others have apparently believed that some profound truth lurks within its Delphic obscurity, it is difficult to
interpret the statement in a manner that could offer any coherent contribution to the debate.
The potential for exploitation
There are, of course, valid arguments in favour of restricting and/or regulating surrogacy arrangements. As the submission
made on behalf of the Australian Catholic Bishop’s Conference points out, “learned commentators” have cautioned
that “the practice of surrogacy has a potential for economic exploitation, moral confusion and psychological harm
to the surrogate mothers the prospective adoptive parents and the children”.
The risk of people being exploited or emotionally damaged must be frankly acknowledged. The point has been made vividly in
the recent report of the Queensland Taskforce on Women and the Criminal Code:
It is the handing over of a child born to a woman that appears to discomfort
most. We have learned only recently the sad and haunted
stories of women who
gave up children for adoption when single motherhood was socially intolerable.
We have also watched generations
of our Indigenous peoples torn apart by
government practices that separated children from their kin. As Margaret Brinig
in respect of women who wish to be surrogates:
” They may simply enjoy being pregnant and the powerful feeling of
creation that comes with giving birth. But the dark side
of these good feelings
is that women are not programmed to have children and then part with them. A
contract made beforehand, even
though it may make the rational part of the
placement easier, cannot affect these biological
However, the Taskforce sounded a note of caution about too readily drawing parallels between the emotional dynamics of different situations:
We simply do not yet know enough to compare surrogacy and adoption, but they
are very different processes for the parents and the
children. There is much to
suggest that it is the genetic link that adopted people search out to understand
themselves. It is possible
that these same issues simply do not apply to
"gestational" surrogacy in particular. It may be that for some surrogate
mothers the
handing over of the child equates with the relinquishing of babies
by young adopting mothers in the 1960s and 1970s - but for many
the fact that
the pregnancy was intentionally entered into for a specific purpose creates an
entirely different dynamic.
The fact that surrogates themselves view their position as different from
that of biological mothers in the adoption situation should
caution policymakers
against unthinkingly applying an adoption/family law paradigm to the
The Taskforce also stressed the need to respect the rights of adults to make decisions about their own lives:
Some argue that surrogacy is inherently exploitative of the surrogate mother.
Lori Andrews studied the lives of over 80 surrogate
mothers in the USA. She
suggests that the attitude that surrogacy must necessarily be exploitative may
well be paternalistic, and
that perhaps it is time to accept that women are able
to give informed consent about issues concerning their bodies. After all,
expected that women and men can give informed consent about sterilisations, sex
change operations, heart surgery and other
elective surgery.
In support of altruistic surrogacy one submission to the Taskforce stated
that "the view that a woman should be prevented from providing
assistance to an
infertile friend or relative on the basis that she may be subject to
exploitation in so doing is paternalistic.
Such a legislative stance fails to
accord recognition to a woman's right to privacy and self-determination". The
Women's Legal Service
reports that most requests for information on surrogacy
laws come from potential surrogate mothers considering surrogacy for their
sister or a friend. They are generally shocked to be told that even altruistic
surrogacy is illegal in this state.
While there are some appalling examples of exploitation and unhappiness that
have reached the world headlines, these cases do not
reflect the norm and may
well not be prevented by current Queensland
legislation.
It should also be acknowledged that there are few, if any, types of relationship that do not involve the potential for abuse and exploitation.
Feminist writers have been making this point about marriage for decades and the files of the Family Court of Australia are littered
with cases in which children born to their parents in a conventional manner have nonetheless been exploited, morally
confused and psychologically harmed. Some risks are inevitable and others cannot be avoided without impinging upon individual
freedom to an unacceptable degree.
Despite the reassuring experience of the Women’s Legal Service in Queensland, it is no doubt true that the widespread use of
substitute parent agreements would give rise to some significant risk of exploitation. It should not be assumed that even
altruistic agreements would not involve some measure of risk. The mere fact that no money changes hands is obviously insufficient
to exclude any potential for exploitation. Indeed, the emotional pressures that may rise in some family relationships may
be even more coercive than that provided by financial incentives.
Furthermore, emotional damage may be caused even when there can be no question of exploitation. As Bryson J said
Application of A and B
[2000] NSWSC 640
, it is difficult for people to have clear and complete insight into their own emotional position, even contemporaneously, and even
more difficult for them to foresee what they will feel in situations of profound emotional involvement which have not yet occurred.
Even a woman who suggested a substitute parent agreement may find herself distressed when asked to actually relinquish a baby
who no longer exists only in idealistic plans for the future of another family but nestles in her arms. The potential
for agreements of this nature to produce situations of acute poignancy must be recognised.
In the Commission’s view, there is an obvious need to respond by such measures as public education and the provision of pre-contractual
counselling. This aspect is further discussed later in this report. However, the days when a paternalistic state would readily
intervene to prevent women from making decisions due to the fear that they might be unable to cope with the practical and emotional
implications of them are long gone. Few people would now accept that a risk of distress warrants the enactment or
retention of laws restricting the freedom of adults by prohibiting people from engaging in activities that do not
involve any significant infringement of the rights of others. Whilst it may sometimes be difficult to balance the need to respect
human autonomy against the need to protect people who may be vulnerable from exploitation or even the unforseen implications
of their own decisions, the Commission has concluded that the latter considerations do not justify the imposition of
criminal sanctions for altruistic surrogacy.
What of justice?
The prohibition of all forms of surrogacy would have the obvious virtues of certainty and added enforceability. However, as Lord
Scarman has observed:
Certainty is always an advantage in the law, and in some branches of the law
it is a necessity. But it brings with it an inflexibility
and a rigidity which
in some branches of the law can obstruct justice, impede the law's development,
and stamp upon the law the mark
of obsolescence where what is needed is the
capacity for development.
Half a century earlier, Lord Atkin had made the point more succinctly: 'Finality is a good thing but justice is better.'
Those in favour of prohibiting even altruistic substitute parent agreements seem to assume that such a step will effectively prevent
people from entering into them and rarely seem to consider the likelihood that some, if not most, would continue in defiance of the
law and presumably face prosecution. In fact, the imposition of criminal sanctions would be unlikely to be effective and may well
be wholly inappropriate.
Even if it were thought to be appropriate for the state to seek to intervene in arrangements between two sisters or close friends
and their partners, it seems unlikely that the existence of any agreement would be discovered in time to dissuade the surrogate mother
from proceeding with the conception. Would it then be appropriate to add to the emotional stress of a young woman who had just given
birth to a baby whom she felt obliged to relinquish to others? Would it be just and appropriate to punish someone whom the law was
intended to protect and whose only crime was acting in a manner intended to bring joy to others at substantial personal cost?
Similar considerations might apply to commissioning parents. The Queensland Taskforce on Women and the Criminal Code referred to
a couple who went through 13 unsuccessful attempts at IVF, then applied for an overseas adoption only to discover that the husband
was by then six months older than the maximum permissible age. Eventually the couple, knowing they were in breach of Queensland
law, travelled to Canberra with a couple who were close friends to attempt a surrogacy arrangement which proved to be unsuccessful.
The submission eloquently expressed their distress:
It is not possible for me to put in words the grief, horror and utter despair
we felt at hearing our last chance for parenthood was
ruled out because of
Queensland legislation. ... I am now a criminal. This is so ridiculous and this
law needs to be changed. ...
I didn't seek to hurt or take anything from
another, I just wanted to have what most women want, to have a child to love and
The Taskforce duly recommended that altruistic agreements not be prohibited, concluding that:
Despite the inherent complexities in, and social discomfort with, surrogacy
arrangements, criminal prohibition, as we have now, is
not the solution.
First, it means that traditional practices of the Torres Strait Islander
community are made into criminal offences when no harm has
been shown. Secondly
it throws families and friends into the criminal justice system when they are
engaged in an intensely private
and personal matter.
One might also ask what kind of intervention could be effective. Those willing to embark upon a course involving such emotional
cost to themselves and others would be unlikely to be deterred by the prospect of a fine and it would be absurdly inappropriate
to have all the participants imprisoned and the child raised by others.
Furthermore, the possibility of criminal proceedings may make the parties more reluctant to commence civil proceedings
in relation to parentage, custody or access or even openly discuss issues of that kind. Insofar as the legislation
is intended to ensure the best interests of the child, that would be a most undesirable consequence.
In short, the Commission recognises that there are divergent and strongly held views about the ethics of surrogacy
arrangements and acknowledges that they have the potential to cause profound emotional distress especially the young
women who may not have appreciated the depth of feeling they are likely to have for their babies. However, it regards the criminal
law as too blunt an instrument to be applied in cases of altruistic surrogacy where sensitivity and compassion are likely to
be far more appropriate responses rather than prosecution and punishment.
Commercial surrogacy
Despite the considerations mentioned earlier, the Commission is firmly of view that the balance is presently tipped in favour of laws
prohibiting commercial surrogacy agreements.
Agreements of that kind may be seen to treat babies as if they were mere commodities, available to be ordered upon payment
of a suitable purchase price. Such concepts naturally evoke concern and distaste. However, some overseas adoptions also involve
the payment of substantial fees to overseas agencies even when the adoption has been pre-arranged by Australian authorities. There
are, of course, obvious differences. Adoption agreements do not involve a woman being paid to undertake a pregnancy for the express
purpose of handing over the child to others. Furthermore, adoption agreements are not unregulated commercial transactions.
Those applying to adopt a child must be assessed as suitable adoptive parents and an adoption will be made only if a court
is satisfied that it will be in the best interests of the child. Nonetheless, a childless couple contemplating an alternative
parent agreement might well protest that those who agree to pay substantial fees for an adoption might be seen
to be effectively buying a child, even if the transaction ultimately requires curial approval. More importantly, it
must be acknowledged that those sufficiently desperate to pay large sums of money in order to have a child may prove to
be very good parents. Hence, the Commission is inclined to accept that acts intended to facilitate the conception of children should
not be criminalized merely because it is intended that one or more parties be paid for their participation. There are, however, more
cogent objections to commercial surrogacy agreements.
First, at least in the absence of adequate licensing, it would expose emotionally vulnerable people to the risk of being exploited
for financial gain. Whilst it is true that people would be free to accept or reject offers to participate in such agreements,
freedom of choice is not always sufficient to prevent people from becoming victims of manipulation and exploitation. Economic
necessity sometimes makes freedom seem an illusory concept and there would be an inevitable risk that young women who
were addicted to drugs or gambling or who were simply poor might become economic conscripts in a process they would not have otherwise
undertaken and which might prove psychologically damaging to them. Childless couples might also be exploited by being
induced to pay substantial sums of money and having their hopes raised only to be again dashed when it becomes clear that the
promised arrangement has not been concluded.
Second, whilst altruistic agreements usually occur amongst family members or close friends and surrogate mothers are likely
to retain contact with the children, the parties to commercial agreements would be likely to be strangers to each other.
Hence, surrogate mothers would be bearing children, not in the expectation of having continuing relationships with them, albeit
as aunts rather than mothers, but in the expectation that when they handed them over to the commissioning couple they
would be unlikely to see them again. It is true that women relinquishing children for adoption hand them over with a similar
expectation but decisions to make children available for adoption are made only after they have been born. Until that time the
mothers retain the option of keeping their babies and raising them as their own. Surrogate mothers would know, throughout their
pregnancies, that the children they were carrying were the product of donated gametes and that they had undertaken to
relinquish them at birth. The feeling of being locked in to such an agreement might cause immense distress to a woman unable to
contemplate being forever separated from the child within her womb.
Third, situations of that kind would be likely to give rise to disputes about parenthood, custody and access. Whilst
disputes of that kind occur in other contexts and are dealt with in the Family Court of Australia on a daily basis, the fact
that the children have been born as a consequence of commercial alternate parent agreements might cause unfamiliar complications.
The surrogate mother would not be the “natural” mother in the usual sense because she would have made
no contribution to his or her genetic composition. On the contrary, she would be likely to be opposed not only by the natural
father but by another woman with a genuine claim to be the natural mother. Arrangements for some form of shared custody
or continuing access would involve the possibility of the child being raised by three “real” parents. If the commissioning
couple were not recognised as the child’s parents or were denied custody, they would obviously be left with a justified sense
of grievance and this might make any continued relationship with the custodial surrogate mother difficult. This problem might be
aggravated by any orders requiring them to make maintenance payments to the surrogate mother.
Fourth, there might be disputes about payment or repayment of fees and commissions and even, perhaps, some risk of pressure
being applied in order to force surrogate mothers to hand over children.
In the Commission’s view, these considerations outweigh the moral claims of childless couples to pursue any reasonable
means of having children and provide ample justification for maintaining the present prohibition on commercial alternate parent agreements
at this time.
There may be exceptional people for whom such legislative protection would be unnecessary and it should be stressed that it is only
commercial agreements that the Commission believes should be prohibited. Hence, if a woman who did not wish to raise any more children
were to volunteer to have another baby in order to give a childless couple the opportunity to have a child, there would be nothing
to prevent her from deciding to enter into such an arrangement, even if the couple were otherwise strangers to her. One would hope
that any such decision would not be made without due deliberation and counselling but the possibility of such selfless acts of
compassion cannot be excluded and, should they occur, they should not be punished. It is even possible that, at some stage
in the future, the experience gained from cases of that nature might reveal some justification for an appropriately administered
system pursuant to which such women could receive some payment. However, the Commission does not believe that the need for such
a system has yet been demonstrated or that any relaxation of the existing prohibition would presently be desirable.
Accordingly, the Commission supports the retention of sections 5, and 8. The Commission’s only concern about the legislative
policy reflected in these sections is that they do not expressly address the position of promoters of commercial schemes.
Whilst those attempting to profit by inducing others to enter into surrogacy arrangements should receive heavy penalties,
those inveigled into such schemes due to their desire for a child or economic necessity should face lesser penalties if, indeed,
any penalties are appropriate in the circumstances. However, there seems to have been no prosecutions under these sections and certainly
no cases were identified in which the absence of any specific provision had led to some difficulty. Accordingly, it
would appear unnecessary to consider any amendment to the penalty provisions of these sections at this time.
However, there are grounds for contending that the distinction between commercial and altruistic agreements should be
more carefully delineated. Section 5 extends the prohibition on the former to any substitute parent agreement under which a
person agrees to make or give to another person a payment or reward other than for or on account of expenses connected
with the pregnancy or birth. It seems not unreasonable to suggest that people should be entitled to agree to provide some
support for surrogate mothers or even to reimburse them for losses of income associated with the pregnancy and any convalescence
that might be required after complications associated with the birth.
Procuring substitute parent agreements
Section 6 prohibits procuring any substitute parent agreements, not merely those of a commercial nature. There may be some apparent
incongruity in prohibiting advertising for people to participate in a lawful activity, though there are comparable
situations that occur in quite different areas of the law such as those relating to prostitution. The section may have been
directed primarily towards preventing the creation of agencies capable of circumventing the prohibition of commercial
agreements by avoiding becoming a party to any such agreement and simply charging commissioning couples a fee for making the arrangements.
For the reasons already mentioned, the procuring of such agreements between strangers is likely to give rise to greater
difficulties than might be expected from similar agreements involving members of the same family or close friends. In the Commission’s
view, these considerations warrant the retention of the current prohibition.
It seems unlikely that a mutual friend who merely acted as a “go-between” would be prosecuted under this section but
it could be further reviewed if it unexpectedly proved to be a source of some unfairness or injustice.
Advertising
Similarly section 7 prohibits advertising even when any substitute parent agreement thereby procured is not intended
to be of a commercial nature. Again, there may be some apparent incongruity in prohibiting advertising for people to
participate in a lawful activity, but this situation is not unique. For example, there are substantial restrictions on advertising
cigarettes and other tobacco products. As we have sought to point out, the procuring of such agreements between strangers
is likely to give rise to greater difficulties than might be expected from similar agreements involving members of the same
family or close friends. Furthermore, advertising might tend to influence young and idealistic people to commit themselves
to pregnancies without really understanding the emotional implications of their agreement to relinquish the child to others.
Whilst the Commission understands that childless couples may feel frustrated at not being able to use advertising to seek out people
who might be willing to assist them to become parents and is acutely conscious of the need to trust women to make their own decisions
Substitute parent agreements void
The Commission strongly supports the retention of this provision. Any disputes concerning the parentage or custody
of children should be determined by reference to their welfare and interests; not by reference to the law of contract.
Recommendation
It is recommended that the provisions of the
Substitute Parent Agreements Act
presently prohibiting certain conduct in relation to substitute parent agreements should remain unamended.
THE ARTIFICIAL CONCEPTION ACT
This Act regulates the parentage of children actually born pursuant to a substituted parent agreement, irrespective of whether the
agreement involved any contravention of the
Substitute Parent Agreements Act
The question of parentage
It commences with the presumptions of parentage referred to earlier, which effectively deem the birth mother and her husband
to be the parents of the child unless an order is made pursuant to section 11.
The full text of section 11 is now as follows:
(1) The Supreme Court must make a parentage order, if allowed by section 12 (Multiple births), if satisfied that—
(a) the making of the order is in the best interests of the child; and
(b) both birth parents freely, and with a full understanding of what is involved, agree to the making of the order.
(2) However, the Supreme Court may dispense with the requirement under subsection (1) (b) for either or both birth parents
to agree to the making of a parentage order if satisfied that—
(a) the birth parent or birth parents are dead or incapacitated, and—
(i) it would not be contrary to the welfare and interests of the child to make the order in favour of the applicants; or
(ii) if there is evidence before the court that the birth parent or birth parents, at the time of death or the onset of incapacity,
no longer intended the applicants to be the prescribed parents of the child—
it would be contrary to the welfare and interests of the child not to make the order in favour of the applicants; or
(b) after making reasonable inquiries, the applicants are unable to contact the birth parent or birth parents to obtain the agreement,
(i) it would not be contrary to the welfare and interests of the child to make the order in favour of the applicants; or
(ii) if there is evidence before the court that the birth parent or birth parents no longer intend the applicants to be the
prescribed parents of the child—it would be contrary to the welfare and interests of the child not to make
the order in favour of the applicants.
(3) In deciding whether to make a parentage order, the Supreme Court must take the following into consideration if relevant:
(a) whether the child’s home is, and was at the time of the application, with both substitute parents;
(b) whether both substitute parents are at least 18 years old;
(c) if only 1 of the child’s substitute parents has applied for the order, and the other substitute parent is alive at
the time of the application, whether the court is satisfied that—
(i) the other substitute parent freely, and with a full understanding of what is involved, agrees to the making of the order in favour
of the applicant substitute parent; or
(ii) the applicant substitute parent is unable to contact the other substitute parent to obtain his or her agreement under
subparagraph (i);
(d) whether payment or reward (other than for expenses reasonably incurred) has been given or received by either of the child’s
substitute parents, or either of the child’s birth parents, for or in consideration of—
(i) the making of the order; or
(ii) the agreement required under subsection (1) (b); or
(iii) the handing over of the child to the substitute parents; or
(iv) the making of any arrangements with a view to the making of the order;
(e) whether both birth parents and both substitute parents have received appropriate counselling and assessment from an independent
counselling service.
(4) The Supreme Court may take into consideration any other relevant matter.
(5) For subsection (3) (e), a counselling service is not
independent
if it is connected with—
(a) the doctor who carried out the procedure that resulted in the birth of the relevant child (the
relevant procedure
(b) the institution where the relevant procedure was carried out; or
(c) another entity involved in carrying out the relevant procedure.
(6) The Supreme Court must make a parentage order under subsection (1)—
(a) if both substitute parents apply for the order—in favour of both substitute parents; or
(b) if only 1 substitute parent applies for the order, and the other substitute parent is dead or incapacitated at the time
of the application (unless the court is satisfied that, at the time of death, the deceased substitute parent no longer intended
to become a prescribed parent of the child)—in favour of both substitute parents; or
(c) if, in any other case, only 1 substitute parent applies for the order—in favour of the applicant substitute parent.
Section 12 deals with multiple births, providing that the Supreme Court may make a parentage order about the child only if it also
makes a parentage order about each living birth sibling of the child.
Related matters
The Act also contains numerous provisions governing issues relating to property, confidentiality of records and the provision of medical
information that may be of relevance to a child born as a result of a substitute parent agreement.
Perhaps the most potentially controversial provisions are those relating to the provision of identifying information. The
relevant provisions are as follows:
21 Right of access to identifying information
(1) An associated person is entitled to apply for identifying information contained in records kept by the registrar-general.
(2) A prescribed child (whether or not the child has turned 18 years old) is entitled to apply for—
(a) identifying information that consists of a copy of, or an extract from, an entry in the register of births about the prescribed
(b) any other identifying information only with the written consent of—
(i) each of the prescribed child’s prescribed parents; and
(ii) each of the child’s birth parents; and
(iii) if a birth relative may be identified from the information—the birth relative.
(3) A birth relative, prescribed relative or descendant of a prescribed child is entitled to apply for identifying
information only with the written consent of each person who may be identified from the information.
(4) The consent of a person is not required for subsection (2) or (3) if the registrar-general is satisfied that—
(a) the person is dead; or
(b) the location of the person is unknown and could not be found out with reasonable inquiries.
22 Provision of information by registrar-general
(1) This section applies if, on an application for identifying information—
(a) the registrar-general is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to apply for the information; and
(b) the appropriate fee determined for the
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1997
has been paid.
(2) The registrar-general must search the register of births and issue to the applicant—
(a) a copy of, or extract from, the relevant entry; or
(b) a notification of the result of the search.
(3) However, the registrar-general may refuse to make the search, or issue the copy, extract or notification, if satisfied
(a) the search, copy, extract or notification is required for an improper reason; or
(b) the applicant does not have a proper reason for requiring the search, copy, extract or notification.
23 Application to Supreme Court in absence of consent
(a) a person would, under
, be entitled to apply for identifying information with the written consent of someone else; and
(b) that person has refused to consent;
the person may apply to the Supreme Court for an order under subsection (2).
(2) The Supreme Court may, if satisfied that there are circumstances that justify the order, make an order declaring that the applicant
is entitled to apply for the identifying information stated in the order.
(3) If the Supreme Court makes an order under subsection (2), the applicant for the order is taken, for
, to be entitled to apply for the identifying information stated in the order.
24 Application to Supreme Court in other circumstances
(1) A person may apply to the Supreme Court for an order under subsection (2) if the person—
(a) is not entitled under
to apply for identifying information; or
(b) has been refused access to identifying information under
(2) The Supreme Court may, if satisfied that there are circumstances that justify the order, make an order declaring that the applicant
is entitled to apply for, and to have access to, the identifying information stated in the order.
ISSUES RELATING TO CHILDREN BORN DUE TO ARTIFICIAL
INSEMINATION OR IVF
As previously mentioned, the focus of this report is not the use of artificial reproductive technology for the purpose
of enabling women to bear children that they and their partners intend to raise but, rather, the law governing
the parenthood of children whose conception was facilitated with the intention that they would be raised by others.
Nonetheless, it is important to bear in mind that the existing sections of the
Artificial Conception Act
do not distinguish between these two types of cases. That is unfortunate because it is by no means clear that, even
if one accepts that the welfare and interests of children should be the paramount consideration irrespective of the intention of
others, it is by no means clear that the statutory provisions applicable to types of cases should be co- extensive.
Whilst the physical acts or procedures that led to the conception may have been substantially the same, the surrounding circumstances
are likely to be quite different. Artificial insemination or IVF procedures are normally considered by women anxious
to bear and raise a child almost inevitably reflect a strong desire to become a parent and hence a commitment to the parental role
in the life of the child to be born. That commitment is likely to be strengthened during the course of the necessary medical
tests and procedures and the pregnancy that follows. On the other hand, the sperm is usually provided by an unknown donor
who has no intention of assuming parental responsibility for any child born as a result of a conception involving the use of his
sperm. In such a situation there would be very little chance of the previously anonymous sperm donor subsequently deciding to pursue
a claim before recognition of his paternity, identifying the child in question and being able to establish that it would be in the
best interests of the child wishing to displace the only person the child had ever known as his father. In contrast, a surrogacy
arrangement usually involves the birth of a child to a woman who had not initially had any intention of raising the child as her
own and a childless couple who had entered into a substitute parent agreement as a result of a carefully considered
decision to have a child, perhaps maintained through years of pursuing alternate means. In this situation, the commissioning
parents might be able to demonstrate at least an equally strong commitment to the child. Furthermore, the issue would be likely
to arise for consideration very soon after the child’s birth and perhaps in circumstances in which he or she had already been
handed over to the commissioning parents rather than in circumstances in which an attempt was being made to displace one
or both parents after the child had already become emotionally dependent upon them.
It is at least theoretically possible that circumstances could arise in which, even if in the first type of case, the donor
of the sperm or ovum used in the child’s conception might be able to demonstrate grounds for the making of a parentage
order. For example, the donor may have been a relative or close friend who had initially been content to see the child raised by
the birth mother and her partner but who changed her mind due to the birth mother’s sudden death or mental illness. However,
the Commission is not aware of any cases in which issues of this kind have arisen. Should such cases emerge it may be necessary
to consider further legislative intervention in the manner that would seem to best reflect the balance between the potentially competing
public interests of ensuring due security for the legal relationship between the parents and child and, that of providing
for the needs of particular children even in exceptional circumstances. However, the Commission is presently unaware
of any cases, other than those involving substitute parent agreements, in which it has been suggested that the welfare and
interests of the child have been jeopardised by the inflexibility of the current law and, as mentioned earlier, the terms of reference
do not extend to an examination of such issues.
Accordingly, whilst different considerations arise in relation to children born pursuant to substitute parent agreements,
the Commission will not be proposing any amendment to the law insofar as it relates to children born in circumstances where it was
always understood that they would be raised by the birth mother and her partner.
ISSUES RELATING TO SUBSTITUTE PARENT
No matter how opposed one may be to the concept of surrogacy agreements it is difficult to see any rational justification for ignoring
the needs of particular young children due to qualms about the arrangements that led to them being born. As Archbishop Carroll said
in a submission on behalf of the Catholic Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn in June 1997, “from any perspective, all children,
however conceived, must be afforded the full protection and benefit of the law”.
Yet, as previously mentioned, the Act provides conclusive presumptions that the birth mother and her husband are the child’s
parents subject only to the limited power provided by section 11 and the court is unable to take a course which may be in
the child’s best interests without their consent. Serious questions arise as to whether the competing claims of the
parents who provided the child’s genetic inheritance should be ignored even if it would be in the child’s
best interests to accede to them. Should the interests of the birth mother be preferred to those of the child? Should she
retain a right to withhold consent? Should a perhaps estranged husband retain such a right even if he has never seen the child
and the birth mother herself has consented? Should there be at least a prima facie presumption that the interests
of the child would best be served by treating the birth mother as his or her parent? Is there any justification for extending
such a presumption to her husband or partner?
In addressing THESE issue it is important to stress that the Commission is not concerned with laws regulating the use
of artificial reproductive technology for the purpose of enabling women to bear children that they and their partners intend to raise.
The focus of this report is the law governing the parenthood of children whose conception was facilitated with the intention
that they would be raised by commissioning parents.
The distinction is an important one because it appears that in earlier years any discussion of the parentage of children
born as a result of artificial conception or IVF was directed to ensuring that women who became pregnant with the intention of raising
the children as part of their own families would be assured that they and their partners would be duly recognised as the
parents and, conversely, that sperm donors would not be liable for maintenance. It was, of course, understandable
that legislators would seek to exclude such risks by enacting provision for conclusive presumptions of parentage
such as that contained in section 5. However, it is by no means clear that the parentage of a child conceived with
the intention that he or she would not be raised by the birth mother but by others should be determined by the application of a conclusive
presumption and that any consideration of what might be in the best interests of the child should be resolutely excluded.
The paramount consideration of the welfare of the child
The principle that in this context the welfare and interests of the child should be the paramount consideration was strongly supported
in the submissions to the Commission including those by the Chief Executive of the Chief Minister’s Department and the Community
Advocate. Such an approach is also consistent with the policy reflected in the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Family Law Act 1975
and in other ACT legislation
. It was also advocated in successive reports of the NSW Law Reform Commission on “Artificial Conception – Human Artificial
Insemination”
and “Artificial Conception – Surrogate Motherhood”.
However, despite paying at least lip service to this principle, in the latter report the NSW Commission recommended a conclusive presumption
that the surrogate mother be the legal mother. Two reasons were offered: first, it was perceived that it might enable the surrogate
mother to be “protected from the worst excesses feared in the procedure”; and second, it was thought that it might “discourage
some who would otherwise be willing to enter into a surrogacy arrangement”. It may be noted that neither of these reasons
relate to the welfare of the child. Indeed, the first suggested that the interests of the birth mother should prevail over those
of the child and the second that a policy of discouraging surrogacy agreements should prevail over the interests of the child.
The latter has vague echoes of the policy underlying discrimination against illegitimate children in Victorian times: the interests
of innocent children should be subordinated to the discouragement of unacceptable conduct.
No one of reasonable sensitivity and compassion could fail to be moved by the distress that might be experienced by a
young woman compelled to relinquish a baby to whom she has just given birth and, as indicated earlier in this report, the Commission
is acutely conscious of the need to protect women from finding themselves in that position as the result of emotional
manipulation by others. Furthermore, in considering what is in the bests interests of a child, it is obviously necessary to look
beyond considerations of wealth and privilege to less tangible but perhaps more important factors such as the personal qualities
of potential parents and their apparent ability to provide the child with emotional security and affection. In considering issues
of this kind a court would no doubt take into account the bond which the birth mother may already have formed
with the newborn child and any plans for the future care of the child which the very fact of her pregnancy will almost inevitably
have caused her to consider. Ultimately, however, the Commission is of the view that the welfare and interests of the child
must prevail over those of any adult, even his or her birth mother.
As mentioned earlier, there may be different answers to the question, “what makes a good parent”? and hence, perhaps,
different perceptions as to how the welfare and interests of a child might best be served. Opinions are generally divided
between those who stress the influence of heredity and the need for a child to be raised by parents likely to be psychologically
and intellectually attuned to his or her nature and those who stress the importance of parental qualities such as love,
patience and perseverance. These concepts are not, of course, mutually exclusive and those who stress the influence
of heredity often suggest that its significance lies largely in the empathy and understanding that it permits parents to bring
to the nurture of their children. There are divergent views as to the relative importance of the two factors. In some
cultures considerable prominence has been given to the concept of family as determined by blood lines and even within the Australian
culture where such concepts are rarely emphasised there may be a feeling that biological kinship is of some importance if
only because of the obvious physical and psychological affinities it may provide. However, as any number of adoptive parents
can attest parenthood is not a biological event endowing the child with his or her unique combination of genes,
however significant that may be, but in a relationship born of love, affection, nurture and support. Heredity does
not guarantee compatibility or similarity of nature and empathy is often the product of the quality of the relationship.
It seems unlikely that any overarching principle could be developed that would provide a clear guide of general application.
As the experience of the Family Court amply demonstrates, there may be general principles which may be applied in determining
what is likely to be in the best interests of a particular child but the application of rigid rules preventing courts from considering
the needs of individual children on a case by case basis would inevitably cause hardship and suffering to many. The decisive question
should not be seen to be whether the law should encourage surrogacy arrangements in which the parental roles will
be divided between people in different relationships but, rather, whether the court’s hands should be tied so that
it will be prevented from making orders in the best interests of particular children no matter how sound a principle may be.
There will almost inevitably be cases in which its application would be inimical to the interests of the child. To take but
one example, the Family Court has long recognised the principle that custody orders should not be made which would have the
effect of splitting up siblings. That is obviously a sensible principle when a child’s parents separate, he or
she will suffer the loss of one member of the family unit in which he or she has been raised but the court can, at least, spare the
child the insecurity and distress that may result from further fragmentation of the family. Sadly, there are cases in which
one child of the family sexually or physically abuses another or in which the relationship between siblings is simply
too antagonistic to permit the sensible application of this principle. In such circumstances, the court must obviously
have a discretion to do what is in the best interests of the particular children with which it is concerned even if those in favour
of converting the principle into a rule of general application had not foreseen the possibility that children might find themselves
in those circumstances.
However these issues may be viewed, it is clear that the existence of a conclusive presumption is wholly inconsistent with the principle
that the welfare and interests of the child must be the paramount consideration. Indeed, it makes the welfare and interests of
the child effectively irrelevant. No matter how extreme the situation, the interests of the birth mother or even
those of her husband must always prevail. If the birth mother proves incapable of providing adequate care, the child has
been grossly neglected or physically abused or if the child has already been placed in the care of the commissioning parents
and neither the birth mother nor her partner have seen him or her since birth, still the presumption applies. Even
if a birth mother and her partner were to attempt to sell a new born baby over the internet the law would still conclusively
presume them to be the child’s parents and exclude any possibility that another couple who were the child’s
biological parents, in the sense of providing his or her entire genetic inheritance, could be recognised as the child’s
parents, no matter how concerned for his or her welfare or how suitable they might be to assume their parental responsibilities.
The consent of the birth mother and her husband/partner
Even the amendments introduced in response to the Ryan case do not permit a parenthood order to be made in the interests of the child
unless the birth mother and her husband both consent. The need for the husband’s consent cannot be dispensed with merely
because of such considerations as his opposition to the conception and pregnancy or his refusal to have anything to do with
In the view of the Commission, the dominant question that arises for consideration when a child is born as a result of such an agreement
is not whether a contracting party should be held to his or her contractual obligations nor even whether the balance
of sympathy should favour one or more of the parties over others. The dominant question should be how may this new born
baby best be cared for, nurtured and supported throughout his or her childhood and equipped to face life’s challenges
as an adult?
Whilst this may seem to be self-evident, it is important to stress the interests of the child because so much of the debate seems
to have been characterised by those who stress the plight of childless couples, those who stress the potential trauma that may be
experienced by a young woman compelled to relinquish a new born baby and those so implacably opposed to surrogacy arrangements that
they are unwilling to sensibly consider the welfare of children born as a consequence.
It should be acknowledged that, despite the recognition of this principle, the consent of the existing parents or guardians
of a child is normally required for any adoption, though the Supreme Court has power to dispense with that consent. There
are, of course, substantial differences. In the case of adoptions, consent is almost invariably sought from those who are
the child’s natural parents in the sense of providing his or her genetic inheritance. Furthermore, the consent
is usually given in circumstances in which there are no other people who might reasonably be recognised as the
parents and who are vying for the chance to raise the child. Since no issue has arisen as to their parentage, it should
normally be recognised and respected unless it is relinquished though, even in that context, a court will usually have the power
to dispense with consent so that the relevant authorities will be free to find suitable adoptive parents.
When others have apparently legitimate claims to be recognised as the child’s parents, it seems impossible to find
any adequate reason for preferring the rights of birth mothers and their husbands or partners to the welfare and interests
of children. Yet the present provisions permit them to deny the court jurisdiction to make parentage orders, no matter how clearly
the interests of the children might require such a course, by simply withholding consent. Furthermore, it permits them
to effectively exercise such a right of veto even though they could not similarly prevent an adoption that would equally
extinguish the legal recognition of their parentage.
The present requirement that the husband also consent would permit an estranged husband to thwart a decision
that the birth mother as well as the commissioning parents believe it would be in the best interests of the child and, in
effect, lock her into remaining the mother of a child she had never intended raising. It would also permit the
birth mother, perhaps disaffected by such a refusal, to cede custody of the child to the commissioning parents and
suggest that they might take proceedings against the estranged husband for maintenance.
More fundamentally, the Commission firmly believes that, in cases of disputed parentage, no person should have the right
to prevent a court from acting in the best interests of the child. The wishes, perceptions and any consent of birth mothers
and perhaps partners should clearly be given due consideration but there are no grounds for any conclusive presumption that the interests
of every child will be served by excluding any possibility of parentage orders without their consent. Whilst it is no doubt true
that the great majority of birth mothers and their partners prove to be caring and responsible parents, the experience of the Family
Court of Australia and other courts concerned with parentage or custody amply demonstrates the sad truth that not every person
who bears a child or is the partner of such a person is a good parent. Children are sometimes neglected, abused
or even killed by parents or their partners. Yet, under the present law birth mothers or their partners, no matter how uncaring
or abusive of their children can prevent a court from even considering whether they should not be locked into such a situation but
have the opportunity of becoming, in law, the children of couples who provided their genetic inheritance and are anxious to provide
a stable home for them.
It is true, of course, that at least in extreme cases, welfare authorities may intervene, remove a child from an
abusive or dangerous situation and seek to place him or her in foster care. However, the fact that government agencies might
be able to intervene if they become aware that the plight of a child has become intolerable obviously provides no sensible
basis for ignoring his or her interests until that time or retaining a system that gives priority to the wishes of his or her
birth mother and her partner irrespective of all other considerations.
The ‘alternative’ of adoption
Adoption is the only other way that a person, who is not otherwise recognised as such, can become the legal parent of a child. One
can apply for a parentage order pursuant to
sections 65A
Family Law Act 1975
, but these give more limited legal care and control of a child, and do not change parenthood.
Unlike orders for custody or guardianship, an adoption order irrevocably extinguishes the parental relationship
between a child and those who were formerly recognised as his or her parents, and creates a new legal relationship
between the adoptive parents and the child. A new birth certificate is issued, and the new parents are, for all purposes, the legal
parents of the child. Because of the potential for abuse, adoption has become the subject of close Government control, including
the licensing of agencies that arrange adoptions, and the creation of offences such as entering into, or promoting
adoption agreements other than through the processes established by law. Payment in consideration of adoptions is also generally
an offence.
Adoption Act 1993
generally requires that the applicants be resident or domiciled and the child present in the Territory when the application
for the order is filed. More fundamentally, the consent of the child's legal parents is required unless adequate grounds are
established for the court to dispense with the requirement. It is an offence to arrange privately for an adoption, (unless
the child is a relative of at least one of the intended adoptive parents, or to privately cause a child to be given to another person
with a view to adoption by that person.
People who have provided a child’s genetic inheritance and raised him or her from birth are unlikely to react enthusiastically
to the suggestion that they should apply to adopt someone whom they regard as their own child. The process is also time consuming
and, under the present law, there would be no statutory guarantee that they would emerge as the preferred adoptive parents. Whilst
the authorities would be unlikely to ignore either the force of their claims or the likelihood that the interests
of the child would be promoted by selecting them as the proposed adoptive parents, they might have a somewhat anxious
Furthermore, as previously mentioned, the existing requirements of the
Adoption Act
would make it difficult, though not impossible, for them to do so in the absence of consent from the birth mother and her husband.
Whilst it would be possible to require commissioning parents to apply to adopt the child, there would appear to be little to commend
such a requirement, other than the involvement of the relevant department and the provision of confidential reports.
Whilst reports of that nature might prove invaluable, there is no obvious impediment to an amendment authorising their provision
in proceedings for parentage, without placing the commissioning parents in the position of having to apply for adoption when,
in a very real sense, they are already the child’s parents.
Anti-discrimination considerations
The Commission received a well written and obviously well researched submission from Good Process ACT, a group formed in October
2002 in response to the government’s commitment to consider legislative and policy reforms to effect equality
for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people whom the submission referred to collectively as “GLBTI”.
As the submission pointed out, the
Artificial Conception Act
does not recognise same sex partners of birth mothers as parents of children born as a result of artificial insemination
or IVF. The Commission is unable to see any sensible reason for maintaining this discriminatory approach. It is true
that many people still believe that a child needs both a mother and a father. However, this perceived truism, even if accepted,
could not justify ignoring the reality that children are in fact being raised by same sex partners or disregarding their needs.
In support of the contention that the restriction on the recognition of same sex parents should be removed, Good Process referred
to research which suggested that the quality of parenting provided by same sex parents was as high as that provided
by parents of different genders, that the incidence of children developing homosexual or lesbian tendencies was no greater than
that of the general population, that the welfare and interests of the children seem to be as well served and that there was no
evidence to suggest that the children suffered any long term disadvantage. Those opposed to recognition of same sex
parents most commonly maintained that children are entitled to both a mother and father and that parents of different gender
are necessary to enable the children to develop proper role models.
Whilst the Commission acknowledges the importance of these issues and would be reluctant to leave any impression that the competing
arguments advanced in these submissions and other relevant literature have not been carefully considered, it has nonetheless
concluded that any issue as to what parental arrangements would best serve the welfare and interests of children
must be resolved on a case by case basis rather than by the blanket application of some perceived truism. So much depends upon
the particular circumstances in which a court is likely to be called upon to make such a decision. The character, personality
and conduct of the parents, the depth of their concern for and sensitivity to the needs of the children,
the temperament of the children themselves, the culture in which they are to be raised and the relative strength and importance
of the existing relationships may all be relevant.
Furthermore, in many cases the children are already being raised by those seeking to have their parentage recognised
and laws requiring a court to effectively turn a blind eye to the reality of such situations may adversely affect the
children by, for example, making it difficult to obtain lawful consent when medical treatment is urgently required.
Consequently, whilst the Commission accepts that if the sexual orientation of potential parents or the fact that they are
of the same gender may prove to be an important consideration, at least in some cases, it agrees with the Good Process Group that
Artificial Conception Act
should be amended to remove any provisions that would presently prevent a judge from recognising the parentage of one or
both members of a couple raising a child born as a result of artificial insemination or IVF or that might prevent a
court from making parentage orders in favour of such parents when the evidence establishes that such a course would clearly be in
the best interests of the children.
The need for education
There would appear to be a strong case for education concerning the potential pitfalls and emotional implications
of arrangements of this kind. The most appropriate course would appear to be the inclusion of a segment on alternative parent
agreements in high school or college courses dealing with issues of human sexuality, reproduction and other related social issues.
It would also be helpful to have pamphlets and other material available for those contemplating involvement in such agreements.
The need for counselling
There is also a strong case for ensuring that adequate counselling facilities are available. Accredited counsellors
should be able to provide information and advice on a wide range of issues that may be relevant to both potential surrogate
mothers and potential commissioning parents including the following:
• the need to ensure there is fully informed consent from the surrogate mother and that she has considered the need
to fully inform and seek the support of her partner and/or existing children and other family members;
• the likely emotional impact upon the surrogate mother, especially if she does not have any other children;
• whether the medical history of the commissioning mother is such that there is a real need for a surrogacy arrangement;
• the legal implications of the decision, including any information that can reasonably be provided about the
procedure by which the commissioning parents may become the legal recognised parents and the birth mother and her husband/partner
may be divested of legal responsibility for the child;
• the need for a cooling off period for the surrogate mother to ensure that she has adequate time to consider the implications
of her decision and to examine her own feelings in the light of the decision;
• a method to settle disputes that gives priority to the child's best interests - the Family Court appears to provide
this when the dispute is about placement;
• the need to ensure proper care for the surrogate mother during pregnancy;
• the need to prepare for the psycho-social well being of the child - this may involve counselling;
• counselling for all parties before entering the process;
• clear rules regarding children's right of access to information;
• the need for appropriate details to be recorded on the child’s birth certificate;
• appropriate financial assistance for the surrogate mother during and immediately after the pregnancy;
• any issues relating to the surrogate mother’s abuse of drugs or alcohol;
• any tests that might be available to ensure that the surrogate mother is not at risk of contracting any disease through
artificial insemination or IVF;
• examining the ability of the commissioning parents to be open and honest with the child; and
• any question of continuing access or relationship with the child.
The need for a rebuttable presumption of parentage
There clearly needs to be a presumption of parenthood in favour of the birth mother and her husband or partner. There
may never be applications for declarations of parenthood and, even if there are, the applications may fail. Whilst any dispute
disputes about what is in the best interests of the child may take longer to resolve. In any event, there may be a need for someone
to give parental consent to medical procedures within minutes of birth.
Nonetheless, the Commission is of the view that the presumption should be rebuttable and that the
Artificial Conception Act
, like any other Act concerned with the parenthood of children should ensure that their welfare and interests are the paramount consideration.
Agreements involving only one donor
The position will obviously be more complicated when the surrogacy arrangement involves only artificial insemination by sperm of a
donor father or, alternatively, the implantation of an egg from the donor mother which has been fertilised by a sperm from the
partner of the birth mother. In such circumstances, any declaration recognising the donor of the egg or sperm as a parent
of the child in lieu of the birth mother or her partner would inevitably create a situation in which the child’s parents not
only did not live together but were involved in different relationships.
That situation may be less than ideal but it must be recognised that there are many thousands of children in Australia
who are growing up in similar situations simply because their parents separated, whether prior to their birth or during their childhood.
In any event, it is a fact that can be taken into account by a court when seeking to determine what would be in the best interests
of the child.
The provision of identifying information
There are also issues about the stringency of the provisions relating to identifying information. It seems somewhat incongruous to
authorise a child or some relevant person to apply for identifying information only with the consent of the person who might be
identified. Whilst there may be serious underlying questions of confidentiality and in some circumstances it may
not be easy to strike an adequate balance between considerations, the paramount consideration should again be the interests of the
At least in the absence of any objection by any of the relevant parties, there would appear to be no reason to deny the child the
opportunity of being fully informed of his or her family links. Hence, the information on a full birth certificate should
include the names of any gamete donors, the name of the birth mother and the names of those legally recognised as his or her parents,
though the child would presumably have the option of using a shorter form for routine purposes such as obtaining a drivers license
or having his or her name added to the electoral roll.
RECOMMENDATIONS
It is recommended that:
Artificial Conception Act 1985
be amended by the addition of a new
providing that, notwithstanding the provisions of
where the procedure was undertaken pursuant to a substitute parent agreement, any presumption that the woman is the mother of any
child born as a result of the pregnancy or that her husband is the father of such child shall be rebuttable and any such presumption
shall cease upon the making of a parentage order in respect of such child under section 11.
2 Section 11 be amended:
(a) by repealing subsections (1) and (2) and, in lieu thereof, providing that:
“(1) Subject to section 12, the Supreme Court may make a parentage order if satisfied that the making of the order is
in the best interests of the child.”
(b) by adding to subsection (3)
“(f) any report from the Department of Education, Youth and Community Services concerning the proposed parentage
order and its likely affect on the welfare and interests of the child.”
3 The Department of Education Youth and Community Services be asked to consider:
(a) the provision of education concerning the legal, practical and emotional implications of substitute parent agreements
by incorporating discussion of such issues within existing High School and/or College courses and the provision of
suitable brochures or pamphlets; and
(b) the establishment of facilities for counselling people considering entering into substitute parent agreements, whether as surrogate
mothers or commissioning parents.
4 A new section be enacted requiring the Registrar-General to include on full birth certificates relating to a child
the names of any gamete donors other than those who made such donations on condition of anonymity, the birth mother and
those people legally recognised as the child’s parents.
5 The provisions in the proposed
Parentage Bill 2003
that have been copied from the
Artificial Conception Act 1985
be similarly amended.
This paper is based on ACT law as at December 2003.
This publication has been produced for the purposes of discussion only and is not intended and should not be relied upon, for use
in legal proceedings or as legal advice.
While this publication represents the final report of the ACT Law Reform Commission, it should not be taken to represent the concluded
views of the Attorney General, the ACT Department of Justice and Community Safety, or the Australian Capital Territory Government.
© Australian Capital Territory, Canberra 2003
of the source should be made.
ACT Law Reform Commission Members
Justice Kenneth J Crispin QC, Chair
Professor Richard Campbell AM, Deputy Chair
Ms Lisbeth Campbell
Mr Ian Nichol
Mr Philip Walker
Professor Charles Rowland
Public submissions received from
Australian Capital Territory Chief Minister’s Department
Australian Catholic Bishops Conference
Canberra Fertility Centre, Kim Riding
Canberra Fertility Centre, Dr Martyn A. Stafford-Bell
Good Process ACT
Office of the Community Advocate
Sexual Health and Family
Planning ACT
In the matter of an application pursuant to the
Births Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1997
[2000] ACTSC 39
(5 May 2000) at [11].
See Genesis, ch 16. In 'Does Surrogacy Have a Future after Brazier'
Medical Law Review
at footnote 2 M Freeman suggests that this was not an example of true surrogacy as the surrogates were slaves or concubines, though
it is not clear what contemporary significance could be attributed to this distinction.
See L Tager, 'Surrogate Motherhood, Legal Dilemmas'
South African Law Journal
Report of the Taskforce on Women and the Criminal Code, chapter 9: reproduction and sexuality, The State of Queensland (Department
of the Premier and Cabinet) 2003.
See “Traditional Surrogacy: An untraditional Approach” in
Journal of Assisted Reproductive Law
, Vol 1, Issue 1
See “Artificial Conception – Surrogate Motherhood”, Report No 60, 1988.
Looking backwards, looking forwards: Judicial and Legislative Trends in the Regulation of Surrogate Motherhood in the UK and Australia.
www.law.unimelb.edu.au/aihle/membersonly.html
(accessed 11 December 2003).
Cytoplasm is the area within the shell of an egg that lies outside of the nucleus which contains the genetic material or DNA.
Emma Ott, born in the USA on May 9 1997 was conceived through her father's sperm, her mother's egg and the cytoplasm from an anonymous
egg donation.<www/pbs/org/wnet/innovation/show1/html/story3.html> (accessed 24 June 2002).
Looking backwards, looking forwards: Judicial and Legislative Trends in the Regulation of Surrogate Motherhood in the UK and Australia
The other conditions are that the couple must apply within 6 months of the child's birth; they must be married and over 18 years
of age, at least one must be a genetic parent of the child, the child must reside with them, those who would otherwise be regarded
in law as the parents must have consented to the order and the surrogate mother's consent will be ineffective if given less than
6 weeks after the child's birth.
Report No 60 (1988).
Committee to Inquire Into the Social, Legal and Ethical Issues relating to in vitro Fertilization and its Supervision.
Select Committee on The
Human Reproductive Technology Act 1991
, 1999 at 245 citing the NBBC
Surrogacy - Report 1.
Report to the Minister for Health for Western Australia
, Health Department of Western Australia, Perth, 1988.
Family Law Council “Creating Children: a Uniform Approach to the Law and Practice of Reproductive Technology in Australia”,
Canberra, AGPS 1985 at 61-70. Cited in the submission of the Archdioceses of Canberra and Goulburn to the ACT Community Law Reform
Committee on 30 June 1997.
The submission cites W Winslade, “Surrogate Mothers: Private Rights or Public Wrong”, (1981) 7 Journal of Medical Ethics
Report of the Taskforce on Women and the Criminal Code, chapter 9: Reproduction and Sexuality, The State
of Queensland (Department of the Premier and Cabinet) 2003.
Gillick v West Norfold A.H.A.
(1986) A.C.112 at 186.
Ras Behari Lal v The King Emperor
(1934) 150 L.T. 3 at 5.
Article 21 provides that States Parties that recognise and\/or permit the system of adoption shall ensure that the best interests
of the child shall be the paramount consideration.
See sections 63B, 65E, 67L and 67V.
See, for example, sections 12 and 326 of the
Children and Young People Act 1999
, section 10 of the
Substitute Parent Agreements Act 1995
Adoption Act 1993
Report No 49 (1986).
Report No 60 (1988).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter