URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTCLRC/1997/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Residential Tenancies: Public Housing [1997] ACTCLRC 16
Residential Tenancies: Public Housing
INTRODUCTION
AREAS FOR SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
Residential Tenancies: Public Housing
Report 16: September 1997
Community Law Reform Committee
This report was tabled in the ACT
Legislative Assembly on 25/9/97 by the Attorney-General, Mr Gary Humphries.
(c) Australian Capital Territory, Canberra 1997 - Copyright in this publication
is waived. It may be copied freely without the need
for permission being
sought. Acknowledgment of the source should be made.
INTRODUCTION
1. In December 1994, the 8th Report of the ACT Community Law Reform Committee
("the committee") on its review of ACT private residential
law was tabled in the ACT Legislative Assembly. The report made 182 recommendations
for reform of the existing law relating
to private landlords and tenants
covered by the
Landlord and Tenant Act 1949.
The committee notes
that the Government, on 15 May 1997, introduced the
Residential Tenancies
into the Assembly, giving effect to most of the recommendations
of that report.
2. In transmitting the report to the Attorney-General the Chairperson
of the committee foreshadowed that two separate reports would
dealing with
* public tenancies; and
* caravan parks, hostel accommodation, boarders and lodgers.
3. A further, short, report will also be prepared on community housing
and, a more substantive report on innkeepers and serviced apartments.
4. The committee indicated at paragraph 34 of the report that it had
formed the preliminary view that ACT Housing should be bound
by the proposed
residential tenancies legislation, subject to consideration of possible
exemptions from particular provisions.
5. Since that time, the committee has further considered the issue of
exemptions within the context of the preparation of the
Residential Tenancy
and against the background of National Competition Policy.
6. The committee takes as its starting point the desirability of the
private and public housing markets being subject to the same
rules. This
report identifies a limited subset of exceptions and a number of transitional
provisions which will achieve these objectives.
The committee has been closely
involved in the finalisation of the existing legislation and notes that
proposed Government Amendments
to the Bill before the Assembly are consistent
with the recommendations made in this Report.
7. ACT Housing (ACTH) is by far the biggest single landlord in the ACT
with a rental stock of some 12,500 houses and flats, representing
30% of the ACT residential rental market. The majority of these dwellings
are allocated to applicants for assistance through
the gazetted Public Rental
Housing Assistance Program operating under the
Housing Assistance Act
. The object of that program is to provide rental accommodation
to eligible people in the ACT who are unable to afford or obtain adequate
and appropriate housing.
8. At December 1995 there were over 12,000 ACTH tenancies and some 5,000
applicants on the waiting list, with typical waiting times
of 3 to 4 years
for a three bedroom house and 4 to 5 years for an aged persons unit. At
March 1996 income barriers for admission
to the waiting list were set at
$381 per week for a single person and $635 per week for a couple, with an
extra $63 per week added
for each additional person in the household.
9. Rents for ACTH dwellings are set at market levels and the average
weekly rent for a 3 bedroom house is about $156 and for a 2 bedroom
who cannot afford to pay market rents are granted
a rebate. This means that
tenants are required to contribute no more than 25% of their income towards
the rent for their dwelling.
Currently about 87% of public tenants receive
a rental rebate at a current annual cost to ACTH of about $48 million. Practically
all new tenants are eligible for a rental rebate.
10. The public rental program operates in accordance with the principles
of the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement (CSHA) to which
the ACT, like
the States and the Northern Territory, is a party. The primary principle
of the CSHA is to ensure that all Australians
have access to secure, adequate
and appropriate housing within their capacity to pay. Assistance is to be
provided to all sections
of the community without discrimination, with priority
determined by need. A key principle of the Agreement is that people in rental
housing shall have security of tenure. This means that tenants are entitled
to remain in public housing while they continue to observe
the conditions
of their tenancy agreement. If it is necessary to move a tenant to another
dwelling, a choice of dwellings and locations
appropriate to their needs
is to be provided.
11. Funding provided under the CSHA is targeted principally for capital
purposes such as the provision of new housing and the upgrading
of existing
dwellings. The committee is advised that CSHA funds may not be used to cover
the cost of general maintenance and repairs
or rental rebates, two areas
of high expenditure for ACTH.
12. Through a variety of targeted programs, ACTH assists a wide range
of people with particular needs in addition to people who are
low incomes. These include people with intellectual and physical disabilities,
youth, single parents, groups and the aged,
whose housing requirements often
cannot be met through the private rental market. The profile of public tenants
therefore tends to
be somewhat different from that of tenants on the private
13. This, together with the sheer size, nature and diversity of the public
housing property portfolio, presents particular management
challenges not
experienced to the same degree by private landlords.
AREAS FOR SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
14. The committee believes that there is no justification for maintaining
a separate body of rules for private and public housing
markets. Such a
distinction is not sustainable on the grounds of basic fairness and cannot
be maintained in the face of National
Competition Policy. The remainder
of this report examines a series of possible exceptions to this basic proposition
15. References to "recommendations" in the following text are
to recommendations made by the committee in the 8th Report of the committee
in its review of ACT private residential tenancy law.
Rent increases
16. Recommendation 60 proposed that the new legislation should continue
to restrict rent increases to one per year (for individual
tenancies). The
standard tenancy agreement prepared by the committee provided that there
should not be a rental increase in the first
year of the tenancy. It is
this later requirement which raises difficulties in the context of ACTH.
17. ACTH has advised that, in relation to its 12,500 houses and flats,
rents all rise (or fall) on the same day where they are assessed
different from market levels. This practice is consistent with the requirement
of the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement
that rent levels for public
housing dwellings be reviewed at least annually.
18. Under this proposal, rents for individual tenancies let during the
12 months preceding the day rents are scheduled to rise could
not be increased
because these tenancies would be less than 12 months old. These rents could
not be increased until some time after
the date of the general rent increase
and this time would vary with the age of each tenancy. Rent increases for
these tenancies would
remain unsynchronised with general rent increases
each year thereafter. This situation would be compounded by the same thing
for new tenancies let in each subsequent year, until the opportunity
for an annual general rent increase ceased to exist altogether.
19. ACTH has indicated that the principle of an annual general rent review
is soundly based, that it is an equitable and practical
mechanism, and is
well understood by public tenants. The concept accords with the spirit of
the proposed legislation. Although rents
for new tenancies increase less
than 12 months after the tenancies commence, this occurs only in the first
year. Thereafter, these
rents do not increase again until a full 12 months
has elapsed. Furthermore, as almost all new tenants qualify for rebated
tenants are not disadvantaged even in the first year. Also, the practice
of increasing all rents simultaneously helps to keep rents
for similar accommodation
at the same or comparable levels.
20. An issue that needs to be addressed in this context is the timing
of rent increases to cover increased amenity arising from the
of dwellings. Current practice is to increase the rent on completion of
upgrading outside the general rent increase arrangements.
ACTH has indicated
that it would postpone these increases until the general rent increase takes
place in recognition of the principle
of 12 monthly intervals between rent
increases. The impact is likely to be negligible because 87% of tenants
pay rebated rents and
therefore are unaffected by increased market rents.
21. The committee believes that it is in the public interest for ACTH
to be able to review rent on a 12 monthly basis. In coming to
this conclusion,
the committee has had regard to the cost which might otherwise be occasioned
to the public and the negligible net
effect on tenants.
The committee recommends that the prescribed terms be amended to permit
rental review of housing under the Commonwealth State Housing
to occur on a twelve month basis, regardless of whether this is during the
first year of the tenancy.
State of repair of premises -obligation to maintain
22. Recommendations made by the committee raise a number of significant
issues for ACTH. Under the proposals, a lessor is required:
* to maintain the premises in a reasonable state of repair throughout
the tenancy
(Recommendation 94)
* to make repairs arising from fair wear and tear but not from tenant
negligence or wilful damage
(Recommendation 96)
* to make non urgent repairs within 4 weeks after notification
(Recommendation
; and urgent repairs within a reasonable period after notification
Recommendation 99)
. If the landlord cannot be contacted or fails
to make urgent repairs within a reasonable time after notification, the
arrange repairs up to a maximum value of $1000 and bill the landlord
who must pay the bill within 7 days after receipt; if the payment
is disputed
the matter must be referred to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal for adjudication
Recommendation 102
23. These recommendations represent a series of significant departures
from the formal requirements under existing legislation (which
that the premises be let in reasonable condition and does not prescribe
standards for the maintenance of the premises throughout
the tenancy).
Urgent repairs
24. ACTH has advised that it accepts the need for reasonable conditions
to be placed on landlords in relation to urgent repairs such
as burst water
pipes, sewerage faults, or dangerous electrical problems. It has a system
for handling after hours emergency repairs,
particularly:
* burst water service
* blocked toilet system
* serious roof leaks
* gas leaks
* total failure of electricity, gas or water supply
* dangerous electrical faults
* serious damage caused by flood, storm or fire
* a fault or damage which causes the premises to be unsafe or not secure.
25. Tenants are advised to call on the 24 hour maintenance telephone
numbers immediately in the event of storm damage, gas leaks,
burst water
pipes or other emergency items which are identified in an information brochure.
Less urgent items are dealt with promptly
but on a more routine basis.
26. ACTH has advised that it generally accepts the definition of "urgent
repairs" (which is different from the concept of "emergency
within the ACTH maintenance system) provided at recommendation 100. However,
it originally sought an exemption from the
proposals outlined at recommendation
102 on the ground that, potentially, control of its limited maintenance
budget would be seriously
compromised if tenants were able to arrange urgent
repairs privately. It considered that low income public tenants could be
disadvantaged if they misjudged the situation or misinterpreted
the guidelines and arranged for repairs to be carried out privately
to discover later that ACTH was not required to compensate them for their
expenditure.
27. Following discussions between the committee and ACTH, these concerns
were not pressed. The committee notes that these issues are
largely resolved
through the existence of the 24 hour maintenance service. ACTH agreed that,
given its policy of attending to urgent
maintenance promptly, it was unlikely
that urgent repairs would not be attended to within a reasonable time.
28. ACTH had concerns about the meaning of the terms "undue inconvenience
to the tenant" and "inhibits or unduly inconveniences the
as used in the recommendations and draft standard tenancy agreement. It
also had concerns that what constituted a reasonable
time to effect urgent
repairs would vary according to the item in question. The committee notes
that these issues have been addressed
in the drafting of the Bill.
Non urgent repairs
29. The proposals for non urgent repairs will have a major budgetary
impact on ACTH, with its large stock of dwellings, many of which
pre-1960. Over 30 per cent of stock is more than 30 years old and 50 per
cent over 20 years old. In many cases, these
older dwellings require significant
work to bring them up to contemporary standards. Furthermore, the majority
of ACTH's major flat
complexes in inner Canberra are over 30 years old and
require extensive renovation work in kitchens, wet areas, water and sewerage
lines and roofing. The Committee accepts that, realistically, these works
can only be done in a programmed way over a number of years.
30. ACTH has assured the committee that it does not seek to avoid its
responsibilities as an owner in this area. However, with a stock
dwellings, the scope of its operations far exceeds that of any other landlord
in the ACT. Given the financial adjustments
since self government and the
current structure of the CSHA, the committee does not believe that it is
realistic to require ACTH
to immediately assume the responsibilities for
routine maintenance and repairs implied by the committee's proposals.
31. The financial viability of public rental operations including the
capacity to undertake repairs and maintenance is greatly influenced
level of rent subsidies provided to public tenants. In 1995-96 the cost
of rent rebates is estimated at about $48 million
representing assistance
to about 87% of tenants. Rent rebates are currently funded from rental operations
and simply represent rent
foregone. The committee is advised that CSHA funds,
including Territory matching funds, cannot be used to fund rebates or maintenance.
32. ACTH, like other housing authorities throughout Australia, is greatly
restricted in its capacity to exercise flexibility in the
use of CSHA funds
and to maintain effectively the housing assets provided for public housing.
This situation may change over time.
33. ACTH originally sought deferral of the proposed arrangements for
routine repairs (
Recommendations 98, 101, 103 and 104
) to enable
it to gear up operations and develop a financial capacity to address the
increased financial responsibilities under the
proposals. Given that the
CSHA negotiations are encompassing principles of competitive neutrality
ACTH expects to be in much the
same position as landlords in the private
market to respond to routine maintenance over the next 3 years.
34. The committee notes that these issues have been partially addressed
in the drafting of the application provision of the Bill.
Under this provision,
the new law will progressively apply to tenancies on the happening of specified
events until 1 July 2000 when
the law will apply to all rental properties.
Notwithstanding these provisions, the committee considers that it would
be in the public
interest that ACTH should be expressly exempted from these
provisions until 1 July 2000. In coming to this decision, the committee
has had regard to the potential diversion of funds at the early stage of
the new regime of law away from the provision of housing
to routine housing
maintenance.
The committee recommends that ACTH should be expressly exempted from
non-urgent repair provisions until 1 July 2000.
Inspections and Access
35. ACTH considered that significant issues arose because of recommendations
concerning inspections and access, including:
* routine inspections by the lessor restricted to 2 per year (
Recommendation
* an inspection within 4 weeks after the commencement of the tenancy
and another upon vacation by the tenant would be additional to
routine inspections (
Recommendation 82
* unless otherwise agreed, lessor to give 14 days written notice of routine
inspections and of required access to make repairs; (
Recommendations
* notice appropriate to the circumstances to be given for access for
urgent repairs (
Recommendation 89
* access for all purposes to be unavailable on Sundays, public holidays,
and before 8am and after 6pm on any day, unless otherwise
agreed or unless
such access is necessary for urgent repairs (
Recommendation 90
36. ACTH agree that the rights of tenants to quiet enjoyment of their
inspections
might be adequate in most cases there would be instances when additional
inspections could be justified; eg, in the case
of a tenant with a history
of property abuse.
37. The committee agrees that the Tribunal should be able to order additional
inspections. It is the committee's view that, in the
appropriate case, the
Tribunal would have the power to make such an order.
Tenant improvements
38. Recommendation 109 proposes that the new legislation should continue
to prohibit the lessor from requiring the tenant to effect
any improvements,
alterations or repairs at the tenant's own expense with the exception of
repairs necessary due to negligent or
intentional damage by the tenant or
person for whom the tenant is responsible.
39. ACTH believe that, consistent with established practices (which help
to keep rental costs down), tenants and owners should be
able to agree on
the tenant undertaking various tasks (including cleaning the roof guttering,
replacing tap washers and light bulbs,
and maintaining gardens).
40. Having considered this matter carefully with ACTH, the committee
does not believe that the Bill or proposed prescribed terms have
this effect
and does not believe that any change is necessary.
Charging for water, gas and electricity usage
41. Recommendation 41 proposes that the landlord could not charge for
electricity, gas or water usage unless a separate meter is provided
actual usage by individual tenants.
42. All units built for ACTH under current construction programs are
separately metered. However at the Northbourne Flats, an older
housing complex,
ACTH charges tenants at a determined rate for the use of centrally provided
hot water and space heating because
individual flats are not separately
metered. The charge is based on average consumption rates and is considered
an equitable arrangement
43. Having considered this matter carefully with ACTH, the committee
does not believe that the Bill or proposed prescribed terms should
be altered.
Instead, ACTH should either factor such costs into the rental costs of the
tenants or provide separate meters.
Receipts for bond or rent
44. Recommendation 57 proposes that the lessor should be required to
issue a receipt for all payments of bond or rent except where
the rent is
paid by direct deposit into an account nominated by the agent or lessor;
the receipt is to specify the date, amount,
period, premises, and whether
the payment is bond or rent; the receipt is to be issued immediately if
the payment is made in person
or within 7 working days otherwise,
45. Having considered this matter carefully with ACTH, the committee
does not believe that the Bill or proposed prescribed terms should
be altered.
The committee notes that a receipt is not necessary if the rent is paid
by the tenant directly into an account nominated
by the lessor (as is the
case in most of ACTH payment arrangements).
Interference with quiet enjoyment
46. Recommendations 78 and 79 propose that the lessor be required not
any interference with the reasonable peace, comfort
or privacy of the tenant and that the Residential Tenancy Tribunal have
to order a reduction in rent in the event of any such interference.
47. ACTH is concerned about the use of the word
a social and legal obligation to house people from all sections of the community
without unlawful discrimination. It is
concerned about any prospect of being
held legally accountable for the behaviour of tenants, which in some instances
might interfere
with the quiet enjoyment by other tenants of their rented
48. In response to substantiated complaints, ACTH advised that it routinely
takes action to remind its tenants of their responsibilities
under their
tenancy agreements not to use their properties in such a way as to cause
a nuisance to other residents.
49. Having considered this matter carefully with ACTH, the committee
does not believe that the Bill or proposed prescribed terms should
be altered.
The committee agrees that the owner should not be responsible for every
nuisance of the landlord's tenant. Indeed, within
the framework of the tenancy
agreement, the owner will not have the legal capacity to prevent many such
nuisances. The meaning of
the word `permit' in this context is constrained
by both the legal powers and the knowledge of the owner.
The committee recommends that it examine and report on possible reforms
concerning disputes between neighbours.
Absence from premises
50. Recommendation 107 proposes that the tenant should be required not
to leave the premises vacant for more than 21 days without
notifying the
51. ACTH was concerned that this would seem to allow a tenant to be absent
without notification from the dwelling for any period,
provided that a person,
including one with no connection with the tenancy, occupies the dwelling
during the tenant's absence.
52. Having considered this matter carefully with ACTH, the committee
does not believe that the Bill or proposed prescribed terms should
be altered.
The proposal does not have the effect originally argued by ACTH.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter