URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/1998/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW) - Issues Paper [1998] NSWLRCIP 15
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
Table of Contents
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
TERMS OF REFERENCE
BACKGROUND TO THE REFERENCE
HAVE YOUR SAY
CHAPTER 2. POLICY OBJECTIVES OF CAMA
INTRODUCTION
RESOLVING COMPLAINTS
CHANGING ATTITUDES TOWARDS COMPLAINTS
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
MONITORING SERVICES
ENCOURAGING COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LEGISLATION
IS THE OBJECTS CLAUSE OF THE LEGISLATION APPROPRIATE?
FUNCTIONS MUST BE EXERCISED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PRINCIPLES
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF THE PRINCIPLES?
IS SECTION 5 APPROPRIATE?
CHAPTER 3. COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
INTRODUCTION
THE CSC AND THE COMMISSIONER
Who is the Commissioner?
Does the Act protect the independence of the Commissioner and the CSC?
THE CSC’S FUNCTIONS
What are the CSC’s functions?
Exercising the CSC’s functions
Are the CSC’s functions appropriate?
THE CSC’S REVIEW FUNCTION
What is the review power?
DEALING WITH COMPLAINTS AGAINST SERVICE PROVIDERS
When can a complaint be made?
Who can complain?
Who should be able to make a complaint?
Procedures for dealing with complaints
Is the legislation too prescriptive?
Notifying the service provider of the complaint
Assessing the complaint
Are the time limits for assessment appropriate?
Alternative dispute resolution
Investigation
ENFORCEMENT OF THE CSC’S DECISIONS
CSC makes recommendations
Should the CSC’s recommendations be enforceable?
What are community services?
Should the CSC’s jurisdiction be extended?
What powers does the Commissioner have?
Powers of search and entry
Limitations on the powers
Enforcing the Commissioner’s powers
Are the Commissioner’s powers appropriate?
4. COMMUNITY VISITORS
INTRODUCTION
WHO ARE COMMUNITY VISITORS?
Appointment of Community Visitors
Functions of Community Visitors
What functions should Community Visitors have?
Visitable services
Should the jurisdiction of Community Visitors be extended?
POWERS OF COMMUNITY VISITORS
CHAPTER 5. COMMUNITY SERVICES APPEALS TRIBUNAL AND THE ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS TRIBUNAL
INTRODUCTION
THE ADT AND ITS MEMBERS
Community Services Division of the ADT
Is the independence of the ADT protected?
Members’ qualifications
Reviewable decisions
Should decisions by service providers be reviewable?
Who has standing to apply to the ADT?
What the Act says
Tribunal decisions
Should the standing provision be changed?
ADT proceedings
ENFORCEMENT OF DECISIONS
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER 6. COMMUNITY SERVICES REVIEW COUNCIL
INTRODUCTION
WHAT IS THE REVIEW COUNCIL?
Composition of the Review Council
Functions of the Review Council
IS THE REVIEW COUNCIL NECESSARY?
Appendix A - Submissions Received
Appendix B - Objects and Principles
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
Terms of reference
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW), the Attorney General, the Honourable Jeff Shaw QC MLC, referred the following matter to the Law Reform Commission:
The Law Reform Commission is to review:
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(the CAMA) to determine whether the policy objectives of the CAMA remain valid and whether the terms of the CAMA remain appropriate
for securing those objectives; and
2. Conduct the review having regard to the obligations arising under s 126 of the CAMA and the provisions of the
Subordinate Legislation Act 1989
Participants
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairman of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Mr Michael Adams QC
Professor David Weisbrot
Mr Jerrold Cripps
Professor Neil Rees*
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Kearney McKenzie and Associates
Ms Beverley Caska
Ms Aferdita Kryeziu
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
Sydney NSW 1044
[DX 1227 Sydney]
Phone: (02) 9228 8230
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 14 December 1998.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing the Report on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Discussion Paper. However,
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
Link to Full Version of Issues Paper 15
History of this Reference (Digest)
1. INTRODUCTION
The New South Wales Law Reform Commission is reviewing the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) (CAMA). We must look at whether:
the policy objectives of CAMA are still valid and
the terms of CAMA are appropriate for securing those objectives.
2. HAVE YOUR SAY
The Law Reform Commission wants to know what you think about
CAMA. We have prepared an issues paper which raises issues and asks
(IP 15). This is a summary of the main issues and questions
in that paper.
3. OBJECTS AND PRINCIPLES
The objects of CAMA are listed at the beginning of the Act. They are:
to foster an atmosphere in which complaints and independent monitoring are viewed positively
to provide for resolving complaints about community services and programs
to encourage the resolution of complaints at a local level
to encourage the resolution of complaints through alternative dispute resolution
to provide independent and accessible mechanisms for resolving
complaints, reviewing administrative decisions and monitoring services,
programs and complaints procedures
to encourage compliance with the objects, principles and provisions of community welfare legislation.
Should the objects clause remain unchanged? If not, what changes would you make?
People who do things under CAMA, for example, the Community Services
Commission resolving a complaint, or the Community Services Appeals
Tribunal deciding an issue, must act in accordance with the principles
listed in CAMA. The most important of these is that “the
paramount consideration in providing a service for a person must be the
best interests of the person”. Other principles are:
a person receiving a service (or eligible to receive one) is to
receive an adequate explanation of it, is to be heard in relation
it, and may question decisions or actions that affect them
a service provider is to respect the legal and human rights of consumers
a service provider is to provide information about the service that enables the consumer to make an appropriate decision
a service provider is to enable a complaint to be dealt with fairly, informally and quickly
a complaint about providing a service is to be dealt with even if it is made by someone else on behalf of the client.
Should CAMA include a list of principles to guide the exercise
of the functions of the Community Visitors, the Commission and the
Tribunal? If so, what should they be?
4. SECTION 5
Section 5 of CAMA says neither the Commission nor the Tribunal
can determine an issue, or make a decision or a recommendation in a
beyond the resources appropriated by Parliament for community services
inconsistent with the way those resources have been allocated by the Government or
inconsistent with Government policy.
Does section 5 unduly limit the independence of the Commission and the Tribunal?
Should section 5 be repealed or amended? If so, how?
5. COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
The functions of the Community Services Commission include:
resolving complaints made by consumers against service providers
making inquiries into the situation of children in care
monitoring and reviewing the delivery of community services and
How important is the independence of the Community Services Commission?
Should CAMA confer more functions on the Commission?
The basis of a complaint to the Community Services Commission is that a service provider “acted unreasonably”:
by providing, or not providing a community service to a person
in the way a community service was provided to a person
by withdrawing or varying a community service to a person or
in the administration of a community service in relation to a person.
who satisfies the Commission that he or she has “a genuine
concern in the subject matter of the complaint” can
complaint, as long as he or she is not “unjustifiably
interfering”. CAMA outlines the procedure for dealing with
complaint, including referring it to the service provider for
resolution, referring it to alternative dispute resolution or
investigating
In what circumstances should someone be able to make a complaint to the Commission against a service provider?
What processes should the Commission use to deal with complaints?
When the Commission hears a complaint or makes an inquiry it can
make “recommendations” for improving the delivery of
community services to the Government, a service provider or someone
else. If a service provider does not take action recommended
Commission after investigating a complaint, the person who made the
complaint can ask the Community Services Appeals Tribunal
to review the
service provider’s decision. Otherwise, the recommendation is
unenforceable.
When should a person be able to take action to enforce a Commission recommendation?
Who should be able to do so?
Generally speaking, the Commission can hear complaints made against
“service providers” by people receiving (or eligible
receive) “community services”. There are differences of
opinion about whether the Commission can hear complaints about
services used by children and people with a disability. These include:
people with a disability who live in licensed boarding houses or aged care facilities
people with a disability who come into contact with the criminal justice system
children who come into contact with the juvenile justice system and
children in foster care.
Should the Commission’s jurisdiction to review, inquire and monitor include any of the people listed above?
6. COMMUNITY VISITORS
The Minister appoints Community Visitors. Their functions are:
to promote the legal and human rights of people using community services
to consider matters raised by consumers and staff of services and others
to give consumers information about advocacy services and help them get the service
to facilitate the early and speedy resolution of grievances or matters of concern.
Should the list of functions of Community Visitors be changed? If so, how and why?
Is the Community Visitors scheme an effective way of
independently monitoring children in care, and people with a disability
in residential
Should the scheme be extended to cover different kinds of services?
7. COMMUNITY SERVICES APPEALS TRIBUNAL
The Tribunal will soon become the Community Services Division of
the Administrative Decisions Tribunal. It can review some decisions
made under community welfare legislation, but not others. It cannot
review Commission decisions, except on the ground that it was
the Commission’s powers. It can review a service provider’s
decision not to implement a Commission recommendation
decisions by the Minister, for example, to adopt a transition plan.
What decisions should, or should not be, reviewable by the Tribunal?
Anyone who can demonstrate to the Tribunal that he or she has a
“genuine concern” in the subject matter of the decision
apply to the Tribunal for a review of the decision. In two recent
decisions, the Tribunal said that two peak disability groups,
with Disabilities (NSW) and the Council on Intellectual Disability,
could bring appeals against decisions by the Minister.
Who should be able to apply to the Tribunal for a review of a decision?
8. COMMUNITY SERVICES REVIEW COUNCIL
The Review Council includes Government members and members from the community services sector. It has two functions:
to encourage co-ordination of the functions of the Commission, Community Visitors and the Tribunal and others
to give the Minister strategic advice about the operational effectiveness of the review and monitoring system.
Should there by a council to oversee the operation of CAMA and advise the Minister? If so, who should be members of the council?
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
TERMS OF REFERENCE
1.1 On 9 June 1998, the Attorney General, the Hon JW Shaw QC MLC, asked the Commission to:
1. Review the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) (the CAMA) to determine whether the policy objectives of the CAMA remain valid and whether the terms of the CAMA remain appropriate
for securing those objectives; and
2. Conduct the review having regard to the obligations arising under s 126 of the CAMA and the provisions of the
Subordinate Legislation Act 1989
BACKGROUND TO THE REFERENCE
1.2 Section 126 of the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) (the Act) says that the Act must be reviewed to determine whether its policy objectives remain valid, and whether its terms
remain appropriate for securing those objectives, as soon as possible after five years from 8 April 1993. A report of the review
is to be tabled in Parliament by 8 April 1999. The Commission is also reviewing the
Disability Services Act 1993
(NSW) and has released an issues paper,
Review of the
Disability Services Act 1993
(NSW) (IP 16).
1.3 This paper is an issues paper. It is designed to provoke comment. It examines the provisions of the Act. It discusses the objects
of the Act, and asks if they remain appropriate. It then considers what the Act has to say about the organisations it establishes:
that is, the Community Services Commission (the CSC), the Community Visitors scheme, the Community Services Appeals Tribunal (the
CSAT), and the Community Services Review Council (the Review Council). It asks questions about the provisions of the Act and its
operation. In preparing this paper, a number of people and organisations made submissions to the Commission, identifying what they
considered to be the main issues and concerns about the Act. A list of those submissions appears as Appendix A to this paper. The
Commission greatly appreciates the assistance provided by these submissions.
HAVE YOUR SAY
1.4 The Commission will be undertaking community consultation during October, November and December 1998. If you wish to respond to
some of the questions in the issues paper, you are invited to do so. You need not respond to all the questions. How to make a submission
is outlined on
of this paper.
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
2. Policy Objectives of CAMA
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
INTRODUCTION
2.1 The policy objectives of an Act are found in the Act’s objects clause. In addition, the second reading speech made by the
Minister when the Bill was introduced into Parliament often throws some further light on them. Part 1 of the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) (the Act) lists the objectives of the Act and the principles which must be observed in exercising functions under the Act.
The text of the objects clause is in Appendix B. Part 1 of the Act also includes a provision that imposes resource and political
limits on the administration of the Act. The objects of the Act spell out a two pronged approach to improving service provision:
encouraging desirable outcomes, for example, compliance with legislation and resolution of complaints at the local level; and
providing mechanisms for achieving them.
RESOLVING COMPLAINTS
2.2 The focus of the objects of the Act is the resolution of complaints. The objects include providing a mechanism for resolving individual
complaints about community services, especially complaints by people who receive services (or are eligible to do so), their families
and advocates. The mechanism should be independent and accessible. The objects also articulate the preferred way for dealing with
individual complaints: the legislation should encourage, wherever reasonable and practicable, resolution at a local level and also
the use of alternative dispute resolution (ADR). In his second reading speech, the Minister for Community Services highlighted the
desirability of resolving complaints quickly and at the local level:
The community services area . . . is an area that focuses on assisting people who are disadvantaged in our community. It is therefore
very important that every effort is made to assist clients with complaints and grievances quickly and to provide a powerful framework
for service providers to enhance their abilities to provide such a responsiveness.
In his view, the underlying theme of the Act was that about 75% of all complaints about the delivery of community services could be
resolved at or close to the place the services are provided.
CHANGING ATTITUDES TOWARDS COMPLAINTS
2.3 Although focusing very much on them, the objects of the Act go beyond individual complaints to the need to change attitudes towards
complaints. The first in the list of objects is to foster, in community services and programs, an atmosphere in which complaints
and independent monitoring are viewed positively as ways of enhancing service and program delivery. The Minister also addressed this
issue in his second reading speech:
The organisational framework is aimed at creating a safety net and providing a basis for motivating all agencies to improve client
responsiveness. In the end it is a framework to assist in improving the relationships between service providers and their clients
or customers. In essence, complaints and grievances are an opportunity to improve services to clients.
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
2.4 The objects of the Act include providing an independent and accessible mechanism for the review of administrative decisions. The
Act establishes the Community Services Appeals Tribunal
(the CSAT). The objects do not, however, spell out how the independence of the CSAT should be maintained or what characteristics
would make it accessible to children and people with a disability.
In his second reading speech, the Minister identified the CSAT as:
a significant safeguard in an environment which is based upon many decisions which are, by the nature of the matters being dealt with,
value judgments against criteria established by law.
MONITORING SERVICES
2.5 The objects of the Act include providing independent and accessible mechanisms for monitoring services, programs and complaints
procedures. The Act establishes the Community Services Commission (the CSC) and the Community Visitors scheme. In his second reading
speech, the Minister said that the Government had given the CSC all the powers the disability sector wanted the Commissioner to have
for his or her monitoring role:
the power to investigate, to initiate inquiries, to obtain subpoenas and search warrant powers, the ability to require a report on
actions taken on the commissioner’s recommendations, the ability to refer matters with recommendations for action, to provide
annual and special reports to Parliament and for the bill to provide for the power to protect people against retaliation for making
complaints.
ENCOURAGING COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LEGISLATION
2.6 The objects of the Act include encouraging compliance with the objects, principles and provisions of the community welfare legislation,
for example, the
Disability Services Act 1993
(NSW) and the
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
IS THE OBJECTS CLAUSE OF THE LEGISLATION APPROPRIATE?
2.7 Generally speaking, submissions to the Commission that address the issue support the objects of the Act and say that they continue
to be valid.
However, as discussed above, the objects clause focuses very much on establishing appropriate mechanisms for resolution of individual
complaints. Although the clause includes as objects fostering an atmosphere in which complaints and monitoring are viewed positively
as an opportunity for improving services and encouraging compliance with legislation, there is no suggestion as to how this might
be achieved. The objects do not include a systemic approach to improving outcomes for clients. The CSC itself identifies this gap.
It says that the objects (and the Act itself) put too much focus on individual complaints handling and not enough on service monitoring
and overall systemic oversight.
Does the objects clause focus too much on individual complaints?
Does the objects clause focus enough on monitoring and review?
Should the objects clause remain unchanged? If not, what changes would you make?
FUNCTIONS MUST BE EXERCISED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PRINCIPLES
2.8 The objects clause of the Act includes a list of principles in accordance with which all functions under the Act must be exercised.
This means that anyone who does anything under the Act, for example, the Minister appointing a Community Visitor, the CSC resolving
a complaint, or the CSAT deciding an issue, must act consistently with the principles. The most important of the principles is that
the best interests of a person for whom a service is being provided must be the paramount consideration in providing the service.
Best interests is, however, a very subjective concept. What one person thinks is in someone’s best interests may be very different
from what another person thinks. The legislation gives no guidance as to what those best interests might be, or what matters a decision-maker
might consider in determining someone’s best interests. The second principle states that a person who receives (or is eligible
to do so) a community service is to receive an adequate explanation of the service, is to be heard in relation to the service and
may question decisions or actions that affect the person in relation to the service. Another principle says a complaint made by someone
else on behalf of a person who receives (or is eligible to do so) a service is to be dealt with. There are three more principles.
They say what service providers should do, and are concerned with protecting clients’ rights, information provision and complaints
handling at the service level. They say a service provider is to:
promote and respect the legal and human rights of anyone receiving a community service and must respect any need for privacy or confidentiality;
(to the best of his or her ability) provide information that will enable a person receiving the service (or who will be) to make an
appropriate decision;
enable a complaint about the service to be dealt with fairly, informally and quickly and at a place convenient to the complainant.
In his second reading speech, the Minister focused on the consequence of taking seriously the view that the needs of consumers should
be the paramount consideration. He said that this means that the services that are delivered will more closely reflect the needs
of the consumers. The Act would encourage those service providers who had already embraced this view and challenge those who had
He said little else about the principles.
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF THE PRINCIPLES?
2.9 Like the objects, the principles are generally supported by those submissions that mention them.
However, it is difficult to understand the role of the principles in the legislative scheme. The Act establishes the CSC, the Community
Visitors Scheme, the CSAT and the Community Services Review Council. It confers jurisdiction, functions, powers and duties on those
bodies. Clearly, the best interests principle and the client’s right to be heard and to ask questions are relevant to the exercise
of the Community Visitors’, the CSC’s and CSAT’s functions. It is not so clear what the principles applying to
service providers are. The Act deals with service providers only incidentally, for example, as a person against whom a complaint
has been made to the CSC or a party to proceedings in the CSAT. The principles do not impose on service providers a duty, nor confer
on clients an enforceable right.
Should the Act include a list of principles to guide the exercise of the functions of Community Visitors, the CSC and the CSAT? If
so, what should they be?
Are the existing principles appropriate? Why or why not?
Should the Act include a list of matters to be considered in determining what is in someone’s best interests? If so, what should
2.10 The Act imposes limits on the exercise of the CSC’s and the CSAT’s functions. Section 5 says that neither the CSC
nor the CSAT can determine an issue, or make a decision or a recommendation, in a way that is (or requires taking action that is):
beyond the resources appropriated by Parliament for community services;
inconsistent with the way those resources have been allocated by the Ministers of Community Services, Aged Services or Disability
Services, or the Directors General of their departments; or
inconsistent with Government policy, as certified in writing by the Minister of Community Services, Aged Services or Disability Services
and notified to the CSC or the CSAT.
Section 5 reveals the tension inherent in establishing independent bodies to review government decisions and the decisions of government
funded service providers. As the Minister said in his second reading speech:
[The Act] clearly empowers the commission and the tribunal to be effective in reviewing not only government decisions but those of
bodies funded by the Government to provide services in the community services area. On the other hand, the legislation sets out the
primacy of responsibility of the elected representatives of the people for policy determination and resource allocation.
IS SECTION 5 APPROPRIATE?
2.11 The CSC and the CSAT were established to fulfil the objective of providing “independent . . . mechanisms for the resolution
of complaints, for the review of administrative decisions and for the monitoring of services, programs and complaints procedures.”
The CSC and the CSAT are independent bodies.
Nevertheless, they are fettered by the requirement not to make decisions or recommendations in a way that is inconsistent with government
policy and resource allocation. This means that they may not be able to make a decision or recommendation that is, in their view,
in a person’s best interests, if to do so would be inconsistent with government policy or resource allocation. Clearly, it
is the role of the Government, not the CSC or the CSAT, to allocate community resources. Nevertheless, s 5 imposes a greater restriction
on the CSC and the CSAT than similar provisions in some other Acts. The
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(NSW), for example, restricts the recommendations the Health Care Complaints Commission can make by reference to resource allocation,
not policy.
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) (ADT Act) says that, in determining an application for a review of a reviewable decision, the Administrative Decisions Tribunal:
must give effect to any relevant Government policy in force . . . except to the extent that the policy is contrary to law or the
policy produces an unjust decision in the circumstances of the case.
The CSAT considered the implications of s 5 in deciding whether or not to set aside a decision of the Minister to adopt a transition
. In deciding to set aside the transition plan, it said:
The Minister’s obligation is to approve only those plans which comply with the requirements of the DSA [the
Disability Services Act 1993
(NSW)]. While funding issues are of considerable importance to government, the Tribunal must apply and interpret the standards set
down in the legislation.
Several submissions suggest that
should be carefully examined.
unduly limit the independence of the CSC and the CSAT?
be repealed? If so, what should take its place?
be amended? If so, how?
inconsistent with the Act’s objects? Why, or why not?
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
. New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 11 March 1993 at 767.
, 11 March 1993 at 769.
, 11 March 1993 at 767.
. This will become the Community Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal under the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW). The Community Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal is due to commence operation on 1 January 1999.
. Cf the objects clause of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
, 11 March 1993 at 767.
, 11 March 1993 at 768.
. Burnside,
; Community Services Commission,
; Council of Social Service of New South Wales,
; Multiple Sclerosis Society of New South Wales,
. Community Services Commission,
, 11 March 1993 at 769.
. Burnside,
; Multiple Sclerosis Society of New South Wales,
, 11 March 1993 at 768.
. See para 3.2 and 5.2 for an outline of the characteristics of the CSC and the CSAT.
People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc and the NSW Council on Intellectual Disability v Minister for Disability Services
at para 7.14.
. See eg People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc,
; Institute for Family Advocacy and Leadership Development,
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
3. Community Services Commission
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
INTRODUCTION
3.1 The Community Services Commission (the CSC) was established by the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) (the Act). Part 6 of the Act deals with the constitution of the CSC, the appointment of the Community Services Commissioner
(the Commissioner) and, if necessary, an Acting Commissioner, and the functions and powers of the CSC. Parts 3 and 4 outline how
the CSC carries out its functions.
THE CSC AND THE COMMISSIONER
Who is the Commissioner?
3.2 The CSC is a statutory body managed by the Commissioner. The Commissioner is appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of
the Minister. The Minister must first consult the Community Services Review Council (the Review Council). The person appointed must
be someone who, in the Minister’s opinion, has:
a commitment to the objectives of the community welfare legislation; and
skills in solving problems about access to, and the use of, community services.
The Act does not specify how long a Commissioner’s appointment should be.
The Governor can remove the Commissioner from office, but only for incapacity, incompetence or misbehaviour.
The Act does not spell out how this might be established. If the Commissioner is absent or ill, or there is a vacancy, the Minister
can appoint an Acting Commissioner and can remove him or her at any time.
Does the Act protect the independence of the Commissioner and the CSC?
3.3 An independent CSC and Commissioner are an essential part of the scheme established by the Act. It is necessary to satisfy the
objects of the Act.
In his second reading speech, the Minister was very proud of the degree of independence for the CSC and the Commissioner which the
Act achieved and the degree to which the community sector’s concerns had been satisfied.
The provisions governing the appointment and termination of the Commissioner are similar to those applicable to other bodies, for
example, the Legal Services Commissioner and the Health Care Complaints Commissioner.
Submissions to the Commission overwhelmingly focus on the independence of the CSC and the Commissioner. The CSC’s independence
is regarded as critically important
and as one of the greatest strengths of the Act.
Submissions are unanimous in their view that this independence should be maintained
and in particular that the CSC should not be subsumed into another body such as the Ombudsman or the proposed Children’s Commissioner.
The CSC’s work is a specialist area that the CSC is managing well.
Integrating the CSC into another body would blur its focus and weaken its effectiveness, and undermining the Commissioner’s
independence would weaken an important safeguard for the most vulnerable and powerless people in the community.
An independent complaints handling, monitoring and review body for specialist disability services and an independent Commissioner
is of critical importance to people with a disability.
How important is the independence of the CSC? Should the legislation make the CSC more independent, or less?
Should the functions of the CSC be incorporated into another body? Why or why not?
Should the Minister be obliged to consult the Review Council before recommending someone for appointment as Commissioner?
THE CSC’S FUNCTIONS
What are the CSC’s functions?
3.4 The Act lists the CSC’s functions.
They comprise functions associated with the CSC’s complaints handling, monitoring and inquiry role and with its education and
development role. Its complaints handling functions include:
receiving, assessing, resolving and investigating complaints made under s 12;
providing information, education and training, and helping others to do so, in making, handling and resolving complaints; and
reviewing the causes and patterns of complaints and identifying ways in which the causes could be removed or minimised.
The CSC’s monitoring and inquiry functions include:
inquiring into matters affecting service providers and consumers (on its own initiative or at the request of the relevant Minister);
monitoring and reviewing the delivery of community services.
Its education and development functions include:
promoting and assisting the development of standards for the delivery of community services;
educating service providers, clients, carers and the community generally about the standards; and
promoting, liaising with and helping advocacy services and supporting the development of advocacy programs.
In addition to the functions listed in s 83, the CSC can review, on application or on its own initiative, the situation of a child
in care or a person in care.
It may also give advice and assistance to the Review Council.
Exercising the CSC’s functions
3.5 Like anyone else exercising functions under the Act, the CSC must exercise its functions in accordance with the principles listed
in s 3(2). In addition, wherever possible, the CSC must:
consult and cooperate with other relevant investigative agencies and those concerned with determining the rights and interests of
consult people and groups with an interest in the provision of community services, particularly consumer organisations and their advocates;
have regard to the needs of consumers, such as children, who are least likely or able to complain.
Are the CSC’s functions appropriate?
3.6 The list of functions in the Act is comprehensive. Most submissions to the Commission that address this issue are concerned that
the CSC’s functions are not reduced. In particular, submissions say that the CSC’s capacity to initiate action of its
own accord is important and should be preserved,
and that the Act should ensure that the CSC’s systemic role is retained and strengthened.
Should the Act confer more functions on the CSC? If so, what?
THE CSC’S REVIEW FUNCTION
What is the review power?
3.7 Section 11 of the Act gives the CSC a wide ranging power to review the situation of a “child in care”
or a “person in care”.
The CSC can do the review on application or on its own initiative. It must look at such aspects of the welfare, status, progress
and circumstances of the person as referred to in the application, or as it thinks fit. It can:
inspect files, records and papers about the person held by the relevant Department and a service provider; and
hear and receive submissions from anyone, including the person whose situation is being reviewed.
The main restriction on the exercise of this function is that the person whose situation is to be reviewed must have been in care
for at least three months, or an aggregate of six months, in the 12 months before the review. When the review is complete, the CSC
must write a report that tells the Minister of the result of the review and advise the Minister as to whether any change and, if
so, what change, in the person’s circumstances or status would, in the CSC’s opinion, promote his or her welfare or interests.
Is the review power adequate?
3.8 Section 11 provides for an in depth review of the situation of an individual child in care and there is no doubt that the function
is a very useful one. The CSC sometimes uses it to work out a way forward in a situation where there has been a complaint, instead
of using the complaints procedure to focus on what has happened in the past. However, some submissions express concern that it is
not enough to protect the interests of children in care. It is not an adequate substitute for a properly resourced, systematic mechanism
for the review of children in care.
The CSC itself says that the review function would be more effective if it included reviews of a group, not just an individual, and
if the CSC could refer a matter to a service provider. It also questions the need for the time qualifications for a review.
Is the CSC’s review function effective to protect the interests of people with a disability in care? Why or why not?
Is it effective to protect the interests of children in care? Why or why not?
How can the CSC’s function of reviewing the situation of a person in care be made more effective?
Should the CSC’s review function be extended to groups of people in care? Why or why not?
DEALING WITH COMPLAINTS AGAINST SERVICE PROVIDERS
3.9 Unlike Part 3 of the Act dealing with the CSC’s review function, which is very short, Part 4, dealing with complaints against
service providers, is long and very detailed. It spells out in intricate detail each step along the way from the making of the complaint
to its final determination.
When can a complaint be made?
3.10 The basis of a complaint to the CSC against a service provider is that the service provider “acted unreasonably”
in one of five specified ways. These are:
by not providing a community service to a particular person;
by providing a community service to a particular person;
the way in which a community service was provided to a particular person;
by withdrawing or varying a community service to a particular person; or
the way a community service is administered in relation to a particular person.
Are there circumstances not listed when a service provider may be said to have acted unreasonably and a person should have a right
to make a complaint to the CSC? What are they?
Should the list of instances of unreasonable behaviour in the legislation be exhaustive?
Who can complain?
3.11 Anyone who satisfies the CSC that he or she has “a genuine concern in the subject-matter of the complaint”, including
a person responsible for, or a next friend of, the recipient of the service, can make a complaint (or, in legal terms, “has
standing” to make a complaint). But a person whom the CSC finds to be “unjustifiably interfering” in the matter
cannot do so.
A complainant can withdraw a complaint at any time by notice in writing to the CSC. If so, the CSC may stop dealing with it or may
continue to deal with it if it appears to the CSC that the matter raises:
a significant issue of public safety or public interest; or
a significant question as to the appropriate care or treatment of a client by a service provider.
Who should be able to make a complaint?
3.12 The standing provision gives considerable discretion to the CSC in deciding that a person has or has not “a genuine concern
in the subject matter” or is “unjustifiably interfering”. Submissions have not addressed the issue, which suggests
that the CSC has exercised its discretion appropriately. The Act contains an anomaly: it does not require a complainant to make a
complaint in writing (and complainants often do not) but he or she must withdraw it in writing.
Should the standing provision be made easier or more difficult to satisfy? Why or why not?
Should complaints have to be in writing?
Should a complainant be able to withdraw a complaint orally, for example, by telephone? Why or why not?
Procedures for dealing with complaints
3.13 The legislation outlines in considerable detail the procedure the CSC must follow in dealing with a complaint against a service
provider. The steps it must follow include:
notifying the service provider, except in certain circumstances;
carrying out an assessment process, during which a decision about how to proceed is made;
referring the matter to voluntary alternative dispute resolution, if appropriate; and
investigating.
The legislation includes time limits for the CSC to assess the complaint and to decide what to do with it, a long list of reasons
why the CSC might decline to deal with a complaint, the conciliator’s functions and requirements for notice to the parties
at various stages.
Is the legislation too prescriptive?
3.14 The procedures for dealing with complaints against service providers in the Act are very prescriptive and do not match the CSC’s
practices. Some submissions say that the procedures should be more flexible.
The CSC itself distinguishes provisions that confer rights and protections on complainants and those that are merely procedural,
and suggests that the former should be retained and the latter should be removed from the Act. This, the CSC says, would allow greater
flexibility and would give services more opportunity to conduct their own investigations and take responsibility for making changes
that would improve their services to clients. It would also reflect the CSC’s practice more realistically.
There is no good reason for entrenching a procedure that is not consistent with practice in legislation. The critical question is
which provisions should be retained in the Act and which should be in administrative guidelines.
Which aspects of the CSC’s procedures should be in the legislation? Which aspects should be in the CSC’s administrative
guidelines?
What general principle should guide the decision as to what should be in the legislation and what should be in the guidelines?
Notifying the service provider of the complaint
3.15 When the CSC receives a complaint against a service provider, it must notify the provider in writing that the complaint was made,
the nature of the complaint, and the identity of the complainant. It need not do so, however, if the notification will, or is likely
prejudice the investigation of the complaint;
place the health or safety of a client at risk; or
put the complainant at risk of intimidation or harassment.
In what circumstances, if any, should the CSC not have to notify the service provider of a complaint?
Assessing the complaint
3.16 The Act outlines a procedure for assessing, and deciding how to deal with, complaints.
In the course of assessing a complaint, the CSC may need more information. The Act says the CSC may require the complainant to give
it more information, within a specified time. If the CSC wants more information from someone else, for example, the service provider,
it must tell the complainant it needs more time to assess the complaint and, if the complainant agrees, it can tell the third party
to provide the information by a specified date, agreed to by the complainant. There are time limits on the processes:
If the CSC has not asked for more information from either party, it must assess the complaint as soon as possible, but not later than
28 days after receiving the complaint.
If the CSC has asked for more information, it has 28 days from the date specified in the request for more information.
The outcome of the assessment process is that the CSC decides how it will deal with the complaint. It may:
refer it to the service provider for resolution;
refer it to alternative dispute resolution (ADR);
investigate it;
refer it elsewhere for investigation; or
decline to entertain it.
The CSC must tell the parties in writing what it has decided, unless to do so would:
prejudice the investigation of the complaint;
place the health or safety of a client at risk; or
put the complainant at risk of intimidation or harassment.
Are the time limits for assessment appropriate?
3.17 A time limit on the preliminary assessment process gives the complainant certainty that something will be done with his or her
complaint within the specified time. It is an effective safeguard for the relatively powerless. On the other hand, a set time limit
may be too inflexible, too long in some cases and unrealistic in others.
Should the Act contain a time frame within which the CSC must assess and decide what to do with a complaint? If so, what should it
In what circumstances, if any, should the time limit be extended?
Should the CSC be able to require a service provider to give more information?
3.18 The Act says that the CSC can require the complainant to give more information. It does not say that it can require the service
provider to do so. There is no way of enforcing the requirement if the complainant refuses to give the information but it is clearly
in the complainant’s best interests to do so. This may not be the case for the service provider.
Should the CSC be able to require a service provider, against whom a complaint has been made, to give more information at the assessment
stage? If so, how should the requirement be enforced?
Alternative dispute resolution
3.19 The CSC can refer a complaint to alternative dispute resolution (ADR) if:
it appears to the CSC that the complainant has taken all reasonable steps to resolve the matter with the service provider; and
both parties consent.
When the conciliation proceedings are over, the conciliator must report the result to the CSC, who must notify the parties. In his
second reading speech, the Minister hailed this as an “especially innovative” way of dealing with complaints.
The conciliation process outlined in the Act is very formal. In practice, the CSC’s processes are much more informal.
Is ADR an appropriate way of dealing with complaints against service providers?
Investigation
3.20 If the CSC decides to investigate a complaint, the investigation must take place as quickly as possible.
If the Commissioner thinks there are grounds for making adverse comment about a service provider, he or she must, before doing so,
tell the service provider of the grounds and give the service provider an opportunity to make submissions. The submissions must be
in writing and must be made within 28 days, or such longer period as the Commissioner allows. The Commissioner does not have to give
the service provider an opportunity to comment before making adverse comment if the CSC is satisfied it is in the public interest
to take immediate action without first informing the service provider.
At the end of the investigation, the Commissioner must give its report of the result and any recommended action to the complainant
and the service provider against whom the complaint was made, and may give it to the Minister.
ENFORCEMENT OF THE CSC’S DECISIONS
CSC makes recommendations
3.21 If it undertakes an inquiry, review or investigation, the CSC may make “recommendations for improvement of the delivery
of community services” to the relevant Minister, the Director General of the relevant Department, a service provider or other
appropriate person. If it makes a recommendation to anyone other than the Minister for Community Services, it must give the Minister
a copy of the recommendations. It may ask the Minister to table its recommendations, if it considers “they raise a significant
issue of public safety or public interest”. If a service provider does not take action on a recommendation of the CSC made
following an investigation, the CSC can recommend that the Minister table in Parliament a special report by the CSC about the recommendation.
However, the CSC cannot enforce its recommendations. Only some recommendations are enforceable by the Community Services Appeals
Tribunal (the CSAT). If a service provider does not take action recommended by the CSC after an investigation of a complaint, the
person who made the complaint can apply to the CSAT for a review of the service provider’s decision.
Otherwise, the recommendation is unenforceable.
Should the CSC’s recommendations be enforceable?
3.22 The Regulation limiting the CSAT’s jurisdiction to review a decision not to implement a CSC recommendation reflects the
individual complaints focus of the legislation. Only an individual complainant can apply to the CSAT to review a decision of an individual
service provider not to implement a recommendation made after an investigation of an individual complaint. A wide range of recommendations
made by the CSC cannot be enforced in this way. A number of submissions to the Commission made the case for extending the range of
recommendations enforceable by administrative review.
Others suggested that the Government should be bound by some CSC recommendations, for example, those that impact on the “fundamental
safety, health and dignity” of people.
One submission suggested that the Minister should have a range of sanctions available to enforce CSC recommendations. These would
include defunding, naming in Parliament, appointing an administrator and re-auspicing.
When should a person be able to take action to enforce a CSC recommendation? Who should be able to do so?
What means should be available to ensure the CSC’s recommendations are implemented?
What are community services?
3.23 The key to the jurisdiction of the CSC are the definitions in the Act of “community services” and “service
providers”.
Generally speaking, the CSC’s functions can be exercised in relation to service providers and people receiving, or eligible
to receive, community services. A “service provider” is:
the Department of Community Services;
the Ageing and Disability Department;
a person or organisation funded by, or authorised by, the Minister for Community Services, the Minister for Aged Services or the Minister
for Disability Services to provide a service;
the Home Care Service of New South Wales or a person or organisation funded by it to provide a service; and
a person or organisation deemed to be a service provider by agreement of a State or Federal Minister under an arrangement between
the relevant Minister and the Minister for Community Services.
A “community service” is:
a service rendered under the community welfare legislation;
a service rendered by a person or organisation authorised by the Minister for Community Services, the Minister for Aged Services or
the Minister for Disability Services to provide a service.
Should the CSC’s jurisdiction be extended?
3.24 There are differences of opinion about whether some funded services used by children and people with a disability come within
the definition of community service, or are provided by a service provider as defined, and are therefore within the jurisdiction
of the CSC. The CSC itself says that the Act should be clarified to make it clear whether or not services about which there is doubt
are included. Other submissions say that the CSC’s jurisdiction should be extended.
This is particularly important as new ways of delivering services to both children and people with a disability are being developed.
People identified by submissions as people who should be included within the jurisdiction of the CSC, if they are not already, include:
people with a disability who live in licensed boarding houses;
people with a disability who live in aged care facilities;
people with a disability who come into contact with the criminal justice system;
children with a disability who come into contact with the juvenile justice system;
all children who come into contact with the juvenile justice system;
children in the care of a foster carer;
young people in nursing homes;
people under the jurisdiction of the Public Guardian and the Protective Commissioner; and
plans made under
Disability Services Act 1993
In addition, some submissions suggest that the CSC should include a review team to monitor and investigate all deaths of people with
an intellectual disability and people with a disability in care.
Should the CSC’s jurisdiction to review, inquire and monitor include any of the people listed above? Why or why not?
How should the Act be changed to ensure that it keeps abreast of new developments in service delivery?
What powers does the Commissioner have?
Powers of search and entry
3.25 The Act give the Commissioner powers which he or she might need in order to exercise the CSC’s functions.
Subject to limitations outlined in the Act, the Commissioner can enter premises where services are provided. He or she can then:
inspect the premises and make notes;
examine, seize, retain or remove equipment;
require that records be produced and make copies of, or take extracts from, them;
take possession of, and remove, the records for further examination;
require the owner or occupier to assist in the exercise of these powers; and
ask anyone on the premises to answer questions, or produce records, about the delivery of services at or from the premises.
Limitations on the powers
3.26 The Commissioner cannot enter a service provider’s premises unless he or she:
has a certificate of authority issued by the CSC and produces it if asked to do so;
gives reasonable notice to the occupier, unless giving notice would defeat the purpose of the visit;
enters at a reasonable hour of the day, except in an emergency; and
uses no more force than is necessary.
Unless he or she has a search warrant, the Commissioner cannot enter a part of a premises used for residential purposes without the
consent of the person living there.
Enforcing the Commissioner’s powers
3.27 It is an offence:
to prevent the Commissioner from exercising his or her powers;
to hinder or obstruct the Commissioner in exercising the powers;
to refuse or fail to comply with a requirement to produce records or to assist, without reasonable excuse;
to refuse or fail to answer a question, without reasonable excuse; or
to give the Commissioner information knowing it is false or misleading.
The maximum penalty for the offence is 20 penalty units ($2,200). If a person required to do so fails to produce records or to answer
a question,
the Commissioner can apply to a magistrate to issue a summons requiring the person to produce the records or to give evidence on
the matter they failed to answer a question about. It is an offence to fail to comply with the summons. The maximum penalty is 20
penalty units ($2,200).
Are the Commissioner’s powers appropriate?
3.28 It is unclear why the Commissioner should be required to have a certificate of authority before he or she can enter a service.
Although the Commissioner can ask questions and look at documents once he or she is on the premises, there is no power to do so otherwise.
Appropriate powers are necessary to enable the Commissioner to exercise the CSC’s functions. The legislation that confers the
powers must, however, strike an appropriate balance between the Commissioner’s powers and the service provider’s rights.
Are there any gaps in the Commissioner’s powers? Does the legislation unduly restrict the Commissioner in exercising these powers?
Are the rights of service providers and their clients well enough protected?
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
. The current Commissioner, Roger West, was appointed for five years.
. See para 2.5.
, 1 March 1993 at 767.
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) s 129;
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Cf the Ombudsman, who can be removed from office only by the Governor upon the address of both Houses of Parliament:
Ombudsman Act 1974
. See eg People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc,
. Autistic Association of New South Wales,
. See eg Citizen Advocacy NSW,
; New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
; Northcott Society,
. See eg Autistic Association of New South Wales,
; Citizen Advocacy NSW,
; New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
. Autistic Association of New South Wales,
. New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
. People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc,
. Autistic Association of New South Wales,
; Citizen Advocacy NSW,
. Citizen Advocacy NSW,
. A child in care includes children who are: in the custody of the Director General of the Department of Community Services under
a temporary care arrangement; living in a residential care centre; foster children and State wards: see
. A person in care is a person in the care of the Director General of the Department of Community Services or the Ageing and Disability
Department or a service provider:
. Association of Childrens Welfare Agencies Inc,
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
(NSW), which has recently been reviewed, provides for a systematic review of children in care but the relevant Part of the Act (Part
9) was never proclaimed.
. Jim Simpson,
; Community Services Commission,
. Community Services Commission,
. The Act includes a long, and not exhaustive, list of reasons why the CSC might decline to deal with a complaint (s 21).
. Community Services Commission,
, 11 March 1993 at 768.
. s 38(2)(d).
. s 40(1)(d) and
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Regulation 1996
. eg Community Services Commission,
; People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc,
; Jim Simpson,
. New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
; see also Citizen Advocacy NSW,
. Citizen Advocacy NSW,
. This means the
Community Services (Complaints Appeals and Monitoring Act 1993
(NSW) and Regulations, the
(NSW) and Regulations and any other Act (and Regulations) administered by the Minister of Community Services within the Department
of Community Services or by the Minister of Aged Services or the Minister for Disability Services within the Ageing and Disability
Department.
. See eg Association of Childrens Welfare Agencies Inc,
; Citizen Advocacy NSW,
; Council of Social Service of New South Wales,
; Intellectual Disability Rights Service Inc,
; New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
. See eg Citizen Advocacy NSW,
; New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
. A person with access to the records can be required to produce them. However, although the Commissioner can ask questions of any
person, on the premises, that person is not required to answer the question: s 84(3), (4).
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
4. Community Visitors
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
INTRODUCTION
4.1 The Community Visitors scheme was established by the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) (the Act). The Act deals with the appointment of Community Visitors, outlines the way they exercise their powers and provides
for the oversight and co-ordination role of the Community Services Commission (CSC). In 1997-98, there were 34 Community Visitors
who visited, at least once, 759 services (88% of eligible services). They reported on more than 5,000 service issues.
WHO ARE COMMUNITY VISITORS?
Appointment of Community Visitors
4.2 The Minister of Community Services appoints Community Visitors. He or she must first consult the Community Services Review Council.
The Minister can appoint only people who, in the Minister’s opinion, meet criteria listed in the Act.
appropriate knowledge and expertise in the matters relating to the community services in which he or she would be most involved;
a commitment to the objectives of the community welfare legislation; and
skills in solving problems about access to, and the use of, community services.
A Community Visitor is appointed for a period not exceeding three years and can be reappointed for consecutive appointments, not exceeding
six years. The Act says nothing about how and when a Community Visitor’s appointment might be terminated.
Functions of Community Visitors
4.3 The functions of Community Visitors are not listed in the Act. They are in the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Regulation 1996
to encourage the promotion of the legal and human rights of persons using visitable services, including the right to privacy, confidentiality,
adequate information and consultation about the services and the right to complain;
to consider matters raised by people using visitable services, staff of service providers and people with a genuine concern for the
welfare, interests and conditions of persons using visitable services;
to give people using visitable services information about advocacy services available to help them present a grievance and, in appropriate
cases, to help them obtain the service; and
to facilitate, wherever reasonable and practicable to do so, the early and speedy resolution of grievances or matters of concern by
referring them to relevant service providers or other appropriate bodies.
In his second reading speech, the Minister focused on the independence of the Community Visitors and their monitoring role. They:
will provide residents . . . with an independent person who can provide a sympathetic ear for any needs, concerns or difficulties
that clients may wish to share with someone who is not directly involved in the delivery of those services. Community visitors will
also provide a basis for safeguarding against forms of system abuse by their ability to view the operations of all residential services.
Community Visitors can report to both the CSC and the Minister of Community Services.
Does the Act safeguard the independence of Community Visitors?
4.4 One of the objects of the Act is the provision of independent and accessible mechanisms for the monitoring of services, programs
and complaints procedures.
Community Visitors, together with the CSC, fulfil that object. The Minister appoints Community Visitors and, notwithstanding the
silence of the Act on the matter, there is no doubt that the Minister has the power to terminate their appointment.
It is not clear how or when the Minister can exercise the power to terminate an appointment. In their day to day work, Community
Visitors are accountable to the CSC, which can set priorities for them. The CSC gives the Minister an annual report on their work
and activities.
Should the Minister appoint Community Visitors? If so, with whom should he or she consult? If not, who should appoint them?
What experience and skills should Community Visitors have? How long should an appointment as a Community Visitor be?
Should the legislation spell out the circumstances in which a Community Visitor’s appointment can be terminated? What should
To whom should the Community Visitors be accountable? Are the existing arrangements appropriate?
What functions should Community Visitors have?
4.5 Community Visitors play an important role in the CSC’s monitoring functions. After each visit, the Community Visitor reports
to the CSC on a standardised form. This enables the CSC to build up a picture of services and to identify the location and circumstances
of the most vulnerable residents. Some submissions suggest that the role of Community Visitors is not clear and should be clarified.
Others suggest their role should be strengthened.
On the other hand, there has been some criticism of the operation of the scheme. One submission said that, among other things, there
have been inadequate processes for identification and visits, causing confusion for staff and clients, that there has been no feedback
and that visits are infrequent.
Another said that there should be protocols for Community Visitors.
Should the list of functions of Community Visitors be changed? If so, how and why?
Should the functions of Community Visitors be listed in the Act, not the Regulation?
Is the Community Visitors scheme an effective way of independently monitoring children in care? Why or why not?
Is the Community Visitors scheme an effective way of independently monitoring people with a disability in residential care? Why or
Visitable services
4.6 Community Visitors visit places where a “visitable service” is provided. They cannot visit any other place. A “visitable
service” is a residential service provided by:
the Department of Community Services;
the Ageing and Disability Department;
a funded service where the person using the service is in the full-time care of the service provider; or
a service prescribed by the regulations as a visitable service.
Should the jurisdiction of Community Visitors be extended?
4.7 The definition of “visitable service” does not cover all funded services, in particular some of the more flexible
and innovative arrangements. In addition, there is considerable uncertainty about whether some services are included in the definition
or not. Some submissions suggest that the definition should be widened to include more flexible arrangements, although there is some
difference of opinion as to which should be included and which should not, for example, foster care.
One submission suggests making the Community Visitors’ jurisdiction depend on the status of the individual, not the service.
This would mean that the Community Visitor could follow a client from a group home into foster care.
Should the jurisdiction of the Community Visitors scheme be extended?
What care arrangements that are not currently covered by the scheme should be included? Why?
POWERS OF COMMUNITY VISITORS
4.8 The Act gives Community Visitors the powers they need to carry out their role. A Community Visitor can:
at any reasonable time, enter and inspect a place at which a visitable service is provided;
confer alone with any person who is a resident of, or employed by, such a place; and
inspect any document held at such a place that relates to the operation of a visitable service.
These powers must be exercised in a way that, as far as possible, preserves the privacy of the people who live at the service. They
must also be exercised in accordance with the principles listed in s3(2) of the Act, including the best interests principle and the
right to be heard.
Are the powers Community Visitors have appropriate for carrying out their role? Should the powers be changed? If so, how?
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
. A person employed by the Department of Community Services, or the Ageing and Disability Department, either permanently or on a temporary
basis, cannot be employed as a Community Visitor.
, 11 March 1993 at 767.
. See para 2.5.
Interpretation Act 1987
. See eg Institute for Family Advocacy and Leadership Development,
; Burnside,
; Autistic Association of New South Wales,
. Citizen Advocacy NSW,
; New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
. Burnside,
. ACROD NSW Division,
. Association of Childrens Welfare Agencies Inc,
; People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc,
; Jim Simpson,
. Australian Association of Social Workers,
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
5. Community Services Appeals Tribunal and the Administrative Decisions Tribunal
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
INTRODUCTION
5.1 The Community Services Appeals Tribunal (the CSAT) is an integral part of the legislative scheme established by the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) (the Act). Under the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) (the ADT Act), expected to take effect from 1 January 1999, however, the CSAT will be abolished and reconstituted as the Community
Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal (the ADT). The CSAT was established by Part 7 of the Act, which also deals
with the appointment of its members, its jurisdiction, its composition and some procedural matters. Part 5 of the Act deals with
proceedings before the CSAT. When it becomes operational, the new legislation will repeal Part 7 and amend Part 5. The matters dealt
with by Part 7 and procedural matters generally are found in the ADT Act. This chapter assumes the implementation of the ADT Act.
THE ADT AND ITS MEMBERS
Community Services Division of the ADT
5.2 The Administrative Decisions Tribunal (the ADT) is established by the ADT Act. It has four Divisions, including a Community Services
Division. When the new legislation commences, the President of the CSAT becomes a Deputy President, and the Divisional Head, of the
Community Services Division of the ADT. Other existing members become non-judicial members of the ADT assigned to the Community Services
Division. Under the ADT Act, the Deputy President will be appointed by the Governor and non-judicial members by the Attorney General.
The Deputy President must be a judge or a magistrate or a legal practitioner of at least seven years standing. Non-judicial members
must, in the Minister’s opinion, have special knowledge or skill in relation to any of the matters the ADT deals with.
In addition, the members, including the Divisional Head, must have been recommended to the Attorney General by the Minister for Community
Services, and the Attorney General must have advised the President (or Governor) of the recommendation. The Minister for Community
Services cannot recommend someone unless the Minister is of the opinion that the person:
has knowledge of and experience in administration, child care, community services, education, law, medicine, psychology or social
has other suitable qualifications or experience warranting his or her assignment to the Division or appointment as Divisional Head.
A member is appointed for a period not exceeding three years, but is eligible for reappointment. The Governor may remove a member
from office for incapacity, incompetence or misbehaviour.
Is the independence of the ADT protected?
5.3 An independent mechanism for the review of administrative decisions is one of the objects of the Act.
Submissions suggest that the CSAT has fulfilled that object. All submissions to the Commission that addressed the issue said that
the independence of the CAMA bodies (the CSC and the CSAT) should be maintained. This is because:
They are critically important, especially to people with a disability.
Any attempt to weaken them would weaken an important safeguard for the most vulnerable and powerless people in the community.
They are a key safeguard against the further politicisation of issues which arise among service providers, people with a disability
and their families, advocates, guardians and friends, and the Government.
The effect of the abolition of CSAT and the creation of the Community Services Division of the ADT is that there will no longer be
a stand alone tribunal. This may result in some reduction of independence. The President of the CSAT will be the Deputy President
of a larger body. Under the Act, the CSAT reported to Parliament every year. Now, the President of the ADT will present an annual
report that covers all the ADT’s operations. Members could previously be appointed for a maximum of five years, now it is three
years. On the other hand, the new legislation makes it more difficult to remove a member from office.
Does the legislation adequately protect the independence of the Community Services Division of the ADT?
Should the Divisional Head be appointed for a term or should he or she have tenure? If for a term, for how long?
Members’ qualifications
5.4 A number of submissions raised the issue of the qualifications for appointment to the ADT. They suggested that the Act should
specify knowledge of, and experience in, disability issues as a necessary qualification of appointment.
One submission suggested that membership should be more representative of the disability sector, not just of consumer groups.
The qualifications for membership of the Community Services Division of the ADT are the same as those for membership of the CSAT.
One significant difference is that the Minister for Community Services does not have to consult the Review Council (or anyone else)
before recommending a person for appointment.
What should be the qualifications of appointment to the Community Services Division of the ADT?
Should the membership be representative of the parties who appear before it?
Should the Minister be required to consult before recommending a person for appointment? If so, whom?
Reviewable decisions
5.5 The CSAT’s jurisdiction is somewhat hotchpotch. It can review some decisions made under community welfare legislation, but
not others.
It cannot review a substantive decision made by the CSC, except on the ground that it was beyond the CSC’s powers. It can also
review a CSC decision to do an investigation that was beyond its powers. The CSAT can review a decision by a service provider not
to implement a CSC decision. Finally, it can review some decisions of the Minister for Community Services or the Director General
of the Department. The selection of decisions made by government agencies that are reviewable seems to be rather ad hoc and there
are gaps and inconsistencies. For example, under
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
(NSW), the CSAT can review a decision by the Minister or the Director General to grant a licence for a child care service but it
cannot review a decision not to do so. The CSAT can review funding decisions in relation to disability services but it cannot do
so in relation to children’s or other community services. Some provisions that confer jurisdiction on the CSAT have not yet
been proclaimed.
The same jurisdiction presently exercised by the CSAT will be transferred to the Community Services Division of the ADT when that
Division of the ADT commences operation.
What kinds of decisions of government agencies should be reviewable by the Community Services Division of the ADT?
5.6 Providing mechanisms for the review of administrative decisions of government agencies makes for better decision-making. There
should be a principled approach to the kinds of decisions that should be reviewable. This would ensure that like decisions were or
were not reviewable and would iron out the gaps and inconsistencies in the legislation conferring jurisdiction on the CSAT. The Administrative
Review Council (ARC) is an expert policy development body of the Commonwealth. It has identified as a basic principle of administrative
law the principle that a decision is suitable for merits review (that is, review on the ground that, although lawfully made, it is,
in the view of the person complaining, wrong) if the interests of a person will be, or are likely to be, affected. However, it identified
situations when decisions affecting the interests of a person should not be reviewable. These include:
Government budgetary decisions; and
polycentric decisions, that is, decisions about how a limited pool of money will be divided among competing individuals or organisations.
What should be the criteria for deciding that an administrative decision should or should not be reviewable by the Community Services
Division of the ADT?
What decisions should, or should not be, reviewable by the Community Services Division of the ADT?
Should all decisions made by the CSC be reviewable by the Community Services Division of the ADT? Why or why not?
Should funding decisions be reviewable by the Community Services Division of the ADT? Why or why not?
Should decisions by service providers be reviewable?
5.7 The principles of administrative review were developed in the context of decision-making by government agencies. In its study
of the Commonwealth’s community services program, the ARC concluded that, as the effect of a service provider’s decision
on the interests of a user is likely to be the same whether the provider is a government agency or a government funded non-government
agency, the non-government agency should be subject to the same review regime.
Under the Act, the CSAT (or, when it commences, the ADT) has jurisdiction to review a service provider’s decision not to take
action recommended by the CSC following an investigation.
Should decisions of non-government agencies be subject to review by the ADT?
Should the jurisdiction of the ADT in relation to service providers be extended? If so, how?
Who has standing to apply to the ADT?
What the Act says
5.8 The standing provision of the Act has not been substantively changed by the ADT Act.
Anyone who can demonstrate to the ADT that he or she has a “genuine concern” in the subject matter of the decision can
apply to the ADT for a review of the decision. This includes a person responsible for, or next friend, of the person to whom the
application relates. In addition, the ADT can appoint someone to represent the person and, if it is still within time to apply, it
can grant leave to apply to someone who was entitled to apply but did not. However, if the ADT finds a person to be “unjustifiably
interfering” in a matter, he or she is not entitled to apply.
Tribunal decisions
5.9 The CSAT carefully examined the issue of standing in two recent cases involving an appeal against the Minister’s decision
to adopt a transition plan.
In both cases, the CSAT had to decide whether or not two peak disability groups, People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc (PWD) and the
NSW Council on Intellectual Disability (CID), could bring an appeal against the Minister’s decision. The CSAT reached the following
conclusions:
Section 41 of the Act is the only source of standing for someone wishing to lodge an appeal with the Tribunal.
The words “genuine concern” have their ordinary meaning in the context of the legislation and the scope and objects of
the CAMA legislation.
The legislation is beneficial and the express objects indicate that the standing provisions should be interpreted widely.
The person lodging the appeal does not have to be directly affected by the circumstances complained of.
Although not directly representing consumers of the services involved or their parents, PWD and CID represented the wider disability
community and those associated with them in putting forward their view of what is in the public interest.
In both cases the CSAT held:
PWD and CID had a “genuine concern” in the subject matter of the appeal.
Notwithstanding strong opposition from the service, from parents and consumers in
and from parents and other family members in
, PWD and CID were not “unjustifiably interfering” in the matter and had standing to appeal.
In coming to its decision in both cases, the CSAT said that the best interests of consumers and the importance of the public interest
outweighed the opposition of other stakeholders.
Should the standing provision be changed?
5.10 The issue of standing is not yet final as decision in
is now on appeal to the Supreme Court. A number of submissions raised the issue of standing. Some noted the lack of clarity in the
provision and suggested that it should be defined unambiguously, thereby avoiding long and costly legal proceedings as have already
Others suggest that the provision should be broadened.
Who should have standing to apply to the ADT for review of a decision?
Should the standing provisions be amended to incorporate the CSAT’s decisions in Dunrossil and Greystanes?
Should the standing provision include a public interest test? Why?
In what circumstances, if ever, should an advocacy group have standing in a matter before the ADT?
ADT proceedings
5.11 Most of the procedural rules governing the CSAT will be in the ADT Act when it is proclaimed. However, some provisions of the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) will remain. The objects of the ADT Act include:
to ensure that the ADT is “accessible”, that its proceedings are efficient and effective and its decisions fair; and
to enable ADT proceedings to be determined in and “informal and expeditious manner”.
These objects are sought to be achieved by procedural provisions that ensure relative informality. For example, the ADT Act says that
is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inquire into and inform itself on any matter in such a manner as it thinks fit, subject
to the rules of natural justice;
is to act with as little formality as the circumstances of the case permit; and
is to take such measures as are reasonably practicable to ensure, among other things, that the parties have the fullest opportunity
practicable to be heard or otherwise have their submissions considered.
The ADT Act gives the ADT the option to hold a preliminary conference before the proceedings begin and also provides for referral
of a matter for mediation or neutral evaluation. In addition, it continues to be bound by its duty under the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) to encourage the parties to effect an amicable agreement and its power to refer a matter to the service provider for resolution,
the CSC for alternative dispute resolution or investigation or to another body for investigation.
Once proceedings begin, parties may be represented by an agent or a legal practitioner, if the ADT gives leave and, in some circumstances,
the ADT may appoint a person to represent a party.
Is the ADT’s procedures consistent with the policy goals of the ADT Act?
5.12 One of the objects of the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) is that there should be an “accessible” mechanism for administrative review.
One of the principles that must be observed in exercising functions under the Act is that community services clients are entitled
to be heard in relation to the service and to question decisions or actions that affect them. The objects and principles do not spell
out how this might be achieved by an administrative review mechanism. It is clear, however, that the CSAT’s procedure is a
significant factor in accessibility and respecting a person’s right to be heard. Some submissions supported retaining an informal
approach in the ADT. Others described the current process of appeal against transition plans as “courtlike” and legalistic
or suggested that, as far as possible, matters should be resolved without legal representation.
How can the ADT Act ensure that the ADT is accessible to community services clients?
Are the ADT’s alternative dispute resolution mechanisms appropriate for people with a disability and for children? If not, how
can they be improved?
How can the ADT Act ensure that all parties to proceedings get a fair go?
In what circumstances should parties be allowed to have legal representation?
ENFORCEMENT OF DECISIONS
5.13 When the CSAT reviews a decision, its decision, if different from the original decision, is substituted for the original decision.
The Act does not deal with the enforcement of the CSAT’s decisions and the CSAT does not have powers of enforcement. If a person
refuses to comply with a decision of the CSAT, the applicant would have to apply to the Supreme Court to enforce it. The CSAT can
also make recommendations which are not binding.
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) deal with the enforcement of Tribunal decisions? If so, how?
MISCELLANEOUS
5.14 This section raises some technical legal issues for consideration.
Deciding procedural matters
. It is unclear whether or not merely procedural issues, for example, whether or not a person can make an application to the ADT outside
the time limit, can be decided by the legally qualified member alone or whether it must be decided by the ADT comprising at least
three members.
Time limits
. Under the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW), the time limit for making an application for review of an administrative decisions is 28 days. Under the ADT Act, the time
limit for making such an application is to be fixed by the rules of the ADT.
The ADT may accept a late application for review if the ADT is satisfied that the applicant has provided a reasonable explanation
for the delay.
The ADT Act does not give the ADT much guidance about when it should, or should not, allow a late application.
Should procedural matters be decided by the legally qualified member sitting alone. Why or why not?
In what circumstances should a person be able to make a late application to the ADT?
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
. See para 2.4.
. See eg Autistic Association of New South Wales,
; Citizen Advocacy NSW,
; Institute for Family Advocacy and Leadership Development,
; Intellectual Disability Rights Service Inc,
; Northcott Society,
; New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
; People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc,
. Citizen Advocacy NSW,
; Institute for Family Advocacy and Leadership Development,
; New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
; People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc,
; Jim Simpson,
. Multiple Sclerosis Society of New South Wales,
. It can review decisions made under the
Adoption Information Act 1990
Adoption of
Children Act 1965
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
Disability Services Act 1993
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Regulation 1996
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) s 97;
Youth and Community Services Act 1973
. Under Sch 5,
, Div 2(4) of the ADT Act, reference in another Act to the CSAT is to be read as a reference to the ADT.
. Administrative Review Council,
Administrative Review and Funding Programs (A Case Study of Community Services Programs)
(Report 37, 1994).
. ADT Act Sch 5, Pt 2, Div 2(4) provides that reference in another Act to the CSAT is to be read as a reference to the ADT.
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) s 41.
People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc and the NSW Council on Intellectual Disability v Minister for Disability Services
(Dunrossil);
People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc and the NSW Council on Intellectual Disability v Minister for Disability Services
(Greystanes).
. ACROD NSW Division,
; Citizen Advocacy NSW,
; New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability,
; Jim Simpson,
. Institute for Family Advocacy and Leadership Development,
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) which refers only to an “accessible” mechanism for administrative review.
. ADT Act s 73.
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) s 46.
. ADT Act s 71.
. See para 2.4.
. ADT Act s 55.
. ADT Act s 57.
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
6. Community Services Review Council
History of this Reference (Digest)
Link to Summary
INTRODUCTION
6.1 The Community Services Review Council (the Review Council) is established by Part 8 of the
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993
(NSW) (the Act). The Act outlines the functions of the Review Council, its meeting procedures and matters relating to the appointment
and remuneration of members.
WHAT IS THE REVIEW COUNCIL?
Composition of the Review Council
6.2 The Review Council comprises seven members who are members because of the position they hold and six members who are appointed
by the Minister for Community Services. The ex officio members are the:
Community Services Commissioner;
Directors General of the Department of Community Services and the Ageing and Disability Department;
President of the Guardianship Tribunal;
Divisional Head of the Community Services Division of the ADT; and
Public Guardian.
The appointed members are people with “knowledge and experience” gained as service providers (two members) or clients
of service providers (two members) or people the Minister thinks are “interested in the provision of community services”
(two members). Members are appointed for a term of up to five years and may be reappointed. The Minister can terminate an appointment
for misbehaviour, incompetence, incapacity or failure to attend meetings.
Functions of the Review Council
6.3 The Review Council has two broad functions. They are:
(1) to encourage co-ordination of the functions of the bodies established by the Act and others involved in providing community services;
(2) to give the Minister strategic advice about the operational effectiveness of the review and monitoring system established under
In addition, the Minister must consult the Review Council before recommending someone for appointment as Commissioner, as the President
of the CSAT and as a Community Visitor.
IS THE REVIEW COUNCIL NECESSARY?
6.4 The Review Council, including, as it does, the heads of all the government agencies involved in providing community services,
is well placed to encourage co-ordination of the agencies. It is the only forum in which the heads of these agencies meet and the
only formal body that might take a whole of government approach to community services. On the other hand, there are other bodies
that perform the Review Council’s advisory role, for example, the Disability Council of New South Wales and the Community Welfare
Advisory Council. The Law Reform Commission understands that in the early days of the implementation of the legislation the Minister
used the Review Council for advice very effectively. However, the Review Council has never been given sufficient resources to carry
out its review function. In recent years it appears that the Review Council has almost lapsed into disuse.
Should the Act include a body whose function it is to oversee the operation of the Act and advise the Minister accordingly? If so,
how should it be constituted?
What exactly should the functions of a Review Council be?
Should the functions of the Review Council be given to another body? If so, which one?
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
. When the ADT Act comes into operation, the Minister will no longer have to consult the Review Council before recommending someone
for appointment as Head of the Community Services Division of the ADT.
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
Appendix A - Submissions Received
History of this Reference (Digest)
Mr P Parkinson, Chair, Community Welfare Legislation Review, 2 July 1998
National Children’s and Youth Law Centre, 7 July 1998
ACT Community Care, Disability Program, 8 July 1998
Disability Safeguards Coalition, 10 July 1998
Citizen Advocacy NSW, 12 July 1998
Carers’ Taskforce Australia Inc, 13 July 1998
Intellectual Disability Rights Service, 14 July 1998
Council of Social Service of New South Wales, 15 July 1998
Multiple Sclerosis Society of New South Wales, 15 July 1998
ACROD NSW Division, 16 July 1998
Northcott Society, 16 July 1998
Burnside, 16 July 1998
Spastic Centre, 16 July 1998
NSW Ombudsman, 17 July 1998
NSW Council for Intellectual Disability, 17 July 1998
People with Disabilities (NSW) Inc, 17 July 1998
Australian Association of Social Workers, 20 July 1998
Mr J Simpson, 20 July 1998
Autistic Association of New South Wales, 20 July 1998
Association of Childrens Welfare Agencies Inc, 21 July 1998
NSW Child Protection Council, 21 July 1998
NSW Department of Education and Training, 21 July 1998
NSW Department for Women, 22 July 1998
Ms H Meekosha, 27 July 1998
Australian Quadriplegic Association Ltd, 28 July 1998
NSW Department of Community Services, 31 July 1998
Anti-Discrimination Board of New South Wales, 31 July 1998
Institute for Family Advocacy and Leadership Development, 6 August 1998
Mental Health Co-ordinating Council Inc, 7 August 1998
NSW Department of Health, 13 August 1998
Community Services Commission, 18 August 1998
Mr R Fisher, Chief Executive Officer, Disability Services Commission of Western Australia, 20 August 1998
Mr A E Maher, 31 August 1998
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 15 (1998) - Review of the Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
Appendix B - Objects and Principles
History of this Reference (Digest)
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
3. (1) The objects of this Act are as follows:
(a) to foster, in community services and programs, and in related services and programs, an atmosphere in which complaints and independent
monitoring are viewed positively as ways of enhancing the delivery of those services and programs;
(b) to provide for the resolution of complaints about community services and programs, especially complaints by persons who are eligible
to receive, or receive, those services, by families and by persons advocating on behalf of such persons or families;
(c) to encourage, wherever reasonable and practicable, the resolution of complaints at a local level;
(d) to encourage, wherever reasonable and practicable, the resolution of complaints through alternative dispute resolution;
(e) to provide independent and accessible mechanisms for the resolution of complaints, for the review of administrative decisions
and for the monitoring of services, programs and complaint procedures; and
(f) to encourage compliance with the objects, principles and provisions of the community welfare legislation.
(2) The following principles must be observed in exercising functions under this Act:
(a) the paramount consideration in providing a service for a person must be the best interests of the person;
(b) a person who is eligible to receive, or receives, a community service is also to receive an adequate explanation of the service,
is to be heard in relation to the service and may question decisions or actions that affect the person in relation to the service;
(c) a service provider is to promote and respect the legal and human rights of a person who receives a community service and must
respect any need for privacy or confidentiality;
(d) a service provider is, to the best of his or her ability, to provide such information about the service as may enable an appropriate
decision to be made by the person for whom the service is, or is to be, provided;
(e) a service provider is to enable a complaint about the service to be dealt with fairly, informally and quickly and at a place convenient
to the complainant;
(f) a complaint about the provision of a service is to be dealt with even if it is made by another person on behalf of the person
eligible to receive, or receiving, the service.
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of Contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter