URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/CLRC/1990/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Conversion Damages [1990] CLRC 8
Report on Conversion Damages
Attorney–General’s Department
Report on Conversion Damages
Australian Government Publishing Service
@ Commonwealth of Australia 1990
ISBN O 644 13473 9
This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the
, no part may be reproduced by any process without
written permission from the Australian Government Publishing Service. Requests
and inquiries concerning reproduction and rights should be addressed to the
Manager, AGPS Press, GPO Box 84, Canberra ACT 2601.
Printed in Australia by R. D. RUBIE, Commonwealth Government Printer,
The Copyright Law Review Committee was established in 1983 to consider
and report to the Attorney–General on specific copyright
matters referred to it from time to time.
The Committee presently consists of:
Mr Justice I.F. Sheppard AO - President of the Copyright Tribunal;
Mr Peter Banki - Solicitor, Phillips Fox
Ms Lyndsey Cattermole - Managing Director, Aspect Computing Pty Ltd;
Mr Brett Cottle - Managing Director, Australian Mechanical Copyright Owners Society;
Mr Chris Creswell - Attorney–General’s Department;
Mr Derek Fielding - University of Queensland Librarian;
Mr Michael Frankel - Solicitor, Michael Frankel and Co. Solicitors;
Professor Dennis Pearce - Commonwealth Ombudsman
Mr Bob Rodgers - Investment Consultant
Dr Ron Sacks-Davis - Head of the Department of Computer Science, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology.
Neither Ms Cattermole nor Dr Sacks-Davis was a member of the Committee at the time when the Committee engaged in the major part of
its consideration of the Conversion Damages Reference.
Mr David Walsh, Solicitor, Mallesons Stephen Jaques, a member of the
Committee since its formation, resigned in May 1988 to head his
office in Hong Kong. Mr Ian Govey, of the Attorney-General’s Department,
also left the Committee in May 1988 to
become Counselor (Legal) at the Australian Embassy in Washington.
The Committee has been asked to consider seven references and has now
completed and forwarded to the Attorney–General its report
these. As well as this report on the conversion damages remedy in the
right Act 1968
(’the Act’), the Committee has completed
references on performers’ protection, the meaning of publication in the
Act, church use of copyright materials, moral rights and the importation
provision of the Act. The outstanding reference on which
the Committee is
presently working is the copyright protection of computer software.
Enquiries concerning the Committee’s work should be directed
Robert Garran Offices
National Circuit
CANBERRA ACT 2600
Telephone (06) 250 6323
FAX (06) 250 5913
The law is stated as at April 1989.]
Report on Conversion Damages
To: The Hon. Michael Duffy
Attorney–General of Australia.
(1) TERMS OF REFERENCE
. To consider the remedy of conversion damages provided for by SS. 116(1)
COpy right Act 1968
(’the Act’).
The Committee has taken this reference to include the remedy by way of an
action for detention also provided for in SS.116(1).
(2) RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee recommends that the remedies of conversion
damages and an action for detention be no longer available to the owners
should be discretionary.
2. The Committee recommends that SS.116(1) of the Act be replaced by a
provision which:
(a) empowers a court in the exercise of its discretion to order the
delivery up to the owner of the copyright
of all infringing copies of works or subject matter and any device used
or intended to be used for making infringing copies of works
or subject matter
and to recover damages as by way of an action for conversion in respect of
infringing copies disposed of by infringers
or not accounted for by
(b) requires a court, in assessing the amount of any damages payable in
an action for conversion, to take into account –
(i) where the goods deemed to be converted are infringing copies, the
extent to which the goods consist of material which infringes
(ii) where the goods deemed to be converted are infringing copies, the
expenses incurred by the defendant in relation to production
of the goods;
(iii) the sufficiency of the remedies for damages for infringement
provided in s.115 of the Act.
3. The Committee recommends that SS.116(2) of the Act should remain in
its present form, except that the words “at the time
of the conversion or detention” should be
replaced by the words “at the time of any deemed conversion or
detention”.
4. The Committee recommends that the definition of ‘plate’ in s.1O of the Act be omitted.
5. The Committee recommends that references to the term ‘plate’ elsewhere in the Act be omitted and replaced by the
6. A draft of amendments which the Committee suggests will give effect to
its recommendations is attached:
Appendix ‘G’.
(3) COURSE OF THE INQUIRY
7. On 17 September 1987 the Committee sent by mail to interested
organisations and law firms:
Appendix ‘A’
Discussion Paper on Conversion Damages, seeking views and comments by 30
November 1987. Four written submissions were received:
In addition the Committee held discussions with some legal
practitioners experienced in copyright infringement matters:
(4) THE CURRENT AUSTRALIAN LAW
8. Sub–section 116(1) of the Act provides:
“Subject to this Act, the owner of the copyright in a work or other
subject–matter is entitled in respect of any infringing
copy, or of any plate used or intended to be used for
making infringing copies, to the rights and remedies, by way of an action for
conversion or detention, to which he would be entitled if he were the owner of
the copy or plate and had been the owner of the copy
or plate since the time when it was
9. The effect of SS.116(1) is to deem the owner of the copyright
infringed when copies are made without his or her licence, to be
the owner of
the infringing copies, and of any plate used or intended to be used for making
infringing copies.
10. The infringing copies or plate may be said to be “converted’ when there is an intentional exercise of control
defendant over them inconsistent with the rights of the deemed
owner. Where the exercise of control seriously interferes with the
owner’s rights, he or she may claim damages for conversion. The quantum of the damages
the full value of the goods at the time of conversion . In effect, the action forces an involuntary
purchase on the deemed converter
(ie. copyright infringer) of the infringing
copies or plates.
11. In relation to copyright materials conversion occurs where an
infringing copy or plate is:
(i) wrongfully taken out of the possession of the copyright
(ii) wrongfully detained in defiance of the copyright owner’s
rights, (eg, refusal to return the copy on demand);
(iii) wrongfully delivered or disposed of by sale or other
distribution;
(iv) destroyed; or
(v) wrongfully dealt with in any other way whereby the owner is deprived
of the use and possession of the copy l
12. If the infringer has possession of the infringing copies or plates
then the copyright owner may bring an action for wrongful detention
for which the remedy would be either return of the goods or damages. If the infringement relates to only part of the article,
and the part is
substantial and not readily severable, then the whole article must be delivered
up. Usually a copyright owner will
claim damages for conversion of copies
converted by the infringer and delivery up of copies still in the infringer’s possession.
Depending on the circumstances, the final relief a court may grant includes
injunctions, damages, accounts of profits and delivery
13. The term ‘infringing copy’ is defined in s.1O of
Act to mean:-
‘infringing copy’ means –
(a) in relation to a work – a reproduction of the work, or of an
adaptation of the work, not being a copy of a cinematography
film of the work or
adaptation;
(b) in relation to a sound recording – a copy of the sound recording
not being a sound-track associated with visual images forming
cinematography film;
(c) in relation to a cinematography film – a copy of the film;
(d) in relation to a television broadcast or a sound broadcast - a copy of a
cinematography film of the broadcast or a record embodying
a sound recording of
the broadcast; and
(e)in relation to a published edition of a work – a reproduction of the edition,
being an article the making of which constituted an infringement of the
or, in the case of
an article imported without the licence of the owner of the copyright, would
have constituted an infringement
of that copyright if the article had been made
in Australia by the importer.’
14. The term ‘plate’ is also defined to include
‘a stereotype, stone, block, negative or other similar mould, matrix,
transfer, appliance’ .
15. An action by a plaintiff under SS.116(1) requires the plaintiff to
establish infringement of copyright. However, damages under
SS.116(1) are distinct from and additional to
damages recoverable in an action for infringement under s.115 of the
Act. Section 115
(1) Subject to this Act, the owner of a copyright may bring an
action for an infringement of the copyright.
(2) Subject to this Act, the relief that a court may grant in an action
for an infringement of copyright includes an injunction (subject
terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and either damages or an account of
(3) Where, in an action for infringement of copyright, it is established
that an infringement was committed but it is also established
the time of the infringement, the defendant was not aware, and had no
reasonable grounds for suspecting, that the act constituting
the infringement
was an infringement of the copyright, the plaintiff is not entitled under this
section to any damages against the
defendant in respect of the infringement, but
is entitled to an account of profits in respect of the infringement whether any
relief is granted under this section or not.
(4) Where in an action under this section -
(a) an infringement of copyright is established; and
(b) the court is satisfied that it is proper to do so, having regard to
(i) the flagrancy of the infringement;
(ii) any benefit shown to have accrued to the defendant by reason of the
infringement; and
(iii) all other relevant matters,
the court may, in assessing damages for the infringement, award such
additional damages as it considers appropriate in the circumstances.
The ambit of SS.115(4) is discussed in the research paper:
16. A court may not, in awarding conversion damages, compensate a
plaintiff twice in relation to the same loss (see, for example
Lewis Trusts
Bambers Stores
[1983] FSR 453).
Accordingly if a plaintiff has been awarded an account
of profits enjoyed by a defendant as a result of his or her infringement,
defendant will not be ordered to pay an amount of conversion damages which
includes profit received by the defendant when he
or she sold the
17. Sub-section 116(2) provides defences to an action under SS.116(1), as
follows: ‘A plaintiff is not entitled by virtue of
this section to any
damages or to any other pecuniary remedy, other than costs, if it is established
that, at the time of the conversion
or detention -
(a) the defendant was not aware, and had no reasonable grounds for
suspecting, that copyright subsisted in the work or other subject-matter
which the action relates;
(b) where the articles converted or detained were infringing copies - the
defendant believed, and had reasonable grounds for believing,
that they were not infringing
(c) where an article converted or detained was a plate used or intended
to be used for making articles - the defendant believed, and
had reasonable
grounds for believing, that the articles so made or intended to be made were not
or would not be, as the case may
be, infringing copies. ‘
18. There are provisions in the Act, other than SS.116(1), which could
result in a defendant giving up infringing copies or items
used to make them. A
court may order a person charged with an offence to deliver up an infringing copy or a plate or recording equipment
used or intended to
be used for making infringing copies, whether or not the defendant is convicted
of the offence: s.132(4) (
Appendix ‘D”)
. In addition copies
of works subject to a notice to the Comptroller–General of Customs under
s.135 of the Act may be ‘seized
as forfeited to the Commonwealth’: s.132(5) (
(5) COMPARISON WITH OTHER AUSTRALIAN INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY STATUTES, WITH
SELECTED FOREIGN COPYRIGHT LAWS AND WITH INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION
REQUIREMENTS
19. The Act is the only Australian intellectual property statute
providing remedies for conversion or detention of goods comprising
articles made
in infringement of intellectual property or of equipment used to make those
articles. However courts of equity have
an inherent jurisdiction to order a
defendant to deliver up articles made in infringement of a plaintiff’s
intellectual property
rights. This power is an adjunct to the power to grant
injunctive relief. The delivered up articles are not regarded as the
plaintiff’s
property. They must be destroyed.
20. Section 21 of the Canadian
COpy right Act 1922
‘All infringing copies of any work in which Copyright subsists, or
at any substantial part there of and all plates used or intended
to be used for
the production of such infringing copies shall be deemed to be the property of
the owner of the copyright, who accordingly
may take proceeding, for the
recovery of the possession thereof or in respect of the
The Act amending the Canadian
passed in June 1988 does not
amend this section, although there has been some criticism of its
of the New Zealand C
OPY right Act 1962
to s.116 of the Australian C
opyriqht Act.
However, the New Zealand
Amendment Act 1985
which came into force on 1 October 1985 provides in
effect that, subject to the discretion of the court, conversion damages are not
available where infringements are three dimensional: SS. 25(2A).
new UK Act’) does not provide rights and remedies by way of an action
for conversion along the lines of SS.116(1)
of the Australian Act. Sub-section
18(1) of the
Act 1956 (uK)
is, in effect,
repealed. This is consistent with the United Kingdom Government’s White
Paper ‘Intellectual Property and
Innovation’ of April 1986 (Chapter 12, para.12.2), and with the earlier recommendation of the
Whitford Committee (Cmnd 6732,
HMSO 1977 Ch.14; para.3).
23. However the owner of copyright has certain rights to seek an order
for forfeiture and delivery up (s.99, the new UK Act) and to
seizure and
detention (s.100, the new UK Act). These provisions are set out in
Appendix ‘E”.
of the United States of America does not provide
for conversion damages or detention remedies.
25. The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works (Paris Act, 24 July 1971) (’the Berne Convention’)
Universal Copyright Convention do not require member States to grant copyright
owners rights in the nature of conversion
damages or remedies for
detention. However Art.16 of the Berne Convention provides:
(1) Infringing copies of a work shall be liable to seizure in any
country of the Union where the work enjoys legal protection.
(2) The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall also apply to
reproductions coming from a country where the work is not protected,
ceased to be protected.
(3) The seizure shall take place in accordance with the legislation of
each country. ‘
Sub–section 132(4) of the Act, referred to above, would appear to
fulfil this requirement.
(6) SOME HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
26. There has been provision by statute of a legal fiction that a
actions for
detention and conversion to be maintained, for almost 250 years.
27. The United Kingdom
of 1842 (5 and 6 Vic C.45) was the
first statute to deem copyright owners to own infringing copies
28. However the 1814 UK Act (54 Geo III c.156, s.4) rendered infringers
‘liable to a Special Action on the case’ . An
‘action on the
case’ was one of the two writs then available under the common law to
redress conduct which the law perceived
as wrongful, the other writ being
trespass. Trover, or conversion, was an action on the case, though it seems
that this remedy was
not the basis of S.4. Actions on the case were typically
available in circumstances where the plaintiff’s injury was consequential
upon the defendant’s act or omission. Such an action, unlike the action
for trespass, did not lie without proof of damage.
29. Under the 1814 Act the copyright owner was entitled also to damages,
with double ‘costs of suit, and the infringer was required
infringing copies to the copyright owner ‘upon Order of the Court of Record in which any
Action or Suit in Law or
Equity shall be commenced . . . ‘ . The
was also required to
destroy the copies and was entitled to receive half of three pence per page
payable by the defendant in relation
to the infringing copy, for which the owner
could sue by ‘Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information . ..’. The other
1 1/2 pence went to the Crown.
30. It is noted that, unlike the current Australian law, the new UK Act
does not provide a plaintiff with the remedy of delivery up
as of right. The Act
requires the owner of copyright to obtain an order for forfeiture and delivery
up (ss.99(1)).
31. Under the first modern copyright legislation, the Statute of Anne
(1709), which was limited to printed books, infringing copies
were stated simply
to be liable to seizure by and forfeiture to the copyright owner, who was
required forthwith to ‘damask
and make waste paper of them’ (1709 8
Anne c.19 s.1). In addition an ‘offender’
(infringer) under the 1709 Act forfeited one penny for every sheet of
paper found in his or her custody, half of which amount went
to the Crown, the
other half of which went to the plaintiff ‘... to be recovered in any of
her Majesty’s courts of record
at Westminster, by action of debt, bill,
plaint or information . ..’.
32. The requirements in the 1709 and 1814 Acts that infringing copies be
destroyed indicate that deemed ownership of the copies by
the plaintiff was not
the legal basis of the requirement to forfeit.
(7) SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS RECEIVED AND DISCUSSIONS HELD
33. On Dawson in its behalf of its clients, see
Appendix ‘B’
, Blake Waldron
submitted that s.116 ought to be retained present form. The main basis for its
argument was that s.116 addresses the
unjust enrichment enjoyed by a defendant as a
result of his or her infringement. It was submitted that damages under s.115 are
compensatory,
whilst those under s.116 are restitutionary. Reliance was also placed on the need to provide adequate deterrence to would be
infringers.
34. The Australian Book Publishers Association, however, supported
abolition of conversion damages and retention of delivery up, either
(preferably) as of right or at the discretion of
the court in circumstances where damages for infringement were not an adequate remedy
(ie, either option (ii) or
(iii) in the Committee’s Discussion Paper, para.31). The organisation saw
this as retaining the
major benefit of SS.116(1) without the uncertainties it
perceived existed as a result of the SS.116(2) defences. This submission
effect recommends reforms along the lines of the new UK
35. All legal practitioners with whom the Committee had discussions
indicated that delivery up as of right under SS.116(1) was very
important to
plaintiffs, both as a deterrent (through letters of demand, or by example) and
as a way of removing infringing copies
from the market. By contrast it was considered by some that the conversion damages remedy
ought to be removed because it causes injustice
to defendants, provides a
windfall to plaintiffs, and because many defendants are in any case unable to
pay damages.
36. Written and oral comments by Mr Kirsner endorsed the view that the
damages awarded under SS.116(1) in
Brine and Co
[1981] FCA 157
(1981) 37 ALR 190
were ‘unreasonably excessive’ . Mr Kirsner acted for the
defendants, who had imported soccer balls bearing marks which
were the subject
of copyright.
37. In discussion practitioners indicated that the defendants apparently
most greatly disadvantaged by the SS.116(1) remedy were those
who manufactured
(typically three dimensional) articles of which the copyright element was an insubstantial part. An example of such
an article might be
a book of which only few pages infringe copyright; a personal computer
containing a memory chip holding an operating
system program; or an item Of clothing upon which is
printed an artistic work subject to copyright. However the point was
that the copyright element of an article, comprising or containing an infringing
copy, may be the valuable element of the article.
38. It was also said that the section could be amended so as to address
the issue of severability of the copyright element from the
article. It was suggested that, in lieu of delivery up, a court
might be empowered to order that the part of the article which was
an infringing
copy be removed, if this could be done without destroying the article.
(8) REASONS FOR RECOMMENDATIONS
39. Problems arise because of:-
(a) The rule that the plaintiff is entitled to the value of the entire
article of which an infringing copy, which is not itself the
whole article, is
(b) The fact that the remedy is as of right, notwithstanding that there
are cases where it will be found that a copyright owner will
be properly
compensated by an award of compensatory damages or an account of profits and, in
appropriate cases, an injunction.
It is the harshness with which the section operates that is the cause of
concern about it. On the other hand, it must be acknowledged,
as the submissions
made to the Committee emphasise, that there will be many cases where
the infringer will be a man of straw and
no damages will be
recoverable. But the remedy of delivery up to the plaintiff for his or her own benefit and not for destruction
provides, in
cases of this kind, something of a remedy and tends to operate as a
deterrent. In cases where infringers are not impecunious,
an award of damages
under s.115 or an account or profits may not yield more than a nominal sum
enabling infringers to infringe copyright
in the knowledge that, in the absence
of s.116, their resources would be unlikely to suffer any significant
depletion. Compare the
recent decision of Wilcox J in
Autodesk Australia Pty
Unreported Judgment No.121 of 4 April 1990.
40. The Committee considers that the major disadvantage for Australia of
an approach along the lines of that taken in the new UK Act
is that defendants
can readily and unfairly avoid losing the value of infringing copies in their
possession by disposing of them
following receipt of a letter of demand or other
notice from a copyright owner. The remedy of delivery up will be of no use and the
damages which may be recovered are unlikely to be very much. The research paper,
Appendix F, discloses that one could not be sanguine
that courts in such
circumstances would find the conduct of infringers to be flagrant for the purposes of SS.115(4) of the Act. In
aggravated damages may be awarded, but, even if they are, it would seem that they are unlikely to involve sums of
as large as those which may be awarded under s.116.
41. In the Committee’s view, there needs to remain in the Act provisions enabling the Court in proper cases to order delivery
up, not for destruction, but to applicants for relief for
their own benefit and the remedy of conversion damages. The fact that these
provisions may operate unjustly or be inappropriate for some cases can be
accommodated by conferring upon the Court a wide discretion
to determine whether
a particular case is an appropriate one in which to order delivery up and/or to award conversion
damages. The
Court, if this approach is adopted, will have a free hand to do
justice in each particular case.
42. The Committee is conscious of a submission made to it by copyright
interests that this change will weaken the position of copyright
owners and that
the discretion which is conferred may not always be exercised consistently by the many
judges who sit in copyright
matters. But there can be no getting away from the
fact that the present law does operate harshly and oppressively in some cases
(the soccer balls) case shows. The matter is in need of
redress and the options seem to be either to abolish the remedies altogether
to make them discretionary. The Committee prefers the second of these
alternatives. It is mindful of the fact that copyright
is today an
international affair and that it is desirable that there be uniformity and consistency of laws so far as possible. The
adoption of the
Committee’s recommendation will place the Australian law somewhat out of
step with the new UK Act and with
the laws of other countries as well.
Nevertheless, the Committee is of opinion that its proposal is, on balance, to
be preferred
to other solutions.
43. One consequential matter raised in the submissions made to the
Committee concerns the use of the word “plate” in s.116
and s.132 of the Act. The work is defined in
s.1O thereof. It was said that a plate was only one device which might be used
for copying
works or subject matter. In age copying devices become increasingly that the Act
should does in relation to a rapidly developing
technological are many and varied and are likely to sophisticated. The Committee agrees
cast a wider net than it presently devices
used for making infringing copies. It is of opinion that this objective will be achieved by the use
of more general words in SS.116
and 132. The definition of “plate” in s.1O should be
44. In all these circumstances the Committee recommends that the Act be
amended in accordance with the proposals made in Section 2
of this Report.
Organisations to which Discussion Paper sent
Allen Allen and Hemsley
Clayton Utz
Clayton Utz
Corrs Pavey Whiting and Byrne
Cocks and Maddox
Dawson Waldron
Freehill Hollingdale and Page
Freehill Hollingdale and Page
Malleson Stephen Jaques
Malleson Stephen Jaques
Minter Ellison
Phillips Fox
Phillips Fox
(2) Industry Associations
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Chamber of Manufacturers
Australian Record Industry Association
Confederation of Australian Industry
Film and Video Coalition
Institute of Patent Attorneys of Australia
Metal Traders Industry Association
Video Industry Distributors Association
T-Shirt Manufacturers
Acme T-shirt Company
Surry Hills, NSW
Addshirt Australia
Montrose, VIC
Bass Printing Services
Lidcombe, NSW
Beaut Promotional Clothing
North Fitzroy, VIC
Captain Tee-Shirts
Clifton Hill, VIC
C�Bon Screen Printers
Leichhardt, NSW
Fairfield, VIC
Mr Tee Shirts
Hawthorn, VIC
Penrith, NSW
Tennyson Textiles
Dandenong, VIC
Newtown, NSW
T-Shirt Media
Frankston, VIC
Submissions following distribution of Discussion Paper
Allen Allen and Hemsley, Solicitors.
Australian Book Publishers Association.
Dawson Waldron, Solicitors (now Blake Dawson Waldron) on behalf
Film and Video Coalition; Motion Picture Distributors Association Limited; Television Producers
Distributors Association Limited;
Video Industry Distributors Association
Limited; and The Australasian Film and Video Security Office.
Mr Alan Kirsner, partner, Phillips Fox, Solicitors.
Legal practitioners with whom discussions were held
Ms Mary Still
Clayton Utz, Solicitors, Sydney.
Mr Richard Cobden
Allen Allen and Hemsley, Solicitors and Notaries, Sydney.
Mr Alan Kirsner
Phillip Fox, Solicitors, Melbourne.
Mr Ian Betts
Blake Dawson Waldron, Solicitors, Sydney.
Ms Sonol Moore
Blake Dawson Waldron, Solicitors, Sydney.
Relevant sections of the COPY riqht Act 1968
Sub–section 132(4) provides:
The court before which a person is charged with an offence by reason of a
contravention of s.132 may, whether the person is convicted
of the offence or
not, order that any article in the possession of the person
that appears to the court to be an infringing copy, or to be a plate or
recording equipment used or intended to be used for making
infringing copies, be
destroyed or delivered up to the owner of the copyright concerned or otherwise
dealt with in such manner as
the court thinks fit.
Section 135(5) provides:
Where a notice has been given under this section in respect of a work and
has not been withdrawn, the importation of copies of the
work to which this
section applies into Australia for the purpose of –
(a) selling, letting for hire, or by way of trade offering or exposing
for sale or hire, the copies;
(b) distributing the copies -
(i) for the purpose of trade; or
(ii) for any other purpose to an extent that will affect prejudicially
the owner of the copyright in the work; or
(c) by way of trade exhibiting the copies in public, is prohibited and
any such copies, if imported into Australia for any such purpose,
may be seized
as forfeited to the Commonwealth.
Relevant sections of COPY right,
Designs and Patents Act 1988 (UK
) Section 99: Order for delivery
(1) Where a person -
(a) has an infringing copy of a work in his possession,
custody or control in the course of a business, or
(b) has in his possession, custody or control an
article specifically designed or adapted for making copies of a particular
work, knowing or having reason to believe that it has been or is to be
used to make infringing copies,
the owner of the copyright in the work may apply to the court for an
order that the infringing copy or article be delivered up to
him or to such
other person as the court may direct.
(2) An application shall not be made after the end of the period
specified in section 113 (period after which remedy of delivery up
available); and no order shall be made. unless the court also makes, or it
appears to the court that there are grounds for making,
an order under
section 114 (order as to disposal of infringing copy or other article).
(3) A person to whom an infringing copy or other article is delivered up
in pursuance of an order under this section shall, if an
order under section 114
is not made, retain it pending the making of an order, or the decision not
to make an order, under that section.
(4) Nothing in this section affects any other power of the court.
Section 100: Right to seize infringing copies and other articles
(1) An infringing copy of a work which is found exposed or otherwise
immediately available for sale or hire, and in respect of which
the copyright
owner woud be entitled to apply for an order under section 99, may be seized and
detained by him or a person authorised
The right to seize and detain is exercisable subject to the following conditions and is subject to any decision of the court
section 114.
(2) Before anything is seized under this section notice of the time and
place of the proposed seizure must be given to a local police
(3) A person may for the purpose of exercising the right conferred by
this section enter premises to which the public have access
but may not seize
anything in the possession, custody or control of a person at a permanent or
regular place of business of his,
and may not use any force.
(4) At the time when anything is seized under this section there shall be
left at the place where it was seized a notice in the prescribed
form containing
the prescibed particulars as to the person by whom or on whose authority the
seizure is made and the grounds on which
it is made.
(5) In this section -
“premises” includes land, buildings, moveable structures,
vehicles, vessels, aircraft and hovercraft; and
“prescibed” means prescibed by order of the Secretary
(6) An order of the Secretary of State under this section shall be made
by statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment
pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
Additional Damages Under The COpY right Act
The United Kingdom Copyright Committee (the Gregory Committee) in its
1952 Report (United Kingdom Board of Trade,
the COPY right
, Cmd. 8662, 1952, para. 291) recognised that the remedy of conversion damages “may be regarded
as to some extent of a penal
character”. This was also recognised by Fox
W.H. Brine CO.
[1981] FCA 157
(1981) 37 A.L.R. 190
at p. 200. A second remedy which may also be regarded as
having a penal element is that provided for in
(C’th) which enables a court to award “additional damages” in certain circumstances.
In Australia, at least, these
would appear to include exemplary or punitive
damages as well as aggravated damages. It may be suggested that if conversion
were abolished or their availability restricted
would receive
a renewed significance and could be used to perform a similar deterrent
Section 115(4)
was introduced into the
as a result
of the recommendation of the
Report of the Copy righ
1959, para. 309 (the Spicer Committee) and was based on
of the United Kingdom
Copy right Act
1956. This section had no equivalent in the 1911
(U.K.) and was introduced on the recommendation of the Gregory
Committee (para. 294) in order to fill a gap it perceived in the other
available for infringement of copyright: injunction, delivery up, damages for
conversion of infringing copies and damages
for infringement of
The Committee considered that:
“It seems to us that there are or may be cases in which an
injunction will not benefit the Plaintiff, where the infringement
involved the making of copies and where damages would be an inadequate
remedy. For instance, if a public performance were
given of a televised sporting
event for which no licence had been granted, the injunction would be ineffective
unless the intention
to give the performance had been ascertained
beforehand, and it is hard to see what damages could be awarded other perhaps
cost of the licence which the infringer failed to obtain, and this
would be of little value if the licence had been refused for good
Thus the Gregory Committee recommended that the Court should be given
“discretionary power to impose something equivalent to
exemplary damages in cases where the existing remedies give inadequate
relief”. The Spicer Committee (para. 309) was also of
the view that s.
17(3) enables a court to grant exemplary damages where it thinks such remedy to
be appropriate. Section
17(3) provides:
“Where in an action under this section an infringement of copyright
is proved or admitted, and the court, having regard (in
addition to all other
material considerations) to –
(a) the flagrancy of the infringement, and I
(b) any benefit shown to have accrued to the defendant by I
reason of the infringement, is satisfied that effective relief would not otherwise be available to
the plaintiff, the court, in assessing
damages for the infringement, shall have
power to award such additional damages by virtue of this subsection as the court
may consider
appropriate in circumstances.”
Section 115(4) of the Australian Act is in similar terms but with one
significant difference. There is no equivalent to the precondition
Court be satisfied that effective relief would not otherwise be available to the
Section 115(4) provides:
“Where, in an action under this section –
(a) an infringement of copyright is established; and
(b) the court is satisfied that it is proper to do so, having regard to
(i) the flagrancy of the infringement;
(ii) any benefit shown to have accrued to the defendant by reason of the
infringement; and
(iii) all other relevant matters,
the court may, in assessing damages for the infringement, award such
additional damages as it considers appropriate in the
circumstances.”
In the recent decision of
[1987] HCA 47
(1987) 164 C.L.R.
at p. 8 the High Court explained the distinction between aggravated and
exemplary damages at common law as follows:
“Aggravated damages, in contrast to exemplary damages, are
compensatory in nature, being awarded for injury to the plaintiff’s
feelings caused by insult, humiliation and the like. Exemplary damages, on the
other hand, go beyond compensation and are awarded
‘as a punishment to the
guilty, to deter from any such proceeding for the future, and as a proof of the
detestation of the
jury to the action itself’:
[1763] EngR 103
(1763) Lofft 1
19 [98 E.R. 489, at pp. 498–499] per Pratt L.C.J.”
This distinction was not so clearly drawn by the courts until 1964 when it was made in the House of Lords decision of
[1964] UKHL 1
[1964] A.C. 1129.
There Lord Devlin, with whom the rest
of the House agreed, considered exemplary damages to be anomalous, confusing the
criminal functions of the law. The majority of cases which purported
to award exemplary damages were explained as involving aggravated
damages and
his Lordship held (at pp. 1226-1227) that although, in deference to precedent, exemplary damages could not be abolished,
their award
should be confined to two categories of cases: oppressive, arbitrary or
unconstitutional action by the servants of the
government and where the
defendant’s conduct has been calculated by him to make a profit for
himself which may well ‘exceed
the compensation payable to the
This was in addition to cases where exemplary damages were expressly
authorised by statute. Lord Devlin (at p. 1230) considered that
the change would
make little difference to the substance of the law as aggravated damages would
be able to do much of the work formerly
done by exemplary damages.
Cassell & Co. Limited
[1972] UKHL 3
[1972] A.C. 1027
HOuSe of Lords affirmed this decision although it emphasised that Lord
Devlin’s categories should not be interpreted too
literally. The first category does not apply
only to servants of the central government but also to police and local
government officials
and the second category does not entail any kind of
mathematical calculation on the part of the defendant.
Meanwhile, in Australia the High Court, relying on a line of previous
High Court authority recognizing exemplary damages, refused
to follow Rookes v.
John Fairfax
[1966] HCA 40
(1966) 117 C.L.R. 118.
It rejected the limitation of Lord
Devlin’s two categories and, adopting the phrase used in
De Lauret & Co. Limited
[1920] HCA 75
(1920) 29 C.L.R. 71
at p. 77 held that exemplary damages may be awarded
“in cases of conscious wrongdoing in contumelious disregard of
rights”. The Privy Council in
Australian Consolidated
Press Limited
[1967] UKPCHCA 2
(1967) 117 C.L.R. 221
accepted this as the law in Australia and the High Court reaffirmed its position more recently in
(N.S.W.) Pty Limited
Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty
[1985] HCA 12
(1985) 155 C.L.R. 448
(supra) in the
latter case stressing that exemplary damages extend to a wide range of torts (at
p. 8). In New Zealand the Court of
[1982] NZCA 13
[1982] 1 N.Z.L.R. 97
followed the Australian lead and also rejected the
limitations imposed by
Cassell & Co. Limited.
This divergence in Australian and English common law has been mirrored in
judicial interpretations of s. 115(4) of the Australian
s. 17(3) of the United Kingdom
It is quite clear from the
Reports of the Gregory Committee (para. 294) and the Spicer Committee (para. 309) that the sections were
intended to provide a remedy
equivalent to exemplary damages for certain infringements of copyright, although
it might be suggested
that at the time these Reports were written the
term “exemplary damages” had not been defined with the clarity
by subsequent cases. This was certainly the case in the pre–1964
[1960] 1 W.L.R. 1072
defendant photographer, who had been commissioned to take photographs at the
plaintiff’s wedding, subsequently sold
a photograph of the wedding group
to the newspapers, in breach of the plaintiff’s copyright after the
plaintiff’s father–in–law
had been murdered. All three members
of the Court of Appeal agreed that
expressly gave the power to award
“substantial and heavy damages of a punitive nature”
(per Sellers L.J.
at P. 1082;
per Willmer L.J.
at P. 1086;
Harman L.J. at p. 1087) and refused to overturn the trial judge’s
award of 1,000 pounds. Nonetheless, although this award was
regarded as an
“award of exemplary as opposed to compensatory damages”
Willmer L.J. at P. 1086) it does seem to have included a significant
element of what are now identified as aggravated damages for
the wounded
feelings of the plaintiff, Sellers L.J. noting (at p. 1083) that the
defendant’s “conduct did aggravate all
that anguish which no doubt
would be present without the publication of photographs” . Thus the case can be seen as supporting
proposition that
(and its equivalents) enable a court to award both
aggravated and exemplary damages for a flagrant infringement of
However, in the reworking of the law on exemplary damages in
) doubts were cast upon the
reasoning in
, Lord Devlin (
1225 and 1229) suggesting that if considered apart form the
Act it could be justified as a case of aggravated damage,
expressly leaving open the question of whether that Act authorises the
award of exemplary damages. Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone
L.C. expressed
similar views in
Cassell & “Co. Ltd
at pp. 1080-1081) noting that s. 17(3) does not use the phrase “exemplary damages” and that
if such damages are authorised
by the section
should be regarded as a case falling within Lord Devlin’s second
category. Otherwise he regarded it as an “extreme example”
of aggravated damages. Lord Kilbrandon went
further and obiter stated that s.. 17(3) did not authorise an award of exemplary
(supra at p. 1134).
In the light of these obiter comments Ungoed–Thomas J. engaged in a
detailed, ‘although also obiter examination of the
Pressdram Limited
[1973] 1 All E.R. 241
(his Lordship already
having held that the plaintiff had no title to the copyright material in question). His Lordship (at p. 265)
considered that the section was directed to providing “effective relief*’ for the plaintiff so that it refers to
compensatory damages and does not include exemplary or punitive
damages. (This was conceded by the plaintiff.) Although the requirement
17(3)(b) for the court to consider any benefit shown to have accrued to the
defendant by reason of the ‘infringement
is similar to Lord Devlin’s
second category of cases involving a calculated profit to the defendant which
may exceed compensation
payable, Ungoed-Thomas J. considered the purpose of the former as compensation and
the latter as punishment, with para. (b) being
satisfied by the mere fact of
benefit apart from calculated conduct to benefit. His Lordship (at pp. 265-266)
held that no”
award of additional exemplary or aggravated damages for
infringement of copyright could be made outside s. 17(3). Copyright is now
exclusively a creature of statute and s. 17(3)
provides a code for damages which are additional which excludes. exemplary
altogether and substantially if not-completely covers what could be
awarded by aggravated damages, making them subject to the precondition
court has to be satisfied that effective relief would not otherwise be available to the plaintiff. This precondition Ungoed-Thomas
J. regarded as referring to an alternative remedy available in another action or
for another cause of action such a libel or breach
of confidence.
Rank Film Distributors Limited
Video Information
[1982] A.C. 380
at pp. 391-392 Ungoed–Thomas J.’s view that
s. 17(3) only refers to compensatory damages received the approval of Whitford
J. at first instance. His decision was reversed on appeal but on other grounds. The only other judge to consider
this point was Templeman
L.J. in the Court of Appeal who agreed with Whitford J.
(supra at p. 425).
The rejection of the
view of exemplary
damages in Australia suggests that these English cases should not be followed in
interpreting s. 115(4) of the
(C’th). This is reinforced by the absence from s. 115(4) of the
precondition in s. 17(3) that “effective relief would
not otherwise be
available to the plaintiff” upon which Ungoed-Thomas J. based his decision that s. 17(3) was directed to purely
compensatory damages. Thus
should still be regarded as authoritative in Australia and s. 115(4)
would seem to provide the equivalent of both aggravated and
exemplary damages. This was the approach taken by Legoe J.
in Concrete Systems Pty
Holdings Limited
(1978) S.A.S.R. 79
at pp. 84-85: “Sub-section (4) of the above section is not directed in its terms
purely to compensatory damages and it therefore
appears that the English
decisions on exemplary damages and on a somewhat differently cast section under
Copy right Act
1956 (U.K.) are not appropriate: see s. 17(3) of the Copyriqht Act 1956 (U.K.); Rookes v.
[1964] UKHL 1
[1964] A.C. 1129
; Cassel & Co. Ltd v.
[1972] UKHL 3
[1972] A.C. 1027
Pressdram Ltd.
[1973] 1 All E.R. 241.
In my opinion, sub–s. (4) gives the court the
widest possible discretionary power to compensate the plaintiff for its loss
damage occasioned by the infringement, whether such loss and damage is
classified as of an exemplary or aggravated or even punitive
nature,” (It may be noted that Legoe J. seems to regard exemplary damages as in
some way different from punitive damages although
in general they are considered
to be interchangeable terms for the same head of damages.) The question was
left open in
P.J Holdings Australia Pty Limited
25 A.L.R. 538
at p. 540 and “raised in Prior v. Lansdowne
Pty Limited
[1977] VicRp 6
[1977] V.R. 65
, the only two other Australian cases on s. 115(4). However, Legoe J. ‘s view has received the
support of the Australian commentators
such as Ricketson,
Law of Intellectual Property
, Sydney, Law Book Company
Limited, 1984, p. 297, ’and Lahore, Intellectual Property in
Australia: COpyright Law
, Sydney, Butterworths, 1988, para 4.15.230. Furthermore, the New Zealand Court of Appeal in
Newspapers Limited
Dealers Guide Limited
N.Z.L.R. 66
has adopted a similar approach in relation to s. 24(3) of the New
opyright Act
1962, which is in identical terms to the United
Kingdom s. 17(3), following its rejection of
. The Court considered that the
reference to “effective relief”’ did not limit damages to
compensatory damages and
that s. 24(3) did enable the Court to award the
exemplary damages with, according to McMullin J. “the considerations which
are relevant to an award of exemplary damages in an action in tort, [being] of
equal application” to S. 24(3). The requirement
that “effective
relief” be not otherwise available was considered by McMullin J. (at
pp. 71-72) to refer to an award
under s. 24(1) (the equivalent s. 115(1) and
(2)) and by Grieg J. (at pp. 78–79) to refer of to both relief under s. 24(1)
and conversion damages, enabling an award
“in excess of the ‘excess’”’ that may be included
in conversion
damages. This would seem preferable to the view of Ungoed-Thomas J. in Beloff v.
Pressdram Limited
p. 266) that they include damages for a different cause of action and is in
accord with the recommendations of the Gregory Committee
294).— Somers J. (at p. 76) states that s. 24(3) “elements of compensation for aggravation damages may include
and of punishment”. Grieg J. (at p. 79) however, considered that, although exemplary damages
were allowed there could be some
difficulty if the plaintiff were
incorporated. He referred to the fact that an incorporated plaintiff may not be
entitled to an award
for its injured feelings although it can recover for
injured trade and concluded that:
“It would certainly not be right that an individual copyright owner
might recover such aggravated damages while an incorporated
owner would be
It is respectfully submitted that this conclusion does not follow. The
reason behind the common law rule is as stated by Lord Reid
Dailv Telegraph Limited
[1964] A.C. 234
at p. 262: *’A company
cannot be injured in its feelings, it can only be injured in its pocket” – because it has
feelings to injure. Thus a Full Federal Court in
Broadcasting Corporation
Comalco Limited
[1986] FCA 300
rejected the proposition that a corporation could recover damages for
injury to its reputation as such otherwise than for monetary
loss caused, for
example, by injury to trade reputation or goodwill. If no financial loss is
caused there is no loss. This, of course,
does not preclude an individual from
recovering injury to his or her feelings at common law because this is a
distinct loss suffered
by natural persons. There would seem to be no legitimate
reason for preventing an individual copyright owner from recovering aggravated
damages for injured feelings merely because a corporate copyright owner cannot,
recover for something it has not lost. Thus, it is
submitted Somers. J. ‘s
view, which accords with that of Legoe J. in
Concrete Systems Pty Limited
Devon Symond
Holdings Limited
) should be preferred and s. 115(4) of the Australian
should be regarded as providing a
statutory, equivalent of both aggravated and exemplary damages. . as
they are now understood.
In determining whether additional damages under
are appropriate
the court is required to have regard to the flagrancy of the infringement, any
benefit shown to have accrued to the
defendant by reason of the infringement and
all other relevant matters.
classic case where these requirements were satisfied. The photograph had already
been published so that an injunction would
be useless and compensation to the
‘plaintiff would amount to only 15 pounds, satisfying the additional English requirement
that effective relief was not otherwise available. The benefit accruing to the
defendant was meagre but, according to Sellers L.J.
(at p. 1082):
. . . it was a flagrant infringement of the right of the plaintiff, and it was scandalous conduct and in total disregard not
of the legal rights of the plaintiff regarding copyright but of his feelings and
his sense of family dignity and pride. It was
an intrusion into his life, deeper
and graver than an intrusion into a man’s property.”
Similarly in
Nichols Advances Vehicle Svstems Inc.
[1979] R.P.C. 127
at P. 140 additional damages were justified
... the defendants, by stealing a march based on infringement, received benefits and inflicted humiliation and loss which are difficult
to compensate and difficult to assess in the
normal course.”
Flagrancy implies the “existence of scandalous conduct, deceit and
such like and includes deliberate and calculated copyright
infringements:
Ravenscroft
Herbert and New Enalish Librarv
[1980] R.P.C. 193
”at p. 208, or as Gowans J, in -z v.
Lansdowne Press
Pty Limited
at p. 70) expressed it, involves a
“calculated disregard of the plaintiff’s rights, or cynical pursuit
of benefit”
but’not mere mistake or carelessness. Thus if the
infringer mistakenly believed he or she owned the copyright: Prior v.
Landsdowne Press Pty Limited
; or acted in the bona fide belief that no copyright subsisted in the
plaintiff’s work:
International Credit
control Limited
[1974] 1 N.Z.L.R. 695
conduct should not be regarded as flagrant. Likewise, the Hong Kong Court of Appeal in
Tyco Industries Inc.
(1987) 9 I.P.R. 133
, after holding that there had been an infringement,
‘accepted that, though deliberate, it was not flagrant because the
had acted openly and bona fide on legal advice – advice which
was subsequently vindicated by the Privy Council:
Interlogo A.G.
TyCO Industries Inc.
[1988] UKPC 3
[1988] 3 W.L.R. 678
, which held that no copyright subsisted in the
relevant drawings. This demonstrates one of the limitations of additional
if infringement is established, especially in areas of legal
complexity.
Benefit, according to
Ravenscroft
at P. 208), implies that the defendant has reaped a
pecuniary advantage in excess of the damages he would otherwise have to pay,
Somers J. in
Wellington Newspapers Limited
Dealers Guide
(supra at p. 75) noted that the section is not necessarily limited
to pecuniary advantages. There the Court was prepared to assume
benefit would
ensue from the infringement in the form of maintained or increased circulation of the appellant’s newspaper because
this was the
purpose of the publication even though no actual financial benefit was
established in evidence. Similar factors are
taken into account at common law in
the assessment of exemplary damages:
John Fairfax & Sons
Pty Limited
at PP. 143 and 146
per Menzies
Finally the court must take into account all other relevant
matters. Ungoed-Thomas J. in
Pressdram Limited
(supra at p. 267) regarded the equivalent phrase in the United Kingdom
Act as including the defendant’s conduct with regard
to the infringement
and motive for it, injury to the plaintiff’s feeling for suffering
insults, indignities and the like and
the plaintiff’s own corresponding
behaviour. These, of course, go to the aggravated damages aspect of the section. Ricketson
p. in other relevant matters
may be infringing material is presented 298) suggests that included the way in which the so that some
compensation could be given for injury to the plaintiff’s moral rights where,
for example, the material is mutilated or distorted
or presented in conjunction
with material which degrades the plaintiff’s reputation. As shown in the Committee’s
Moral Rights
(January 1988 pp. 6–10 and 62-73) Australian
law at present provides only limited protection for an author’s moral
in most cases by way of actions other than for infringement of
Trade Practices
(C’th), passing off, defamation and actions under
Section 115(4)
damages relate specifically to actions
for infringement of copyright and would give no. greater protection of moral
rights than that
which already exists under
Australian law. However, injury to a plaintiff’s moral accompanying
an infringement of the economic rights may circumstance
aggravating the damage,
especially to the plaintiff’s feelings, which might be taken into
account rights be a under
Not surprisingly, in the absence of comprehensive recognition
and protection of moral rights as such, there has been no discussion
question in any of the cases on
or its equivalents.
Additional factors which may be relevant under
are presumably
those which are taken into account in a common law action for exemplary
damages. As shown in
XL Petroleum
(N.S.W.) Pty Limited
Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty
at pp. 471–472
per Brennan J.)
these may include the
fact that the plaintiff and defendant-were competitors
in a notoriously competitive industry where the risk of repetition of the
conduct is high - although the element of competition may be of less
significance in copyright cases, a large proportion of which
competitors. The court may also take into account the financial circumstances of
the defendant in order to determine what
sum will-be a sufficient deterrent
’against a repetition ’of the conduct (at p. 461
Gibbs C.J. and p. 472
per Brennan J.;Rookes
Lord Devlin).
In 1977 the recommended Whitford Committee (op. that conversion damages cit. paras 702 and 743) should be abolished. It also recommended
which, it is interesting to note,
was seen as empowering the court to impose exemplary damages (para. 698); No
reference was made
in this context to
Pressdram Limited,
although the case does seem to be referred to in another context in para.
704; nor was there any discussion of whether exemplary damages
under the United
OPY right Act
were limited to Lord Devlin’s categories. The Department of Trade Green Paper (United Kingdom
Department of Trade,
Reform of the Law relating to
and Performers’ Protection,
Cmnd. 8302, 1981, p. 48) also explicitly stated that “penal damages may be
awarded under section 17(3)”.
The Whitford Committee recommended that this power should be retained and
strengthened so as to act as a deterrent if the existing
deterrent of conversion
damages is removed (para 704) . The Committee noted that the requirement of effective relief not
being otherwise
available had been interpreted (in
) as referring to relief which might be obtained outside copyright
law. It therefore recommended that the power to award additional
damages should
not be fettered by any requirement that the plaintiff must show some particular
benefit which has accrued to the defendant
or that the plaintiff must satisfy
the court that effective relief could not otherwise be available. This would seem to be
of the Australian provision already which apparently does include exemplary damages (as understood in
Australia), does not contain
the “effective relief” precondition
and, if interpreted in accordance with
Dealers Guide Limited
) (actually decided on
a provision identical to s. 17(3)) does not require the plaintiff to prove. some
particular benefit accruing
to the defendant - benefit in that case was able to
be assumed. These recommendations have been given effect to in s. 93(2) of the
[enacted as s.97(2)] in which the requirement relief has been abolished,
‘although the court of effective must still have regard,’
in particular, to the flagrancy of the
infringement and any benefit accruing to the defendant by reason of the
infringement as well
as all the circumstances.
The Whitford Committee (para. 704) and the United Kingdom Government
(Green Paper, 1981, p. 48 and Department of Trade and Industry
White Paper on
Intellectual Propertv and
, Cmnd.97l2, 1986, para 12.3)
clearly envisaged the provision for additional damages (strengthened, it is
submitted, to the level
of s. 115(4)) to be capable of taking over
the function of conversion damages as an effective deterrent against flagrant
infringement
and undoubtedly, in the absence of conversion damages, the provision will receive new
life. The paucity of authority on s. 115(4)
and its equivalents must surely be
due to the ready availability of, often very substantial, conversion
damages. However, it is submitted
that, ‘because of the way in which the
courts have interpreted these provisions and their approach to exemplary damages
general, s. 115(4) would at most provide only a partial replacement of the
deterrent effect of conversion damages. The provision
was originally conceived
as having a limited application where existing remedies give inadequate relief
(Gregory Committee Report
para. 294; Spicer Committee Report para; 309)
‘although in Australia s. 115(4) has never been restricted to this
Damages have been regarded a’s only ‘recoverable in cases of
flagrancy, -not where the defendant bona fide believes there
is no infringement
in cases where this is a real question:
International Credit Control
Industries Inc
Inte rlogo A.G.
(Court of Appeal,
) or even where this has
been caused through the defendant’s own mistake or perhaps
carelessness: Prior v. Lansdowne Press
); Indeed, even in
Ravenscroft
at pp. 207-208) where Brightman J. considered the defendant as having “clearly infringed” the
plaintiff’s copyright
by deliberate copying to a substantial extent, his Lordship did
not regard the conduct as flagrant because there was no cover-up,
there was an
acknowledgement in the defendant’s novel of the plaintiff’s work and
the defendant did not intend to injure
the plaintiff and did not appreciate that
he was doing so.
This accords with the common law requirement for exemplary damages that
there be “conscious wrongdoing”’: Whitfeld
Lauret & Co. Limited
[1920] HCA 75
(1920) 29 C.L.R. 71
at P.77, and with the
general principle of deterrence, although it indicates that additional damages
will be available only in certain
limited circumstances. Similarly at common
law, although the High Court has shown itself much more willing than the House
to accept the concept of exemplary damages, their availability is.
still closely circumscribed:
“They can apply only where the conduct of the defendant merits
punishment, which is only considered to be so where his conduct
is wanton, as
where it discloses fraud, malice, violence, cruelty, insolence or the like, or, as it is sometimes
put, where he acts
in contumelious disregard of the plaintiff’s
(Mayne & McGregor on Damages, 12th ed. (1961), p. 196, cited with
approval most recently by the High Court in Lamb v.
at p. 8).) Indeed, the landmark case of
John Fairfax &
Sons Pty Limited
) by bare majority, the High Court held that’ there was no evidence on which a jury
could make an award of exemplary damages.
Thus at common law a plaintiff may
only recover damages over and above pure compensation where a court considers
they are warranted
by way of punishment’ or example - which is markedly
different to the present availability of conversion damages. The question
be asked whether there is any special feature of copyright, either theoretically
or in practice, which would justify enabling
a plaintiff’ to recover more
than simple compensation or an account of profits in circumstances where they
could not be recovered
at common law.
A second significant limitation on damages under s. 115(4) is that to the
extent that they include aggravated damages for injury to
a plaintiff’s
feelings, as opposed to injury to trade reputation or goodwill, they may not be recovered by a corporate plaintiff:
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Comalco Limited
. Hence Ungoed-Thomas J. in Beloff v.
Pressdram Limited
(supra at p. 272) considered that the plaintiff, the
author of the work but not the copyright owner at the time of infringement,
if copyright had been validly assigned to her, only recover damages
suffered by the corporate owner at the time of infringement,
which would not
include damages for personal suffering and distress. There is nothing
intrinsically unfair in preventing a corporation
from recovering under this head
because aggravated damages are designed to provide compensation for loss
actually suffered. However,
it again poses the question whether copyright owners
should be entitled to some extra head of damages beyond mere compensation and
so on what basis.
Finally, courts have traditionally adopted a very cautious approach to
awarding damages under s. 115(4) and its equivalents and to
exemplary damages in
general. Templeman J. in
Nichols Advanced Vehicle Systems Inc
[1979] R.P.C. 127
at 140 regarded a “moderate, but not excessive, sum”* for
additional damages as appropriate (assessed at 2,000 pounds,
although in
addition to 32,000 pounds conversion damages:
Nichols, Advances Vehicle
Systems Inc
. v. Rees (No. 3)
[1988] R.P.C. 71.
and especially .
Wellington Newspapers Limited
Dealers Guide Limited
the apellate judges regarded the trial judge’s assessment of additional
damages as high (higher perhaps than they would have
awarded themselves) but not
so unreasonable as to warrant an appellate court’s interference. Similar
sentiments have been expressed
at common law:
[1968] S.A.S.R. l42at p. 146, and XL Petroleum (N.S.W.)
Pty Limited
Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Limited
) where the
High Court issued a plea for moderation in the assessment of exemplary damages
and upheld the Court of Appeal’s
reduction of damages from $400,000 to
$150,000. Gibbs C.J. (at p. 463) approved Lord Devlin’s view in
that exemplary damages might amount to a
punishment greater than would be likely to be imposed if the conduct were criminal and that
therefore in making awards juries should display restraint.
It would seem that courts are generally cautious in awarding exemplary
and additional damages, limiting their availability to cases
of flagrant,
high–handed conduct where the aims of punishment and deterrence are best
served, and placing restraints on the
sums which may be awarded. Conversion
damages contain these punitive and exemplary elements but are much more
indiscriminate in their
incidence and frequently more generous in their
awards. The abolition of conversion damages would leave copyright law providing
same level of deterrence against flagrant infringements as is provided by
the common law against other tortious conduct. It is an
open question whether
anything more should be provided. It would also limit the pecuniary damages a
to compensate for loss suffered or an account
of profits and preclude him or her from gaining a windfall at the
defendant’s
expense except in cases of flagrant conduct. However,
conversion damages are capable of relatively straight-forward assessment and
are not subject to the strictures for
moderation imposed upon exemplary damages. They are also a much more certain consequence of
infringement than
additional damages, being available as of right to the copyright owner and thus
presumably provide potential infringers
with a greater incentive to respect
infringement
or an account of profits are minimal or difficult to assess. This
would seem to suggest that , conversion damages as a discretionary
remedy may be
an appropriate solution, although it also indicates that they should be viewed as one of a range of remedies the
whose interrelationship must account before part of the package is
altered. available under be taken into
Recommended form of 5.116 to replace existing section
116(1) Subject to this Act, in addition to the relief which the court may
grant under section 115, the court may, in respect of any
infringing copy or any
device used or intended to be used for making infringing copies of works or
subject matter”, give to
the owner of the copyright in such work or
subject matter, any or all of the rights and remedies, by way of an action for
or detention, to which he would be entitled if he were the owner of
the copy or device and had been the owner of a copy or device
since the time when ‘it was
(2) In exercising its discretion under sub-section (1) and in determining
the amount of any damages which it may decide to award as
a consequence thereof,
the court:-
(a) shall have regard-to the nature and extent of the relief to which the
owner of ‘the copyright is entitled under section
(b) shall not make an order under this section if, in all the
circumstances, it is of opinion that the’ relief to which the
owner of the
(c) in assessing the amount of damages to be awarded, may have regard
(i) the proportion or importance so much of the infringing copy as
constitutes the infringement of copyright bears to the entirety
of the article
in; on or in relation to which, “the infringing copy i’s
(ii) the extent to which so much of the article as constitutes the
infringing copy may be severed or separated from the article of
which it is
(iii) the expenses incurred by the person marketing or dealing with the
article in acquiring it or manufacturing it, whether those
expenses were
incurred prior to the sale or other disposition of the article or thereafter;
(iv) any other matter which the court considers it appropriate to take
into account.
(3) [Adapted from the present SS. 116(2).] A plaintiff is not entitled by virtue of this section to any damages or to
any other pecuniary
remedy, other than costs, if it is established that, at the time of any deemed conversion or
detention –
(a) the defendant was not aware, and had no reasonable grounds for
suspecting, that copyright subsisted in the work or other subject-matter
which the action relates;
(b) where the articles converted or detained were infringing copies
– the defendant believed, and had reasonable grounds for
believing, that
they were not infringing copies; or
(c) where an article converted or detained was a device used or intended
to be used for making articles - the defendant believed,
and had reasonable
grounds for believing, that the articles so made or intended to be made were not
or would not be, as the case
may be, infringing copies.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (232 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter