URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2002/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration - Issues Paper [2002] NSWLRCIP 21
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition
of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of
administration
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
1. INTRODUCTION
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON UNIFORM SUCCESSION LAWS
THIS REVIEW
PREVIOUS PROPOSALS: THE WALRC REPORT
OUTLINE OF ISSUES PAPER
Automatic recognition
Conflict of laws issues
2. THE RESEALING SYSTEM
INTRODUCTION
Statistics on resealing
The cost of resealing
The need for resealing
The need for uniformity in relation to resealing
3. AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION OF AUSTRALIAN GRANTS: BACKGROUND
OVERSEAS SCHEMES
Automatic recognition in the United Kingdom
The position in the United States of America
The Hague Convention
EXISTING COMMONWEALTH LEGISLATION
EARLIER AUSTRALIAN PROPOSALS
The Barwick proposals
WALRC proposals
4. AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION OF AUSTRALIAN GRANTS: PROPOSALS
WALRC RECOMMENDATION
Automatic recognition of a grant made where the deceased died domiciled
The resealing of other Australian grants
PARLIAMENTARY COUNSEL’S COMMITTEE
Automatic recognition of all Australian grants
ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST A SYSTEM OF AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION
Preliminary view
Automatic recognition
Continued resealing of Australian grants
AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION OF OVERSEAS GRANTS
AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION OF GRANTS RESEALED IN THE DECEASED’S DOMICILE
DETAILS OF THE SCHEME
Matters to be notified on the grant
Automatic recognition of elections and orders to administer
Notification to other jurisdictions
AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION AND SAFEGUARDS IN THE RESEALING PROCESS
Advertising
AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION AND OTHER AREAS OF SUCCESSION LAW
5. A UNIFORM RESEALING PROCEDURE
PERSONS ENTITLED TO APPLY FOR THE RESEALING OF A GRANT
General provisions
Executor or administrator by representation
A public trustee to whom an order to collect and administer is made
Preliminary view
APPLICATIONS FOR RESEALING: PROCEDURAL ISSUES
Multiple personal representatives
Grants of double probate
Substituted executors or administrators
Application by a trustee company for resealing
Non-resident applicants for resealing
No need to be within the jurisdiction of the resealing court
Deemed residence of, and service on, a non-resident applicant for resealing
INSTRUMENTS THAT MAY BE RESEALED
All grants of probate and administration
Instruments given an effect similar to grants of probate and administration
Provisions referring to the effect of the instrument
Orders to administer and elections to administer
Orders to administer
Elections to administer
THE RESEALING PROCESS
Applying in person or through a legal representative
Resealing by the court or the registrar
Commencing an application for resealing
Documents that must be produced to the court
The power to reseal
Finding as to domicile
Time limits
EFFECTS OF RESEALING
Force and effect of a resealed grant
Imposition of duties and liabilities of a personal representative
Applicant deemed to be the personal representative of the estate
DUTIES AND LIABILITIES OF A PERSON AUTHORISED BY POWER OF ATTORNEY
ADVERTISEMENT OF INTENTION TO RESEAL
NOTIFICATION TO COURT OF ORIGINAL GRANT
DISCLOSURE OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
SUCCESSION DUTY
6. COUNTRIES WHOSE GRANTS MAY BE RESEALED
THE CURRENT LAW
SOME PROPOSALS
PRELIMINARY VIEW
7. JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES
ORIGINAL GRANTS
8. CHOICE OF LAWS ISSUES: THE PERSON TO WHOM THE GRANT WILL BE MADE
ORIGINAL GRANTS
Most Australian jurisdictions
Movable property
Immovable property
South Australia
New Zealand
South Australia
PRELIMINARY VIEW
9. RESEALING WHERE ORIGINAL GRANT NOT MADE IN DOMICILE
MOVABLE PROPERTY
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY
RESTRICTIONS ON RESEALING
South Australia
Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill
PRELIMINARY VIEW
Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill
TABLE OF LEGISLATION
TABLE OF CASES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
Terms of reference
History of this Reference (Digest)
To inquire into and report on the existing law and procedure relating to succession and to recommend and draft a model State and
Territories law on succession.
In undertaking this inquiry the Commission is to consult with the Queensland Law Reform Commission which has accepted responsibility
for the co-ordination of a uniform succession laws project.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
Participants
History of this Reference (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Master Joanne Harrison
The Hon Justice David Hodgson*
The Hon Gordon Samuels AC CVO QC
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Mr Joseph Waugh
Ms Anna Williams
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Consultant to the National Committee
Associate Professor P R Handford
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
postal addresses
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 1044 or DX 1227 Sydney
street address
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
telephone (02) 9228 8230
facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 31 August 2002.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. However,
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Other publication formats
The NSW Attorney General’s Department is committed to fully meeting its obligations under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination
legislation. These laws require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices which may prevent people with disabilities
from having full and equal access to our services.
This publication is available in alternative formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document please contact the Law
Reform Commission.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
List of issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
Chapter Four
(a) Should there be a scheme of automatic recognition of Australian grants of probate or letters of administration?
(b) If so, what form should that scheme take?
(a) Are there any circumstances in which grants of probate or letters of administration made by the courts of overseas countries
should be entitled to automatic recognition?
(b) What arrangements should be made for the resealing of overseas grants?
Should a grant of probate or letters of administration that has been resealed by the court of the Australian jurisdiction in which
the deceased died domiciled be automatically recognised in all other Australian jurisdictions?
When a grant or reseal is made by the court of the Australian jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled:
(a) should the deceased’s domicile be notified on the grant or reseal;
(b) should the grant or reseal contain a short statement, in simple language, of the effect of automatic recognition?
Should automatic recognition be given to:
(a) orders to administer made in favour of a public trustee (or similar officer) by the court of the Australian jurisdiction in which
the deceased died domiciled;
(b) elections to administer estates that are filed by a public trustee (or similar officer) or by a trustee company in the court of
the Australian jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled?
(a) Is it necessary to a scheme of automatic recognition to establish a system of notification of grants and other appropriate details?
(b) If so, what form should the system of notification take?
Is it necessary for the implementation of the proposed scheme of automatic recognition for the States and Territories to have uniform
advertising requirements for the making of an original grant?
What provision, if any, should be made in relation to caveats if a scheme of automatic recognition is introduced?
Chapter Five
Who should be entitled to apply for the resealing of a grant?
(a) Should it be possible for a grant made to several personal representatives to be resealed on the application of only one or some
(b) If so, what conditions should be required before such an application can be made?
What provisions should be made for resealing when there is a grant of “double probate”?
What provision should be made for resealing where an order has been made substituting an executor or administrator for an executor
or administrator named in an original grant?
What procedure should be followed in relation to resealing when a trustee company is appointed as executor or administrator or as
the attorney of an executor or administrator?
What provision should be made for applicants for resealing who are not resident within the jurisdiction of the resealing court?
What provision should be made for deemed residence of, and service on, applicants for resealing who are not resident within the jurisdiction
where resealing is sought?
Should it be possible to reseal all grants of probate and letters of administration, including grants made for special, limited or
temporary purposes?
Should grants that can be resealed include instruments that are given an effect similar to grants of probate or administration by
the law of the country where the instrument was first filed or issued?
Should it be possible to reseal an order to administer made in favour of a public trustee or similar officer?
(a) Should it be possible to reseal an election to administer?
(b) If so, what provision should be made in relation to resealing an election to administer?
Should an applicant for the resealing of a grant be able to apply through a legal practitioner?
What functions should the registrar have in relation to resealing?
What limitations should be placed on the registrar’s powers in relation to resealing?
(a) Should there be a uniform procedure for initiating a resealing application?
(b) If so, what form should it take?
What should an applicant for resealing be required to produce to, or deposit with, the registrar?
How, if at all, should the model legislation emphasise that resealing is discretionary?
(a) In what circumstances should the court require further evidence as to the deceased’s domicile?
(b) What sort of evidence should be required?
What further requirements, if any, should be imposed on an applicant for resealing when the application has been delayed beyond a
specified period?
Should the model legislation provide that a grant, when resealed, is to have the same force, effect and operation as if it had been
originally granted by the resealing court?
What rights, powers, duties and liabilities should be imposed on an applicant for resealing?
Should the applicant for resealing be deemed to be, for all purposes, the personal representative of the deceased in respect of his
or her estate within the resealing jurisdiction?
Should specific provision be made with respect to the duties and liabilities of a person authorised under a power of attorney who
obtains the resealing of a grant?
(a) What provision, if any, should be made in relation to caveats against resealing?
(b) What effect should any such caveats have?
What provision, if any, should be made in relation to advertising an intention to reseal?
What provision, if any, should be made for the provision of security for the due administration of an estate in the resealing jurisdiction?
What provision, if any, should be made for notification to the court of original grant of an application for resealing?
Should an applicant for a grant or resealing be required to disclose all assets and liabilities wherever situate?
What provision, if any, should be made to ensure that such succession duties are paid as would have been payable if the grant had
originally been made by the resealing court?
Chapter Six
What provision should be made to identify the countries or parts of countries whose grants may be resealed by Australian courts?
Chapter Seven
What provision, if any, should be made to allow the resealing of a grant of probate or letters of administration even though the
deceased left no property in the resealing jurisdiction?
Chapter Eight
What provision, if any, should be made as to the law governing the person to whom a grant or reseal should be made?
Chapter Nine
What provision, if any, should be made where an application is made for the resealing of an original grant that has not been made
in the jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of
interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
The National Committee on Uniform Succession Laws
This review
Previous proposals: the WALRC Report
Outline of Issues Paper
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON UNIFORM SUCCESSION LAWS
1.1 In 1991 the Standing Committee of Attorneys General (SCAG)
approved the development of uniform succession laws for the whole of
Australia. In 1995 a National Committee on Uniform Succession Laws was
established to review the existing state laws relating to
and to propose model national uniform laws. The Committee comprises
representatives from the various jurisdictions in
Australia and the
Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC) is the co-ordinating agency.
The New South Wales Attorney General asked
the New South Wales Law
Reform Commission (NSWLRC) to participate in the deliberations of the
National Committee under terms of reference
that were issued on 5 May
To inquire into and report on the existing law and procedure
relating to succession and to recommend and draft a model State and
Territories
law on succession.
1.2 The National Committee has divided the project into different
phases, each of which deals with a discreet area of succession
areas of law are:
the law of wills;
family provision (or Testator’s family maintenance);
administration of estates of deceased persons;
intestate estates.
THIS REVIEW
1.3 This Issues Paper, on the recognition of interstate and foreign
grants of probate and letters of administration, is part of the
of the administration of estates of deceased persons and is a brief
summary of the issues raised in the Discussion Paper produced
Queensland Law Reform Commission.
1.4 This Issues Paper raises, and invites comments on, a number
of issues in relation to the recognition of interstate and foreign
grants of probate and letters of administration. The preliminary views
expressed in this Issues Paper have been suggested by Associate
Professor Handford. The views are not necessarily those of the National
Committee which is yet to adopt a position in relation to
discussed. The National Committee invites members of the public and
organisations with an interest or expertise in the
issues under review
to comment on the issues raised or any other issues that should be
PREVIOUS PROPOSALS: THE WALRC REPORT
1.5 The National Committee has decided to use, as the starting
point for its consideration of the issues, the recommendations made
the Western Australian Law Reform Commission (WALRC) in its 1984 Report
on the subject.
The Western Australian Law Reform
Commission had undertaken its work with a view to proposing uniform
legislation throughout Australia.
The Report recommended that there
should be a uniform code of procedure for the resealing of grants, and
it set out the general principles
that should be incorporated in such a
code. It also recommended that a grant made by the court of the
Australian State or Territory
in which the deceased was domiciled at
the time of his or her death should be automatically recognised,
without any need for resealing,
in each other Australian State and
1.6 The WALRC Report was tabled at a SCAG meeting in 1985. A
number of SCAG Officers’ Papers were subsequently prepared and
Committee of Parliamentary Counsel commenced drafting a uniform code of
procedure as recommended by the WALRC. During this process
proposals were not followed and it was then proposed that
grants of probate and letters of administration made in any Australian
State or Territory (rather than a grant issued in the jurisdiction
which the deceased died domiciled) should receive automatic recognition
throughout Australia.
At a conference of Probate
Registrars held in May 1990, the Probate Registrars rejected the
revised scheme as completely unacceptable,
and expressed a clear
preference for the original WALRC scheme.
The matter was
subsequently removed from the SCAG agenda, and no further steps have
been taken to implement the recommendations of
OUTLINE OF ISSUES PAPER
1.7 The chapters in this Issues Paper mirror those set out in
the National Committee’s Discussion Paper. Readers should consult
the Discussion Paper for further details on the issues raised in each
Automatic recognition
1.8 The first part of this Issues Paper deals with the question of automatic recognition:
outlines the present system of resealing;
examines some possible alternatives to resealing; and
suggests a scheme of automatic recognition.
1.9 The second part of this Issues Paper deals with the question of
resealing which may still be necessary at least with respect to
Australian grants and all foreign grants:
sets out provisional proposals for a uniform resealing procedure; and
outlines proposals for a uniform approach to the question of the countries whose grants should be able to be resealed.
Conflict of laws issues
1.10 Finally, this Issues Paper addresses a number of issues that raise a question of conflict of laws:
discusses proposals for uniform rules to determine whether a court has jurisdiction to make or reseal a grant;
examines proposals for the reform of the choice of law rules dealing with the appointment of personal representatives; and
examines the existing statutory restrictions
that apply in some Australian jurisdictions if the grant that is sought
to be resealed
has been issued from a jurisdiction in which the
deceased was not domiciled immediately prior to his or her death.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. See NSWLRC,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Issues Paper 10, 1996); NSWLRC,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Report 85, 1998).
. See NSWLRC,
Uniform Succession Laws: Family Provision
(Issues Paper 11, 1996); National Committee on Uniform Succession Laws,
Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General on Family Provision
(QLRC, Miscellaneous Paper 28, 1997).
. See NSWLRC,
Uniform Succession Laws: Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(Discussion Paper 42, 1999).
. Work has not yet commenced on this stage.
Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Letters of Administration
(Discussion Paper WP 55, 2001).
Report on Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Administration
(Project 34
). See also WALRC,
Working Paper on Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Letters of Administration
(Project 34
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 13-14, referring to para 4 and 5 of the Report of the Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee (6 September 1989).
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 13-16.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of
interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
2. The resealing system
History of this Reference (Digest)
Introduction
2.1 Under Australian law a deceased person does not continue to possess a legal personality.
Therefore, when a person dies, someone has to be appointed to deal with the person’s assets.
The person appointed is a “personal representative”
who is either:
an executor, appointed by the deceased’s will; or
an administrator, appointed by a court where the deceased did not leave a will or did not name an executor.
2.2 A court may need to grant an executor probate to give him or her full power to deal with the estate.
An administrator, being appointed by the court, cannot act until the court makes a grant of letters of administration.
2.3 Many people die leaving assets not only in the State or
Territory in which they have their permanent home, but also in other
and Territories, or other countries. Some people also die
leaving claims by or against them in litigation, actual or potential,
other jurisdictions.
2.4 Even if a personal representative has authority to deal
with the estate in which the deceased died domiciled, that authority
not by itself allow the personal representative to deal with the
estate or otherwise act as personal representative, for example
litigation, elsewhere.
2.5 Indeed, a person, including a foreign executor, who fails to
take out a local grant of probate or letters of administration and
intermeddles with the estate in another jurisdiction may become liable
to suit in that jurisdiction as an “executor de son
(executor of his own wrong). This situation applies equally between
Australian States and Territories as it does between
Australian and
overseas jurisdictions.
2.6 Each Australian State and Territory has introduced
provisions under which a grant made elsewhere – either in another
“resealed” in the jurisdiction in question.
Resealing – that is, certification by a competent probate
authority – overcomes the need for an executor or administrator
to obtain a fresh grant of probate or letters of administration in
every jurisdiction in which the deceased left assets and is simpler
than obtaining an original grant because it does not involve the
investigation of the title of the grantee.
Each statute
provides that a grant of probate or letters of administration, once
resealed, is as effective as if the original grant
had been obtained in
that jurisdiction.
Statistics on resealing
2.7 In 2000 566 reseals were made in Australian jurisdictions,
compared with 51,757 original grants of probate. The number of reseals
represents a substantial drop from the figure of around 1,000 in
2.8 The proportion of resealing applications that relate to
overseas grants of probate in 2000 ranges from nil in the Northern
to 75% in New South Wales.
The cost of resealing
2.9 Making an application for the resealing of a grant of
probate or letters of administration involves the payment of court
fees. These fees, which vary quite considerably, are set out in
the following table:
Fees payable for filing an application for the resealing of a grant
Australian Capital Territory
All estates
New South Wales
Gross value of estate:
less than $50,000
$50,000 to less than $250,000
$250,000 to less than $500,000
$500,000 to less than $1,000,000
$1,000,000 and above
Northern Territory
All estates
All estates
South Australia
All estates
Gross value of estate:
less than $20,000
$20,000 to less than $50,000
$50,000 and above
Gross value of estate:
$10,000 to less than $100,000
$100,000 and above
Western Australia
Value of estate:
Less than $10,000
$10,000 to less than $100,000
$100,000 and above
2.10 The cost of resealing is not limited to
these court fees. Estates may also have to pay lawyers’ fees if a
personal representative
engages lawyers to act on behalf of the estate
in the resealing jurisdiction and additional fees if the lawyers have
to engage an
agent in one of the capital cities. In addition, most
Australian jurisdictions also require an applicant for resealing to
a notice advising of his or her intention to apply for
resealing, thus incurring further costs.
The need for resealing
2.11 A fundamental question is whether resealing remains the
best way of dealing with the problem of estates that have assets in
Australian jurisdictions.
2.12 Given that it is common for Australians to move from one
State or Territory to another and acquire property in various different
places and given there is substantial uniformity between the laws of
succession in each State and Territory, it seems unnecessary
order to administer an estate with property in several jurisdictions
within Australia, a personal representative should
have to seek fresh
authority to carry out his or her responsibilities in each different
The need for uniformity in relation to resealing
2.13 Even if resealing is to be retained for Australian grants
the present legislation governing resealing is in need of reform. The
procedure for resealing, and the applicable rules, differ quite
considerably from one jurisdiction to another. There are also
considerable
variations as to the countries whose grants may be
resealed, and the jurisdictional requirements. If the rules and
procedures could
be made uniform, it would simplify the task of a
personal representative who was administering an estate that had assets
in several jurisdictions.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. See O Wood and N C Hutley,
Hutley, Woodman and Wood: Cases and Materials on Succession
(3rd ed, 1984) at 1. Even though this might be the case under the law of the deceased’s domicile:
Banque Internationale de Commerce de Petrograd v Goukassow
[1923] 2 KB 682 at 691 (Scrutton LJ).
. The role of the personal representative is to collect the
assets of the deceased, pay the debts and distribute the remainder of
the estate to those entitled under the deceased’s will or
according to the rules of intestacy. See
Administration of Estates Discussion Paper
. See N Crago, “Executors of Unproved Wills: Status and Devolution of Title in Australia” (1993) 23
University of Western Australia Law Review
. Where the deceased left a will but named no executor, the court makes a grant of administration
cum testamento annexo
, that is, with the will annexed.
. See, for example,
Blackwood v The Queen
(1882) 8 App Cas 82 at 92;
Arnot v Chapman
(1884) 5 LR (NSW) Eq 66
The New York Breweries Company, Limited v The Attorney-General
[1899] AC 62
Re Fitzpatrick
[1952] Ch 86
Re Ricketson
(1917) 17 SR (NSW) 233
Whyte v Rose
(1842) 3 QB 493 at 507 (Tindal CJ),
[1842] EngR 266
Electronic Industries Imports Pty Ltd v Public Curator of the State of Queensland
[1960] VicRp 2
[1960] VR 10
Boyd v Leslie
[1964] VicRp 93
[1964] VR 728
Cash v The Nominal Defendant
(1969) 90 WN (Pt I) (NSW) 77 at 78-79;
Degazon v Barclays Bank International Ltd
[1988] 1 FTLR 17
Re the Estate of Webb
(SA, Supreme Court, No 1554 of 1990, Mohr J, 2 August 1991, unreported).
Pedersen v Young
[1964] HCA 28
(1964) 110 CLR 162
at 170 (Windeyer J).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111-114;
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
. See S Cretney, “Administration of Estates Act 1971”
Solicitors Journal
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(4);
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
. The drop in numbers is most likely the result of the
abolition of succession duty by the States, the Northern Territory and
Commonwealth between 1977 and 1984.
Supreme Court Act 1933
(ACT) s 37(1), Combined Determination of Fees and Explanatory Memorandum, No 105 of 2001, Sch 3, Item 203.
Supreme Court Regulation 2000
(NSW) cl 4, Sch 1, Item 1(3).
Supreme Court Regulations
(NT) reg 4, Sch, Item 1
(Fees payable for all other proceedings in the Supreme Court). In
addition, a $4 file search fee is imposed.
Uniform Civil Procedure (Fees) Regulation 1999
, Sch 1, Item 1(b).
Supreme Court (Probate Fees) Regulations 1999
(SA) reg 5(1), Sch, Item 1(b).
Tasmanian Government Gazette
, 15 June 1999 at 660 (notification made under s 8(1) of the
Fees Units Act 1997
Supreme Court (Fees) Regulations 2001
(Vic) reg 6, Sch 2, Item 2.1.
Supreme Court (Fees) Regulations 2002
(WA) reg 4, Sch 3, Item 1.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
3. Automatic recognition of Australian grants: Background
History of this Reference (Digest)
Overseas schemes
Existing Commonwealth legislation
Earlier Australian proposals
3.1 An alternative to a system of resealing is to have a system of automatic recognition whereby a grant of representation made in
one part of Australia is automatically recognised throughout the whole of Australia. This would overcome jurisdictional problems
of personal representatives having to seek fresh authority to carry out responsibilities in each jurisdiction.
3.2 This chapter examines overseas automatic recognition schemes. It also examines existing legislation in Australia under which,
in certain limited circumstances, grants can be recognised in other jurisdictions without resealing, as well as previous Australian
proposals for automatic recognition.
3.3 The concept of domicile is key to an understanding of the discussion of resealing in this and the following chapters. A person’s
domicile operates as a connecting factor between that person and a particular legal system. Every person has a domicile at every
stage of his or her life and no person may have more than one domicile for the same purpose.
In Australia, the question of a person’s domicile is determined in each State and Territory by
Domicile Acts
These Acts are in virtually identical terms and modify the common law of domicile in a number of important respects.
3.4 There are three types of domicile:
domicile of origin, which each person has at birth, by force of law;
domicile of dependence, which is the domicile of a person, such as a child, whose domicile is determined by reference to the domicile
of another person, such as a parent; and
domicile of choice, which is the domicile acquired by a person with capacity “as the result of a voluntary choice of a new place
of residence”.
3.5 The domicile that a person has at any given time continues until the person acquires a different domicile.
Domicile Acts
, a person is capable of having an independent domicile – that is, of acquiring a domicile of choice – if the person has
attained the age of 18 years or is, or has at any time been, married.
3.6 To acquire a domicile of choice, a person must have, at the same time, both a lawful physical presence in a country
and an actual intention to make his or her home indefinitely in that country.
OVERSEAS SCHEMES
Automatic recognition in the United Kingdom
3.7 The United Kingdom introduced a system of automatic recognition thirty years ago. The
Administration of Estates Act 1971
(UK) provides that, where a person dies domiciled in England and Wales, a grant of probate of the will or letters of administration
of the estate (or any part of it) made by the High Court in England and Wales noting the deceased’s domicile there shall, without
being resealed, be treated, for the purposes of the law of Northern Ireland, as if it had originally been made by the High Court
in Northern Ireland,
and for the purposes of the law of Scotland, as if it were a confirmation
made by the appropriate officer of the Scottish courts.
There are similar provisions dealing with the automatic recognition of Northern Irish grants
and Scottish confirmations.
3.8 Since 1971, it has not been possible to apply in one part of the United Kingdom for the resealing of a grant made in another part
of the United Kingdom;
instead, there is now a system of issuing limited grants. If no grant has been made in the place of domicile, an application may
be made for an original grant in any other part of the United Kingdom. The grant so made will be specifically limited to the deceased’s
estate in the place of grant, and further limited to operate only until a grant is made in the place of domicile.
This prevents the making of multiple grants. In normal circumstances, a person applying for a grant must state where the deceased
died domiciled
and this domicile will then be noted on the grant.
3.9 It has been suggested that the 1971 Act is a measure of considerable importance in that it saves work for solicitors and the staff
of probate registries and saves the expense involved in obtaining grants of administration.
The Principal Registry of the Family Division of the English High Court of Justice has advised the National Committee that no reports
of any difficulties with the operation of the legislation have been drawn to the attention of the Probate Registry.
The position in the United States of America
3.10 In the United States an alternative to resealing has been developed whereby a personal representative does not have to take separate
court proceedings where a deceased person has left assets in two or more states. These and other procedural sections of the
Uniform Probate Code
have now been adopted in 26 states.
3.11 A personal representative appointed by the court of the deceased’s domicile may collect debts and personal property in
another state without initiating separate court proceedings, provided the necessary affidavit evidence is given to the debtor or
holder of the property in support of the personal representative’s claim. The affidavit is required to set out the date of
death, the fact that no local administration has been commenced, and that the personal representative is entitled to payment or delivery.
However, this provision does not apply to real property, which must be dealt with by a personal representative who has been authorised
to act by a grant issued in the state in which the property is situated.
3.12 A personal representative appointed by the court of the deceased’s domicile may also, upon filing authenticated copies
of his or her appointment and of any official bond that he or she has given, exercise all the powers of a local personal representative
and maintain actions and proceedings.
The Hague Convention
3.13 The 1973
Hague Convention Concerning the International Administration of the Estates of Deceased Persons
(“Hague Convention”) resulted from the Twelfth Session of the Hague Conference of Private International Law in 1972.
The Hague Convention is in force in only three countries – the Czech Republic, Portugal and Slovakia. Australia is not a party.
3.14 The Hague Convention provides for Contracting States to issue a certificate, which may be recognised by other Contracting States,
designating the person or persons entitled to administer the movable estate of a deceased person and indicating the powers of the
certificate holder.
3.15 The certificate may be issued only by the competent authority in the State in which the deceased had his or her habitual residence.
Generally, the internal law of that State will be applied to determine who should be designated as the holder of the certificate
and the powers that should be exercisable by that person, although, in certain circumstances, these issues will be determined according
to the internal law of the State of which the deceased was a national.
Recognition of the certificate in another Contracting State is not necessarily automatic. A Contracting State may establish “an
expeditious procedure” for determining the recognition of certificates issued by other Contracting States,
and the Hague Convention specifies a number of grounds on which one Contracting State may refuse to recognise a certificate issued
by another Contracting State.
3.16 The Hague Convention also includes provisions in relation to the immovable property of a deceased person. If the law that governs
the issuing of the certificate gives the holder of the certificate powers over immovable property situated in another State, the
issuing authority must indicate the existence of those powers in the certificate. Other Contracting States may recognise these powers
in whole or in part, and must indicate the extent to which they do so.
3.17 The Hague Convention principally deals with the needs of civil law heirs seeking authority in common law countries, it has attracted
little support and appears to involve complex requirements.
The WALRC concluded that the Hague Convention was not “suitable for adoption as between Australian States and Territories,
or between Australia and other common law countries”.
EXISTING COMMONWEALTH LEGISLATION
3.18 Under existing legislative provisions, it is unnecessary to reseal a grant of probate or letters of administration made in one
Australian State or Territory in order to administer an asset situated in another Australian State or Territory, if the asset consists
a share, debenture or interest in a company to which section 1091 of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) applies;
an amount below a statutory limit payable under a life insurance policy.
These provisions reduce the cost, delay and inconvenience involved in resealing. It has been suggested that without provisions of
this kind the number of applications for resealing would be substantially greater.
3.19 Section 1091(7) of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) would appear to apply not only to a person who is a personal representative under the law of another Australian State or Territory,
but also to a person who is a personal representative under the law of another country.
EARLIER AUSTRALIAN PROPOSALS
The Barwick proposals
3.20 In the early 1960’s the Commonwealth Attorney General, Sir Garfield Barwick, put forward preliminary guidelines to the
Law Council of Australia for a scheme under which a grant of probate or administration made in one Australian jurisdiction would
be automatically recognised throughout Australia.
It was proposed that:
… when an application was made either for an original grant or for resealing in an Australian State or Territory, and the applicant
sought recognition of the grant or reseal in another State or Territory, he should request such recognition in making his original
application for the grant or resealing. The Registrar would then file copies of such request in the courts where recognition was
sought and would notify such courts of any further orders made in relation thereto. Upon receipt, the request would be sealed by
the recognising court and one copy would be retained in the recognising court’s registry.
3.21 Draft legislation was then prepared in Victoria under the direction of the Standing Committee of Attorneys General.
However, the draft legislation departed from the Attorney General’s proposal in suggesting not recognition but a simplified
resealing of grants made by Australian courts.
No uniform legislation was enacted as a result of the proposal.
WALRC proposals
3.22 The WALRC in its 1984 Report recommended the adoption of a scheme of automatic recognition similar to that in operation in the
United Kingdom. The details of this scheme are outlined in the next chapter.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. P E Nygh,
Conflict of Laws in Australia
(6th ed, 1995) at 200.
Domicile Act 1982
(Cth) (which applies to the Australian Capital Territory, the Jervis Bay Territory and declared external territories);
Domicile Act 1979
Domicile Act
Domicile Act 1981
Domicile Act 1980
Domicile Act 1980
Domicile Act 1978
Domicile Act 1981
. P E Nygh,
Conflict of Laws in Australia
(6th ed, 1995) at 199.
. P E Nygh,
Conflict of Laws in Australia
(6th ed, 1995) at 203.
Domicile Act 1982
Domicile Act 1982
Puttick v Attorney General
[1980] Fam 1.
See also Nygh at 207-208.
Domicile Act 1982
Administration of Estates Act 1971
(UK) s 2(1).
. A confirmation is the Scottish equivalent of a grant of probate or letters of administration.
Administration of Estates Act 1971
(UK) s 3(1)(a).
Administration of Estates Act 1971
(UK) s 1(4), s 3(1)(b).
Administration of Estates Act 1971
(UK) s 1(1), s 2(2). Section 4 deals with evidence of grants.
Administration of Estates Act 1971
(UK) s 12 and Sch 7.
. Practice Direction (Probate Grants: Sureties) [1971] 1 WLR 1790.
Non-Contentious Probate Rules 1987
Administration of Estates Act 1971
(UK) s 1(1), (4), 2(1), (2), 3(1).
. S Cretney, “Administration of Estates Act 1971”
Solicitors Journal
. Letter to Associate Professor Handford from Mr Clive Buckley of the Court Service Secretariat, Principal Registry of the Family
Division, 13 May 1999.
. By 1997, 25 states had adopted the procedural provisions of the
Uniform Probate Code
: see R A Stein, “Probate Reformation: The Impact of the Uniform Laws” (1997) 23
The Probate Lawyer
1 at 14, note 53. Maryland has recently become the 26th state: Letter to Associate Professor Handford from Professor J H Langbein,
Chancellor Kent Professor of Law and Legal History, Yale University, a Uniform Law Commissioner from Connecticut and member of the
Joint Editorial Board for the Uniform Probate Code, 14 May 1999.
Uniform Probate Code
Uniform Probate Code
Hague Convention
Hague Convention
Hague Convention
Hague Convention
Article 10.
Hague Convention
Articles 13-17. Recognition may be refused in relation to all or only certain of the powers indicated in the certificate: Article
Hague Convention
Article 30.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 6.14.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 6.14.
. In its 1984 Report, the WALRC raised the possibility of the automatic recognition of an Australian grant insofar as the property
sought to be administered consisted of monies held on deposit in a bank, building society, credit union or other similar financial
institution. This would be similar in effect to s 1091 of the
Corporations Act 2001
Life Insurance Act 1995
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 5.3.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 6.1, 6.2.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 6.3. For a discussion of the reaction to these guidelines, see
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 6.4.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 6.5.
. For a discussion of the reaction to the draft legislation, see
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 6.6.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 6.7.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
4. Automatic recognition of Australian grants: Proposals
History of this Reference (Digest)
WALRC recommendation
Parliamentary Counsel’s committee
Arguments for and against a system of automatic recognition
Automatic recognition of overseas grants
Automatic recognition of grants resealed in the deceased’s domicile
Details of the scheme
Automatic recognition and safeguards in the resealing process
Automatic recognition and other areas of succession law
4.1 This chapter sets out the essential elements of the proposals in the WALRC’s 1984 Report. It also sets out details of an
alternative scheme developed by the Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee when it was asked to prepare draft legislation on instructions
from SCAG Officers.
The revised scheme proposed by the Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee did not limit automatic recognition to grants made in the
Australian State or Territory in which the deceased was domiciled at the time of death.
WALRC RECOMMENDATION
Automatic recognition of a grant made where the deceased died domiciled
4.2 The WALRC recommended that:
the Australian States and Territories should enact uniform legislation so that a grant of probate or letters of administration made
by the court of the Australian State or Territory in which the deceased died domiciled will be automatically recognised as effective
in every other Australian State or Territory, without being resealed;
a grant of probate or letters of administration made by the court of an Australian State or Territory other than that in which the
deceased died domiciled should not be automatically recognised within Australia.
4.3 The WALRC’s primary concern was to develop a system based on certainty that would avoid the jurisdictional disputes that
were likely to arise if automatic recognition were extended to grants based on other connecting factors, for example, permanent residence
or the existence of assets within the jurisdiction.
The resealing of other Australian grants
4.4 If a grant is applied for in a jurisdiction where the deceased did not die domiciled, under the WALRC proposal such a grant would
not be automatically recognised. As such, the WALRC recommended that “it should remain possible for Australian grants other
than those made by the court of the deceased’s domicile to be resealed”.
This recommendation was a departure from the United Kingdom system of limited grants.
4.5 The WALRC expressed the view that “in Australia resealing would operate more satisfactorily than a system of limited grants”.
It pointed out that it “is common practice for persons living close to some State borders to use professional advisers and
appoint executors resident in an adjacent State”. For example, persons resident at Broken Hill (in New South Wales) are often
advised by solicitors and trustee companies in Adelaide and appoint them as executors. The South Australian executor would usually
obtain a grant in South Australia and then apply (generally by means of an agent) to have the grant resealed in New South Wales,
where the assets are situated.
4.6 The certainty provided by the existence of a single grant is the most important factor in favour of the WALRC proposal.
4.7 However, while under the WALRC scheme only one grant would be entitled to automatic recognition throughout Australia, it would
still be possible for two grants to be operative in a particular jurisdiction. This could arise if grants were made both in the jurisdiction
in which the deceased died domiciled and in another Australian jurisdiction. However, this situation could be avoided by requiring
evidence that a grant had not already been made in the State or Territory in which the deceased had died domiciled. This would usually
necessitate making a search in only one jurisdiction.
PARLIAMENTARY COUNSEL’S COMMITTEE
Automatic recognition of all Australian grants
4.8 The Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee proposed that there should be automatic recognition throughout Australia of any grant
made by an Australian State or Territory Court, regardless of the place of domicile.
To avoid the situation where there might be more than one grant that would be effective throughout Australia, the Committee proposed
that courts should have the power to decline to make a grant if it appeared that another court was the more appropriate forum.
These proposals would eliminate the need to reseal any Australian grant as each grant would be effective throughout Australia as
if it were an original grant made in the jurisdiction in question.
4.9 An advantage of this scheme is that there would be no need to identify domicile for the approximately 52,000 grants made annually
in Australia since the question of their effect in other Australian jurisdictions will be relevant only to a small percentage of
those grants. Applications for the resealing of grants represent little more than one per cent of the total number of applications
for original grants made annually.
4.10 A further advantage of this scheme is that resealing would not be necessary in relation to any grant made by the court of an
Australian State or Territory. However, if grants made in two or more jurisdictions were automatically recognised throughout Australia,
there would be the possibility of competing grants dealing with the same property as well as the possibility of grants being made
to different personal representatives. One way of avoiding such problems would be to have a register of grants that would have to
be searched each time a grant was made to ensure that a grant had not already been made in another State or Territory.
4.11 The need for further provisions to deal with the possibility of multiple grants that would all be entitled to recognition throughout
Australia is the chief disadvantage of this scheme.
ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST A SYSTEM OF AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION
4.12 Arguments in favour of adopting a scheme of automatic recognition include:
Cost savings
in not incurring costs in the resealing jurisdictions, including court filing fees and solicitor’s and advertising fees.
Reduction in delay and inconvenience
, not just in the time taken for the courts to approve an application but also the time spent in preparing the documentation for each
resealing court.
4.13 The main argument against the adoption of the proposed scheme of automatic recognition is that certain safeguards afforded by
the resealing process would be lost, in particular, opportunities:
for the resealing court to scrutinise the foreign grant, both as to the validity of any will and as to the person appointed under
for the resealing court to order that the applicant for resealing provide security in relation to the administration of the estate
within the resealing jurisdiction; and
for a person opposed to the resealing to lodge a caveat in the resealing jurisdiction.
4.14 The WALRC was aware that, under a system of automatic recognition, certain safeguards afforded by the resealing process would
However, it considered that some of these safeguards, such as the giving of security, could be accommodated within the scheme of
automatic recognition.
Although it acknowledged that other safeguards, such as the court’s discretion to decline to reseal a grant, would disappear
under a system of automatic recognition, it questioned whether these safeguards were needed where the grant in question had been
made in another Australian State or Territory.
4.15 The WALRC concluded that the advantages of the automatic recognition scheme outweighed “any possible adverse effects resulting
from the disappearance of these safeguards”.
Preliminary view
Automatic recognition
4.16 If a scheme of automatic recognition is to be adopted, automatic recognition should be given only to a grant made by the court
of the Australian jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled, and not to any other Australian grant.
Continued resealing of Australian grants
4.17 Courts should still be able to reseal a grant made by the court of a State or Territory in which the deceased was not domiciled.
(a) Should there be a scheme of automatic recognition of Australian grants of probate or letters of administration?
(b) If so, what form should that scheme take?
AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION OF OVERSEAS GRANTS
4.18 The WALRC recommended that:
a grant of probate or letters of administration made by a court outside Australia should not be automatically recognised in Australia,
whether or not the deceased died domiciled in the jurisdiction in which the grant was made;
such a grant should, as at present, be recognised as effective in a particular Australian State or Territory only when resealed by
the court of that State or Territory.
4.19 Automatic recognition is suitable only for jurisdictions within a federation such as Australia where the law of succession is
substantially similar in all jurisdictions. This is not necessarily so in the case of overseas jurisdictions. Even in jurisdictions
that follow the common law tradition, such as England, there are a number of differences, for example, in the acceptance of informal
and in the interpretation of the concept of domicile.
4.20 The WALRC’s recommendation was supported by the conclusions of the Commonwealth Secretariat on the recognition and enforcement
of judgments and orders within the Commonwealth of Nations. The Secretariat concluded that:
… automatic recognition without judicial intervention was not appropriate as between independent countries. Resealing provided
safeguards that, between independent countries, were important. It allowed local claimants to object that the personal representative
was not validly appointed; it ensured due compliance with local estate duty laws; and it facilitated the taking of security to protect
Preliminary view
4.21 There should be no automatic recognition of any overseas grants of probate or letters of administration.
(a) Are there any circumstances in which grants of probate or letters of administration made by the courts of overseas countries should
be entitled to automatic recognition?
(b) What arrangements should be made for the resealing of overseas grants?
AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION OF GRANTS RESEALED IN THE DECEASED’S DOMICILE
4.22 The WALRC recommended that, if a grant (Australian or overseas) was resealed by the court of the Australian State or Territory
in which the deceased died domiciled, “that grant, when resealed, should be automatically recognised as effective throughout
Australia in the same way as an original grant made by” that court.
The WALRC suggested that this recommendation was consistent with the fundamental objective of a scheme of automatic recognition which
is “to allow the court of the domicile to have a decisive say in whether a grant should be issued”.
Preliminary view
4.23 This proposal does not constitute an essential part of the automatic recognition scheme. The scheme could be confined to automatic
recognition of an original grant made in the domicile of the deceased, and grants made in other Australian jurisdictions or overseas
could simply be resealed in as many Australian jurisdictions as is necessary. However, there does not seem to be any fundamental
objection to the proposal. Once a grant had been resealed in the Australian jurisdiction of domicile, there would be no need to reseal
it in any other Australian jurisdiction.
Should a grant of probate or letters of administration that has been resealed by the court of the Australian jurisdiction in which
the deceased died domiciled
be automatically recognised in all other Australian jurisdictions?
DETAILS OF THE SCHEME
Matters to be notified on the grant
4.24 The WALRC recommended that, when a grant was made or resealed by the court of the Australian State or Territory in which the
deceased died domiciled, the deceased’s domicile should be notified on the grant.
This recommendation was based on the similar requirement under the United Kingdom scheme of automatic recognition. It serves the
obvious purpose that it clearly identifies the grant as one made or resealed by the court of the domicile.
4.25 This proposal is contrary to the National Committee’s current general proposal in relation to the administration of estates
of deceased persons that there is no need to require the courts to determine the deceased’s domicile.
However, if a scheme of automatic recognition were introduced, different considerations might apply when the grant was made in the
deceased’s domicile.
4.26 The WALRC also recommended that, when a grant or reseal was made by the court of the deceased’s domicile a short statement
in simple language should be added, setting out the effect of the grant – namely, that it was effective in each other Australian
State and Territory without any need for resealing.
Preliminary view
4.27 The WALRC’s recommendations should be adopted.
When a grant or reseal is made by the court of the Australian jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled:
(a) should the deceased’s domicile be notified on the grant or reseal;
(b) should the grant or reseal contain a short statement, in simple language, of the effect of automatic recognition?
Automatic recognition of elections and orders to administer
4.28 In certain circumstances, generally where there is no proper person available or willing to administer an estate, the public
trustee in some Australian jurisdictions may apply for an order authorising that officer to administer the estate of a deceased person.
Such an order in general confers on the public trustee the same powers, rights and obligations as a grant of administration.
4.29 In most jurisdictions, in cases involving estates under a prescribed value, the public trustee or a trustee company may also
file an election to administer the estate without any need for a grant of probate or letters of administration.
4.30 The WALRC recommended that “orders to administer” and “elections to administer” should be automatically
recognised when made in the deceased’s domicile.
4.31 Orders to administer made in favour of a public trustee present no special problem since they involve the making of an order
by a court of competent jurisdiction, and this process provides the necessary safeguards for those interested in the administration
of the estate.
4.32 However, an “election to administer” results in what is in effect a deemed grant, but without the benefit of the
court’s scrutiny and directions. The different status of an election to administer was recognised by the Probate Registrars
who, at a conference in 1990, suggested that resealing should be limited to documents issued under the seal of the court, and that
elections should therefore not be resealed.
Although elections were developed as a cheaper and quicker way of administering a small estate, this has not been the universal result.
The National Committee, in its work on the administration of estates of deceased persons, has proposed that elections be abolished.
Preliminary view
4.33 Automatic recognition should be given to orders to administer estates. However, elections to administer estates should not be
automatically recognised.
Should automatic recognition be given to:
(a) orders to administer made in favour of a public trustee (or similar officer) by the court of the Australian jurisdiction in which
the deceased died domiciled;
(b) elections to administer estates that are filed by a public trustee (or similar officer) or by a trustee company in the court of
the Australian jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled?
Notification to other jurisdictions
4.34 The WALRC considered the possibility of having a system whereby the making of a grant, and any revocation or alteration of its
terms, could be notified to other jurisdictions but concluded that it was “not necessary, as part of the proposed system of
automatic recognition, for the court of the State or Territory of domicile, having made an original grant, to notify the courts of
the other States and Territories”,
suggesting that:
The slight disadvantage of having to address enquiries to the court of grant rather than the local Supreme Court is not felt to be
sufficient to warrant the expense and inconvenience of insisting upon such a proposal.
4.35 However, in 1990, the Probate Registrars suggested that a national register of grants and caveats would be essential for the
proper administration of the proposed scheme of automatic recognition.
Preliminary view
4.36 If the notification of grants made is found to be necessary to the proposed scheme of automatic recognition, a system to achieve
this should be easier to establish and maintain than it would have been in 1984 when the WALRC considered the matter.
4.37 Some suggestions for implementing a system of notification include:
Details of grants and other relevant information could be entered on a computer database available to all Australian State and Territory
Supreme Courts.
A court could be required, if it made a grant in respect of the estate of a deceased person who did not die domiciled in that jurisdiction,
to notify the court of the jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled that it had made a grant.
The advantage of the latter suggestion is that, if a grant were subsequently sought in the jurisdiction in which the deceased died
domiciled, the court in that jurisdiction would be aware that a grant had already been made elsewhere.
(a) Is it necessary to a scheme of automatic recognition to establish a system of notification of grants and other appropriate details?
(b) If so, what form should the system of notification take?
AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION AND SAFEGUARDS IN THE RESEALING PROCESS
4.38 There are a number of aspects of the resealing process that are said to be safeguards for persons with an interest in the proper
administration of an estate. The decision whether or not to adopt the proposed scheme for the automatic recognition of certain Australian
grants requires a consideration of:
the importance of these safeguards where the grant in question is made in an Australian State or Territory, rather than in an overseas
the extent to which particular safeguards that are considered important can be accommodated within the proposed scheme; and
the impact of the proposed scheme of automatic recognition on other areas of succession law.
These issues are considered in the balance of this chapter.
Advertising
4.39 Requirements in relation to giving notice of an intention to make an application for resealing vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
Some, including New South Wales,
require a person applying for the resealing of a grant of probate or letters of administration to publish an advertisement in the
no advertisement is necessary unless required by the registrar. There is no requirement to advertise in Western Australia.
4.40 Under a system of automatic recognition, there would no longer be an opportunity to advertise notice of intention to apply for
the resealing of an Australian grant. It would still be possible, however, to require an applicant to advertise before an original
grant can be made.
4.41 The WALRC suggested that advertising “is often ineffective and causes undue expense and delay without providing sufficient
compensating advantages to beneficiaries, creditors or anyone else”
but concluded that a uniform rule on advertising in relation to an original grant was not essential for the proposed automatic recognition
scheme, and that each jurisdiction could continue its own practice.
Is it necessary for the implementation of the proposed scheme of automatic recognition for the States and Territories to have uniform
advertising requirements for the making of an original grant?
4.42 At present, it is possible in all jurisdictions to lodge a caveat against the making of a grant of probate or letters of administration
and against the resealing in that jurisdiction of a grant made elsewhere.
If a scheme of automatic recognition were introduced, it would no longer be possible to lodge a caveat against the resealing of a
grant. It would, however, remain possible to lodge a caveat against the making of the original grant.
4.43 The WALRC expressed the view that, in practice, caveats against resealing were rarely used (a fact confirmed by information given
by the Probate Registrars to the National Committee), and it did not regard the loss of the opportunity to lodge a caveat as a reason
for not adopting a scheme of automatic recognition.
Preliminary view
4.44 There is no reason why a person wishing to lodge a caveat could not do so in the jurisdiction of domicile prior to the making
of the original grant, since in all but very exceptional cases the domicile of the person in question would be readily apparent.
The loss of the opportunity to lodge a caveat against the resealing of a grant is not a sufficient objection to the introduction
of a scheme of automatic recognition.
What provision, if any, should be made in relation to caveats if a scheme of automatic recognition is introduced?
AUTOMATIC RECOGNITION AND OTHER AREAS OF SUCCESSION LAW
4.45 There will obviously be an interaction between any scheme of automatic recognition and other areas of succession law such as
the formal validity of wills, family provision, intestacy and administration of estates. However, in most cases a scheme of automatic
recognition will either have little or no impact on the other substantive areas of succession law or work positively with them.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
WALRC Report
(1984) at recommendation 21. See also
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.1-7.4.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.5 and recommendation 22.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 9.55.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.17.
. Which allows a grant to be made in a country within the United Kingdom in which the deceased did not die domiciled and operates
only until a grant is made in the place of domicile: see para 3.8. See also T H Tristram,
Tristram and Coote’s Probate Practice
(28th ed, 1995) at para 12.23.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.14.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.15.
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 13, referring to para 4 of the
Report of the Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee
(6 September 1989) and s 73 of draft bill no 10.
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 14, referring to para 5 of the
Report of the Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee
(6 September 1989).
. Although, it is doubtful whether such an advantage would be realised in practice. The proposal that courts should have the power
to decline to make a grant if it appeared that the court of another jurisdiction was the more appropriate forum for the application
would presumably lead courts to require evidence as to the deceased’s domicile.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.25.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.32-7.35.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.27.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.25.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.6 and recommendation 22.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.11 and recommendation 22.
. See W J Williams,
Williams on Wills
(7th ed, 1995) vol 1 at 109.
. For example, in England a person may acquire a domicile of choice at 16 or earlier if the person marries before attaining that age:
Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1973
. Commonwealth Secretariat,
Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments and Orders and the Service of Process within the Commonwealth: A Report of a Working Meeting
held at Basseterre, St Kitts, 24-28 April 1978
at 18. See also
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.10.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.18 and recommendation 23.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.19.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.20 and recommendation 24.
. QLRC, Discussion Paper MP 37 at 262; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at para 18.17 and Proposal 95.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.21 and recommendation 24.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.30, 7.23 and recommendation 25.
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 6-7.
. QLRC, Discussion Paper MP 37 at 163-164; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at para 11.10-11.12.
WALRC Report
(1984) at recommendation 29.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.36.
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 16.
. As well as the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory, Tasmania and Victoria.
. Queensland and South Australia.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.29. See also
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.37-3.42.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.29.
. See also QLRC, Discussion Paper MP 37 at 37-39; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at para 5.34-5.39.
(1984) at para 7.31 and recommendation 27.
(1984) at para 7.30.
. The effect of a scheme of automatic recognition on other areas of succession law is discussed in more detail in QLRC,
Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Letters of Administration
(Discussion Paper, WP 55, 2001) at 62-68 and 203-210.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
5. A uniform resealing procedure
History of this Reference (Digest)
Persons entitled to apply for the resealing of a grant
Applications for resealing: procedural issues
Instruments that may be resealed
The resealing process
Effects of resealing
Duties and liabilities of a person authorised by power of attorney
Advertisement of intention to reseal
Notification to court of original grant
Disclosure of assets and liabilities
Succession duty
5.1 Even if a scheme of automatic recognition were adopted, there would still be a need for resealing. Since the scheme proposed
in Chapter 4 would be confined to the recognition of grants made in an Australian State or Territory by the court of the deceased’s
last domicile, resealing will continue to be required for any other Australian grants and also for all overseas grants. If it is
decided not to introduce a scheme of automatic recognition, all grants will continue to require resealing.
5.2 Regardless of whether a scheme of automatic recognition is introduced, it remains desirable to unify the present resealing procedure.
The statutory provisions in each jurisdiction have a number of basic similarities, reflecting the fact that in most cases they were
originally based on English legislation such as the
Colonial Probates Act 1892
(UK). However, the process of gradual amendment of both the legislation and the probate rules in each jurisdiction has resulted in
considerable differences of detail. These differences of detail present problems for anyone applying for the resealing of a grant.
Lawyers well versed in the rules of their own jurisdiction will encounter differences when they need to have a grant resealed in
another State or Territory. A uniform procedure for resealing would considerably simplify the process, reducing the delay and expense
5.3 In putting forward proposals for a uniform resealing procedure, particular consideration has been given to the earlier work of
the WALRC as well as comments on the WALRC proposals made by the Probate Registrars at their 1990 conference and also the model resealing
legislation drawn up on behalf of the Commonwealth Secretariat between 1975 and 1980 in an attempt to unify the law of resealing
in the Commonwealth of Nations. The Commonwealth Secretariat’s draft model bill is reproduced in Appendix A to this Issues
PERSONS ENTITLED TO APPLY FOR THE RESEALING OF A GRANT
General provisions
5.4 All jurisdictions provide that the following persons are entitled to apply for the resealing of a grant:
an executor named in the grant of probate;
an administrator named in the letters of administration; and
a person authorised by the executor or administrator under a power of attorney.
Executor or administrator by representation
5.5 Legislation in a number of Australian jurisdictions provides expressly for the transmission of the office of executor upon the
death of a sole or last surviving executor.
In these jurisdictions, the executor of a deceased executor becomes the executor of any estate that was being administered by the
deceased executor. The executor of a deceased executor is known as an executor by representation.
5.6 In addition, legislation in New South Wales provides, in limited circumstances, for the transmission of the office of administrator.
Where the public trustee or a trustee company is appointed administrator of an estate, the public trustee or trustee company, as
the case may be, becomes the administrator by representation of any estate of which the deceased person had been granted administration.
5.7 Neither an executor by representation nor an administrator by representation is the executor or administrator named in the original
grant. Whether such a person can apply under the existing legislation in the Australian States and Territories for the resealing
of a grant turns on the construction of the particular provisions.
A public trustee to whom an order to collect and administer is made
5.8 Legislation in the Australian Capital Territory and in the Northern Territory expressly provides that, in the case of an order
to collect and administer an estate, a public trustee in the country or part of a country to whom the order was granted may apply
to have the order resealed.
Preliminary view
5.9 The following persons should be able to apply for the resealing of a grant:
1. In the case of probate of a will:
(a) the executor named in the grant of probate;
(b) the executor by representation, provided that person is recognised as the executor by representation in the jurisdiction in which
probate was granted, and probate of the will of every deceased executor in the chain of representation has been granted or resealed
in the resealing jurisdiction;
(c) a person appointed under a power of attorney and authorised to apply for the resealing of the grant by the executor named in the
grant or by the executor by representation.
2. In the case of letters of administration of an estate:
(a) the administrator named in the grant of letters of administration;
(b) the administrator by representation, provided that person is recognised as the administrator by representation in the jurisdiction
in which administration was granted, and administration of the deceased administrator’s estate has been granted or resealed
in the resealing jurisdiction by his or her administrator;
(c) a person appointed under a power of attorney and authorised to apply for the resealing of the grant by the administrator named
in the grant or by the administrator by representation.
5.10 To cater for jurisdictions that distinguish between a grant of administration and an order to administer, or an order to collect
and administer, made in favour of a public trustee or similar officer, a public trustee or similar officer should also be able to
apply for resealing.
5.11 The legal representative of the executor or administrator should not be an applicant for the resealing of a grant unless he or
she is authorised under a power of attorney given by the executor or administrator for that purpose.
Who should be entitled to apply for the resealing of a grant?
APPLICATIONS FOR RESEALING: PROCEDURAL ISSUES
Multiple personal representatives
5.12 Where a grant is made to two or more executors or administrators, the question arises as to whether the application for resealing
may be made by only one, or by some, of the executors or administrators, or whether it must be made by all the executors or administrators
named in the grant.
5.13 Generally, where the grant was made to several persons, all persons to whom the grant was made must apply for the resealing of
There are, however, exceptions to this general rule. For example, if the other executor(s) are deceased
or have been discharged and no longer hold office,
or where the application is made with the consent of the other executors.
In South Australia, the rules provide that an application for the resealing of a grant may be made:
by the executor or administrator, or by one of the executors or administrators with the consent by affidavit of the co-executors or
co-administrators to whom the grant was made.
Preliminary view
5.14 A grant made to several personal representatives should be resealed on the application of only one or some of them, provided
the consent of the others has been obtained, and is evidenced by affidavit.
(a) Should it be possible for a grant made to several personal representatives to be resealed on the application of only one or some
(b) If so, what conditions should be required before such an application can be made?
Grants of double probate
5.15 Where a number of executors are named in a will, a grant of probate may be made to one or more of those executors, reserving
leave to the other or others who have not renounced to apply for probate in the future.
Where an executor to whom leave was reserved subsequently applies for a grant of probate, the grant obtained is called a grant of
“double probate”. A grant of double probate “runs concurrently with the first grant if any of the first grantees
are still living”.
5.16 Where double probate has been granted, two issues arise for consideration:
who should be able to apply for resealing; and
which instrument or instruments should be resealed.
5.17 No Australian jurisdiction has an express provision dealing with this situation. However, in England, the practice is that:
An exemplification which contains copies of a probate and a double probate may be resealed, provided that the application is at the
instance of all parties. … If a probate and double probate are brought in together, both may be resealed.
An exemplification is an official copy of a document made under the seal of a court which “contains an exact copy of the will
(if any), and a virtual, though not an exact, copy of the grant”.
Preliminary view
5.18 Where a grant of double probate has been made, it should be possible to reseal:
the probate (or an exemplification of probate) and the double probate (or an exemplification of the double probate), provided both
instruments are deposited together in the court; or
an exemplification that contains copies of the probate and the double probate.
5.19 An application to reseal grants of probate and double probate, or an exemplification of probate and double probate, should be
able to be made by:
the executor under the probate and the executor under the double probate;
the executor under the probate or the executor under the double probate, provided the consent of the executor under the other grant
has been obtained, and is evidenced by affidavit; or
where more than one executor has been appointed under the probate or the double probate, one or more of the executors under the probate
or the double probate, provided the consent of all executors under both grants has been obtained, and is evidenced by affidavit.
What provisions should be made for resealing when there is a grant of “double probate”?
Substituted executors or administrators
5.20 In some Australian jurisdictions, a court may substitute an executor or administrator for an executor or administrator named
in an original grant.
Similar legislation exists in New Zealand
and in England.
The effect of these provisions is that the original grant remains on foot, but, by a separate order of the court, an executor or
administrator is substituted for some or all of those named in the original grant.
5.21 Because an executor or administrator so appointed is not named in the original grant, the question arises as to whether an application
for the resealing of the original grant can be made by an executor or administrator who has been appointed in substitution for the
executor or administrator named in the original grant.
5.22 No Australian jurisdiction has an express provision to deal with the situation where a court has appointed a substitute personal
representative to replace a personal representative who has been discharged and an application is subsequently made for the resealing
of the grant. However, the Supreme Court of Victoria has held that an order substituting an executor should be considered as an addition
to, or a variation of, the original probate and should be read as part of the probate, so that resealing could be applied for.
Preliminary view
5.23 Where an order has been made substituting an executor or administrator for an executor or administrator named in an original
grant, it should be possible to reseal:
an exemplification that contains copies of the grant and the order by which an executor or administrator is substituted; or
the grant and the order, or exemplifications of either or both, provided both instruments are deposited together in the court.
5.24 In these circumstances, an application for resealing should be able to be made by:
where there is no continuing executor or administrator – the substitute executor or administrator;
where there is a continuing executor or administrator – the continuing executor or administrator and the substitute executor
or administrator;
where there is more than one continuing executor or administrator or more than one substitute executor or administrator – one
or more of the continuing or substitute executors or administrators, provided the consent of all continuing executors or administrators
and all substitute executors or administrators has been obtained, and is evidenced by affidavit.
What provision should be made for resealing where an order has been made substituting an executor or administrator for an executor
or administrator named in an original grant?
Application by a trustee company for resealing
5.25 Legislation in each Australian State and Territory enables certain specified trustee companies to be appointed as executors or,
in certain circumstances, to be appointed as administrators in the jurisdiction in question.
This raises the question of whether a trustee company that has been appointed as executor or administrator in one jurisdiction can
apply to have the grant under which it has been appointed resealed in another State or Territory.
5.26 Grants made in favour of foreign trustee companies have been resealed in New South Wales and in Queensland,
even though the companies were not ones to which original grants would have been made in those jurisdictions.
It has been held, however, that, where the executor is a foreign trustee company, the application should be made by a person appointed
by the executor under a power of attorney for that purpose.
In South Australia, the rules provide that, where a trustee company is the executor, administrator or attorney, application for the
resealing of the grant may be made:
by an officer of such corporation who must depose in the oath to his or her authority to make the application and such officer must
lodge with the application a certified copy of the resolution of the board of directors of such corporation authorising such officer
to make the application for the re-sealing of the grant.
5.27 The Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill defined “personal representative” to include a corporation named in
the probate or letters of administration as executor or administrator.
Preliminary view
5.28 It is proposed that a model rule based on the South Australian rule should be adopted. It has the merit of stating the precise
procedure to be adopted when a trustee company has been appointed executor or administrator or has been given a power of attorney
by an executor or administrator.
What procedure should be followed in relation to resealing when a trustee company is appointed as executor or administrator or as
the attorney of an executor or administrator?
Non-resident applicants for resealing
No need to be within the jurisdiction of the resealing court
5.29 The legislation in Tasmania and Victoria expressly provides that an executor or administrator who applies for resealing need
not be within the jurisdiction of the resealing court.
There is no express provision to that effect in the other Australian jurisdictions, although some legislation appears to contemplate
that an applicant for resealing need not be resident in the jurisdiction in which resealing is sought.
Preliminary view
5.30 An executor or administrator need not be resident within the jurisdiction of the resealing court and it should also be clear
that a person appointed to apply for a reseal under a power of attorney given by an executor or administrator need not be resident
within the jurisdiction of the resealing court.
What provision should be made for applicants for resealing who are not resident within the jurisdiction of the resealing court?
Deemed residence of, and service on, a non-resident applicant for resealing
5.31 Some jurisdictions deem every executor or administrator who applies for resealing to be resident within the jurisdiction in which
resealing is sought and requires non-resident executors or administrators to file a local address for service at which notices, processes
or documents may be served. Any notice, process or document served at that address is deemed to have been served personally on the
executor or administrator.
Such provisions ensure that an executor or administrator is amenable to legal proceedings that may be brought against the estate
in the jurisdiction in question.
5.32 Other jurisdictions require the filing of an address for service regardless of whether the executor or administrator is resident
outside the jurisdiction but do not deem an executor or administrator who applies for the resealing of a grant to be resident within
the jurisdiction in which resealing is sought.
Preliminary view
5.33 A non-resident executor or administrator should be deemed to be resident in the jurisdiction in which resealing is sought and
must file an address for service in that jurisdiction. Service of any notice or process at that address should be deemed to be personal
service on the executor or administrator. Such a provision should also apply to a person appointed under a power of attorney given
by an executor or administrator who applies for the resealing of a grant.
What provision should be made for deemed residence of, and service on, applicants for resealing who are not resident within the jurisdiction
where resealing is sought?
INSTRUMENTS THAT MAY BE RESEALED
All grants of probate and administration
5.34 Legislation in all Australian jurisdictions provides that a grant of probate or letters of administration may be resealed, provided
the conditions imposed are satisfied.
In the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, the Northern Territory, Victoria and Western Australia, “administration”
is defined to include a grant made for a general, special or limited purpose.
In the remaining jurisdictions, it is provided in the rules that a special, limited or temporary grant is not to be resealed except
by order of a judge or, in South Australia, the registrar.
Preliminary view
5.35 It should be possible to reseal all grants of probate and administration, including grants made for special, limited and temporary
Should it be possible to reseal all grants of probate and letters of administration, including grants made for special, limited or
temporary purposes?
Instruments given an effect similar to grants of probate and administration
5.36 The extent to which any type of instrument, other than a grant of probate or letters of administration, may be resealed in a
particular jurisdiction depends on the definitions of “probate” and “administration” in that jurisdiction
and on whether the legislation is otherwise expressed in terms that are sufficiently broad to apply to an instrument that has a similar
effect to a grant of probate or letters of administration.
5.37 Whereas, in some jurisdictions, legislation is directed to the type of document that is sufficient evidence of a grant of probate
or administration, in other jurisdictions legislation is framed in broader terms and refers to the effect of the instrument in question.
Provisions directed to the type of instrument
5.38 In some jurisdictions the terms “probate” and “administration” are defined in almost identical terms.
For example, the New South Wales definitions allow the resealing of an instrument other than a grant of probate or letters of administration:
Administration
includes all letters of administration of the real and personal estate and effects of deceased persons whether with or without the
will annexed, and whether granted for general, special, or limited purposes, also
exemplification of letters of administration or such other formal evidence of the letters of administration
purporting to be under the seal of a Court of competent jurisdiction
as is in the opinion of the Court deemed sufficient
“exemplification of probate” or any other formal document
purporting to be under the seal of a court of competent jurisdiction
which, in the opinion of the Court, is deemed sufficient
5.39 Some of these jurisdictions also specifically include Scottish confirmations in the definitions.
However, the terms of the definitions in all these jurisdictions suggest that resealing is possible only where there has been a grant
of probate or administration in the foreign court.
Provisions referring to the effect of the instrument
5.40 In Queensland “probate” and “letters of administration” are defined to include:
“letters of administration”
include confirmation in Scotland, and any instrument having in any part of Her Majesty’s dominions the same effect which under
the law of Queensland is given to probate and letters of administration respectively.
5.41 In the South Australian legislation, the definitions of “probate” and “administration” are substantially
the same as the definitions in the New South Wales legislation except that it refers to the opinion of the registrar, rather than
to the opinion of the court.
However, the South Australian legislation also enables certain instruments to be resealed if they “correspond” to a grant
of probate or letters of administration in South Australia:
“probate or administration granted by a foreign Court”
means any document as to which the Registrar is satisfied that it was issued out of a court of competent jurisdiction in a foreign
country other than an Australasian State, or the United Kingdom, and that in such country it corresponds to a probate of a will or
to an administration in this State.
5.42 In Victoria, the term “letters of administration” is defined to include “exemplification of letters of administration”
and the term “probate” is defined to include “exemplification of probate”.
However, in addition to providing for the resealing of probate or administration granted by a court of competent jurisdiction in
the United Kingdom or in any of the Australasian States, the legislation provides for the resealing of:
probate of the will or administration of the estate of any deceased person; or
a grant or order appointing a person executor of the will or giving a person authority to administer the estate of any deceased person,
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction in a country specified under section 88 of the Victorian legislation.
Preliminary view
5.43 Instruments that have a similar effect to a grant of probate or administration should be capable of being resealed.
Such a provision is broad enough to include, for example, Scottish confirmations, without singling them out for special mention as
is currently the case in some jurisdictions.
Should grants that can be resealed include instruments that are given an effect similar to grants of probate or administration by
the law of the country where the instrument was first filed or issued?
Orders to administer and elections to administer
Orders to administer
5.44 Legislation in a number of Australian jurisdictions provides that, in certain circumstances, the court may make an order authorising
the public trustee in that jurisdiction to administer the estate of a deceased person.
The terminology differs slightly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction but such orders are here referred to collectively as “orders
to administer”.
5.45 There are some differences between the jurisdictions as to the circumstances in which a public trustee may apply for an order
to administer. So, for example, in some jurisdictions a public trustee may apply for an order to administer in respect of the estate
of a person who died leaving property in that jurisdiction if:
the deceased died intestate (in varying circumstances);
the deceased left a will, but there is no executor resident in the jurisdiction who is willing and capable of acting;
no application for probate or administration is made, or probate or administration is not obtained within a specified time after the
death of the deceased.
5.46 The effect of an order to administer is that the public trustee is in the same position as if administration or probate or letters
of administration had been granted to the public trustee.
5.47 Only in the Australian Capital Territory and in the Northern Territory is specific provision made that an order to collect and
administer may be resealed.
Consequently, in the other jurisdictions, whether an order to administer may be resealed will depend on the interpretation of the
definitions of “probate” and “administration” and on whether the legislation is otherwise expressed in terms
that are sufficiently broad to apply to an order to administer.
Elections to administer
5.48 Legislation in all Australian jurisdictions except South Australia provides that, in certain circumstances, where a person has
died leaving property in that jurisdiction, the gross value of which does not exceed a specified relatively low amount, the public
trustee or similar officer in that jurisdiction may file an election to administer the estate of the deceased person.
Generally, the effect of filing an election is that the public trustee or similar officer is deemed to be the executor or administrator
of the estate.
5.49 Provision is also made so that when the gross amount of the estate exceeds the specified amount the public trustee must file
a notice in the registry and either the election is revoked (and the public trustee may reapply)
or the public trustee must proceed in the ordinary manner to obtain probate or letters of administration.
5.50 In New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia, certain trustee companies are also empowered to file
an election to administer the estate of a deceased person.
5.51 No Australian jurisdiction provides expressly for the resealing of an election to administer made by a public trustee or similar
officer or by a trustee company.
5.52 The National Committee, in its work on administration of estates, has proposed that elections should be abolished and that, if
an estate cannot be effectively administered informally, a grant should be sought.
Preliminary view
5.53 The resealing of orders to administer would be covered by the provision already proposed, under which the instruments that can
be resealed would include instruments that are given an effect similar to a grant of probate or administration by the law of the
country where the instrument was first filed or issued. However, it should not be possible to reseal an election to administer, as
only documents issued under the seal of a court of competent jurisdiction should be capable of being resealed.
Should it be possible to reseal an order to administer made in favour of a public trustee or similar officer?
(a) Should it be possible to reseal an election to administer?
(b) If so, what provision should be made in relation to resealing an election to administer?
THE RESEALING PROCESS
Applying in person or through a legal representative
5.54 In some jurisdictions there are provisions that permit an application for resealing to be made in person or through a legal practitioner.
5.55 In other jurisdictions provisions merely permit an application for the resealing of a grant to be made by the executor or administrator
or person authorised by power of attorney either in person or through a legal practitioner.
Preliminary view
5.56 It is appropriate to provide that an applicant for resealing should be able to apply either in person or through a legal practitioner.
Should an applicant for the resealing of a grant be able to apply through a legal practitioner?
Resealing by the court or the registrar
5.57 In each of the Australian States and Territories, the legislative provisions on resealing provide that a grant of probate or
letters of administration or other instrument is ultimately to be sealed with the seal of the court.
However, most of the statutes give the registrar an important role in the process – for example, requiring that the necessary
documents be produced to, and copies lodged with, the registrar.
In some jurisdictions the rules specifically provide that the registrar can exercise the powers of the court,
and in the other jurisdictions it appears that this is assumed to follow from the statutory references to the part played by the
5.58 In some jurisdictions the registrar’s power is subject to specific limitations, for example, where a caveat against resealing
has been filed,
where the registrar has referred an application for resealing to the court,
or where the original grant is a special, limited or temporary one.
Preliminary view
5.59 The registrar should:
be able to cause a grant to be resealed, once satisfied that the statutory conditions had been met;
be able, if he or she thinks fit, at any time before resealing, to refer an application to the Supreme Court (in which case the grant
could not be resealed except in accordance with a court order); and
not be able to proceed with an application for resealing without a court order if a caveat against resealing had been lodged.
What functions should the registrar have in relation to resealing?
What limitations should be placed on the registrar’s powers in relation to resealing?
Commencing an application for resealing
5.60 Each jurisdiction has its own rules setting out how to commence an application for resealing using a variety of prescribed forms,
affidavits, summonses, statements of claim and other forms of application.
5.61 If a deceased leaves assets in several jurisdictions, a personal representative is likely to have to bring proceedings in each
of those jurisdictions more or less simultaneously. The variety of different procedural rules is likely to cause problems for such
applicants that would be avoided if all jurisdictions had a common form of initiating applications.
Preliminary view
5.62 A uniform procedure for resealing would be a considerable advantage.
(a) Should there be a uniform procedure for initiating a resealing application?
(b) If so, what form should it take?
Documents that must be produced to the court
5.63 In all jurisdictions the applicant is required to produce the grant of probate or letters of administration (or other order)
to the registrar, and deposit a copy with the registrar or, in the case of Queensland, with the Supreme Court.
In all jurisdictions, except Queensland, a reference to a grant of probate or administration includes an exemplification of probate
or letters of administration.
5.64 In some jurisdictions, the rules contain further provisions about other relevant documentation. The required documents must be
produced either in original
or copy form,
depending on the jurisdiction. The rules in most jurisdictions also contain provisions setting out the matters that must be included
in the affidavit or oath sworn by the applicant.
Preliminary view
5.65 An applicant for resealing should be required to:
produce to the registrar:
the grant of probate or letters of administration; or
an exemplification or duplicate of the grant of probate or letters of administration, provided it is sealed with the seal of the granting
a copy of the grant of probate or letters of administration, or exemplification or duplicate or either, provided it is certified under
seal as a correct copy by or under the authority of the granting court; and
deposit a copy of the grant of probate or letters of administration with the registrar.
The applicant should also be required to produce a copy of the will (if there is one), if this is not included in the document required
as a precondition for resealing.
What should an applicant for resealing be required to produce to, or deposit with, the registrar?
The power to reseal
5.66 The core provision of the resealing legislation, which is in essence the same in all jurisdictions, allows the court to reseal
the grant if the various conditions dealt with above have been satisfied – namely, the making of a grant of probate or administration
or similar order by a court of competent jurisdiction in a recognised country, the production of the specified documents, and the
deposit of copies with the court.
It is clear that the relevant provisions in all States and Territories give the court a discretion whether or not to reseal the grant,
even if the specified conditions are satisfied.
Preliminary view
5.67 It is important to make it clear that the court has a discretion in the matter of resealing. The model legislation should provide
that, if the specified conditions are satisfied, the court may reseal a grant.
How, if at all, should the model legislation emphasise that resealing is discretionary?
Finding as to domicile
5.68 There are three different types of provisions concerned with evidence of the deceased’s domicile in force in various jurisdictions:
the court may not make or reseal a grant unless it has made a finding with respect to the deceased’s domicile;
the court may require evidence of the domicile of the deceased, if it appears in proceedings for a grant or for resealing that the
deceased was domiciled out of the jurisdiction, and the court may also require evidence of the law of the domicile as to the validity
of any will made by the deceased, and the law of the domicile as to the persons entitled on distribution of the estate;
if the domicile of the deceased as sworn to in the affidavit differs from that suggested by the description in the grant, the registrar
shall or may, require further evidence as to the deceased’s domicile.
Preliminary view
5.69 No preliminary view is expressed on this issue.
(a) In what circumstances should the court require further evidence as to the deceased’s domicile?
(b) What sort of evidence should be required?
Time limits
5.70 In Tasmania, the rules provide that, if an application for the resealing of a grant is made after a lapse of three years from
the death of the deceased, the reason for the delay must be certified to the registrar, who, if not satisfied with the certificate,
“shall require such proof of the cause of delay as he may think fit”.
No other jurisdiction has an equivalent provision.
5.71 In the Northern Territory, if an application for resealing is made after a lapse of two or more years from the death of the deceased,
the affidavit in support of the application must state whether a prior application for resealing has been made in connection with
the estate.
Preliminary view
5.72 It is not proposed to adopt these provisions as model rules of procedure, as they are not considered necessary.
What further requirements, if any, should be imposed on an applicant for resealing when the application has been delayed beyond a
specified period?
EFFECTS OF RESEALING
5.73 Legislation in all jurisdictions deals with the effects of resealing a grant. The main effects of the legislation are outlined
in the following paragraphs.
Force and effect of a resealed grant
5.74 A grant, when resealed, has the same force, effect and operation as if it had been originally granted by the resealing court.
Preliminary view
5.75 The model legislation should provide that a grant, when resealed, has the same force, effect and operation as if it had been
originally granted by the resealing court.
Should the model legislation provide that a grant, when resealed, is to have the same force, effect and operation as if it had been
originally granted by the resealing court?
Imposition of duties and liabilities of a personal representative
5.76 Legislation in all jurisdictions except Queensland provides that, on the resealing of a grant of probate or letters of administration,
certain specified persons (usually the applicant for resealing) are to perform the same duties and be subject to the same liabilities
as if the grant of probate or letters of administration had been originally granted by that court.
In addition to duties and liabilities, some jurisdictions also refer to “rights” of personal representatives.
5.77 The main differences between the provisions in the various jurisdictions concern the persons on whom the various duties and liabilities
are imposed and the terms in which those duties and liabilities are expressed. For example, in New South Wales, Western Australia
and South Australia, although the attorney of an executor or administrator may apply for a reseal,
the relevant duties and liabilities are expressed to apply only to the executor or administrator and not to a person authorised under
a power of attorney.
Preliminary view
5.78 In relation to persons who are entitled to apply for the resealing of a grant the relevant duties and liabilities should be imposed
the personal representative or grantee, where the application was made by the personal representative or grantee or by a legal practitioner
on behalf of the personal representative or grantee; or
the person authorised by power of attorney given by the personal representative or grantee, where the application was made by the
authorised person or by a legal practitioner on his or her behalf.
5.79 The person who obtains the resealing of a grant should also have the rights and powers of a personal representative.
What rights, powers, duties and liabilities should be imposed on an applicant for resealing?
Applicant deemed to be the personal representative of the estate
5.80 In some jurisdictions on the resealing of a grant, the person who applies for the reseal is deemed, for all purposes, to be the
personal representative of the estate within the resealing jurisdiction.
The effect of this deeming is that an attorney who applies for the resealing of a grant is not merely the agent of the foreign executor
or administrator, but is placed in the position of an original personal representative in the resealing jurisdiction. Consequently,
where the attorney dies after obtaining the reseal, but before completing the administration of the estate, the office of executor
will devolve to his or her executor.
In addition, an attorney will be allowed a commission on the passing of the accounts
and, in the absence of legislation allowing a different course, must see to the distribution of the estate in the resealing jurisdiction.
Preliminary view
5.81 It is desirable to remove any doubt as to whether, on a grant being resealed, the applicant for resealing is, for all purposes,
the personal representative of all the estate in the resealing jurisdiction, or merely subject to the duties and liabilities of a
personal representative.
5.82 In addition to conferring on the applicant the rights, powers, liabilities and duties of a personal representative, an applicant
for resealing should, on the resealing of a grant, be deemed for all purposes to be the personal representative of the estate within
the resealing jurisdiction.
Should the applicant for resealing be deemed to be, for all purposes, the personal representative of the deceased in respect of his
or her estate within the resealing jurisdiction?
DUTIES AND LIABILITIES OF A PERSON AUTHORISED BY POWER OF ATTORNEY
5.83 Victoria has a specific provision dealing with the duties and liabilities of a person, authorised under a power of attorney,
who obtains the resealing of a grant of probate or letters of administration.
This provision applies to an attorney who has obtained the resealing of a grant and has satisfied or provided for the debts and claims
of which the attorney has notice. It allows such an attorney to pay or transfer the balance of the estate to the personal representative
of the estate in the country in which the deceased died domiciled, to the donor of the power of attorney, or as directed by either
of such persons, rather than requiring the attorney to see to the distribution of those assets personally. No other jurisdiction
has an equivalent provision.
Preliminary view
5.84 It is proposed that a provision to the effect of
Administration and Probate Act 1958
(Vic) should be included in the model legislation.
Should specific provision be made with respect to the duties and liabilities of a person authorised under a power of attorney who
obtains the resealing of a grant?
5.85 A person who wishes to object to the making or resealing of a grant of probate or letters of administration in a particular jurisdiction
does so by lodging a caveat with the registrar. The provisions dealing with lodging a caveat against resealing vary from one jurisdiction
to another.
5.86 Some jurisdictions essentially provide that a caveat against resealing has the same effect and is dealt with in the same manner
as if it were a caveat against an original grant.
Others, however, do not expressly provide that such a caveat shall have the same effect and shall be dealt with in the same manner
as a caveat against the making of a grant.
5.87 The WALRC, despite noting that, in practice, caveats against resealing are rare
recommended, in light of submission supporting their retention, that there should be a uniform rule-making provision for the lodgment
of caveats against resealing, and that the consequences of lodgment should be the same as for a caveat against an original grant.
Preliminary view
5.88 There should be a uniform rule-making provision for the lodgment of caveats against resealing. It is proposed that the following
provisions be included in the model legislation:
(1) Any person who wishes to oppose the resealing of a grant of administration shall, by the date specified in the advertisement published
pursuant to
section 3(3)
, lodge a caveat against the sealing.
(2) A caveat under subsection (1) shall have the same effect and shall be dealt with in the same manner as if it were a caveat against
the making of a grant of probate or letters of administration by the Supreme Court.
(3) The Registrar shall not, without an order of the Supreme Court, proceed with an application under
if a caveat has been lodged under this section.
5.89 The South Australian rules provide a suitable model for further provisions to be set out in the rules.
(a) What provision, if any, should be made in relation to caveats against resealing?
(b) What effect should any such caveats have?
ADVERTISEMENT OF INTENTION TO RESEAL
5.90 The question whether a person who applies for the resealing of a grant should be required to advertise his or her intention to
do so has occasioned considerable controversy. In some jurisdictions, advertising an intention to reseal is mandatory.
However in Queensland, it is not necessary to publish or serve a notice of intention to apply for the resealing of a grant unless
there are debts owing in Queensland at the date of the application or the court or registrar requires it for another reason.
In South Australia, if the registrar so requires, notice of the application shall be advertised in such manner as he or she may direct.
In Western Australia there is no requirement that the applicant advertise his or her intention to apply for resealing.
5.91 The WALRC expressed the view that advertising was often ineffective and caused delay and expense:
Part of the ineffectiveness of advertising was seen to arise out of the method of advertising. Advertisements may appear in any place
on any date in any one of several newspapers. ... It thus seems to be merely a matter of chance whether an advertisement comes to
the attention of interested persons.
Preliminary view
5.92 Advertising should be at the discretion of the registrar in each jurisdiction. It is envisaged that, where an applicant is directed
to advertise notice of the resealing application, the direction would have a similar effect to the issuing by the registrar of a
requisition in relation to the application.
What provision, if any, should be made in relation to advertising an intention to reseal?
5.93 All jurisdictions have legislative provisions dealing with the provision of security in connection with an application for resealing,
but the provisions are not uniform.
5.94 In relation to original grants of administration, there has been a legislative trend away from the provision of administration
bonds, or at least away from the mandatory requirement for the provision of such bonds. Administration bonds have been abolished
in England,
Western Australia
and Victoria.
Both administration bonds and sureties have been abolished in Queensland.
In South Australia, although administration bonds have not been abolished, they are not required in every case where a grant of administration
Similarly, in New Zealand, there is no longer a mandatory requirement for an administrator to enter into an administration bond,
although the court may make a grant of administration (other than the probate of a will) conditional upon the person to whom the
grant is made giving such security as the court may require.
5.95 In its Discussion Paper on the administration of estates, the National Committee proposed that the provision of bonds and sureties
should not be mandatory, but should be among the options that may be ordered by the court in an appropriate case.
Preliminary view
5.96 The model legislation should provide that:
the registrar may require security for the due administration of the estate in that jurisdiction; and
if security is required, the grant may not be resealed unless the registrar is satisfied that adequate security has been given.
What provision, if any, should be made for the provision of security for the due administration of an estate in the resealing jurisdiction?
NOTIFICATION TO COURT OF ORIGINAL GRANT
5.97 The rules in Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania require that notification of resealing must be given to the court that
made the original grant, and that, if the court is informed – or, in Queensland, if the registrar believes – that an
original grant issued by it has been resealed elsewhere, the registrar should inform the resealing court of any revocation or alteration
of that grant.
These rules are not expressed to be confined in their operation to a grant issued in another Australian jurisdiction. Although there
is no requirement to this effect in the Western Australian rules, it is nevertheless the practice in that jurisdiction for notification
to be given to the court that has made an original grant when that grant is resealed in Western Australia.
Preliminary view
5.98 Notice of the resealing should be given by the resealing court to the court of original grant; and the court of original grant,
having been informed of resealing, should notify the resealing court of any revocation or alteration of the original grant.
The resealing court should notify the granting court of the application for resealing at the time the application was made, so that
any notice of revocation or alteration of the original grant could be conveyed to the resealing court prior to the resealing of the
5.99 A national register of grants that are entitled to automatic recognition (already discussed above
) could also serve to inform all Australian jurisdictions of other grants, and of reseals, made in each State and Territory, of revocations
and alterations of grants, and of caveats.
What provision, if any, should be made for notification to the court of original grant of an application for resealing?
DISCLOSURE OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
5.100 Various provisions in a number of States and Territories require a person who applies for a grant or resealing of a grant to
provide the court with a statement of the deceased’s assets and liabilities.
5.101 In its Discussion Paper on the administration of estates, the National Committee proposed that provisions based on the South
Australian legislation should be included in the model legislation on administration of estates.
The South Australian legislation requires an executor, administrator or trustee to disclose to the Court the assets known to them
at various stages, including when the application for a grant or reseal is made, or at any other time during the administration of
the estate.
The South Australian legislation also provides that assets of an estate shall not be disposed of unless they have been disclosed
and sets out penalties for an executor, administrator or trustee who fails to comply with the provisions.
Preliminary view
5.102 The South Australian provisions should be adopted provided that such legislation makes it clear that what is required is disclosure
of all assets and liabilities of the deceased wherever they are, and that they should be listed so as to establish the jurisdiction
where each is located.
Should an applicant for a grant or resealing be required to disclose all assets and liabilities wherever situate?
SUCCESSION DUTY
5.103 In the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, the Northern Territory, South Australia and Tasmania, the legislation
provides that the seal of the court shall not be affixed until such succession duties have been paid as would have been payable if
the probate or administration had originally been granted by the court.
The Queensland legislation requires the filing of a certificate to the effect that “adequate security has been given for payment
of all probate and succession duty”.
5.104 Between 1976 and 1983, the Commonwealth Government, the Australian States and the Northern Territory passed legislation abolishing
the payment of succession or estate duty.
In each case, however, the legislation was expressed to apply in respect of the estate of a person who died after a particular date.
The legislation did not of itself extinguish the liability of an estate of a person who died before the relevant date.
5.105 In South Australia, the legislation under which succession duty is levied is still in force.
In New South Wales, the Northern Territory, Queensland and Tasmania, despite the repeal of the relevant legislation,
the estate of a person who died before the date from which succession duty was abolished in the particular jurisdiction will still
be liable to succession duty. It is therefore possible that there are still some unadministered estates that will be subject to the
payment of succession duty when they are eventually administered.
5.106 In Victoria and Western Australia, legislation has since been passed repealing the Acts in those jurisdictions under which succession
duty was levied and extinguishing any existing liability in respect of the payment of succession duty.
Preliminary view
5.107 In view of the fact that succession duty may still be payable in respect of estates in five Australian jurisdictions, it is
proposed that the model legislation should contain a provision to the effect of clause 5(1)(a) of the Commonwealth Secretariat draft
model bill.
What provision, if any, should be made to ensure that such succession duties are paid as would have been payable if the grant had
originally been made by the resealing court?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(1);
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.01;
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Queensland provides that an application for resealing may also be made by “a person lawfully authorised for the purpose by
the executor or administrator”:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 616.
Imperial Acts (Substituted Provisions) Act 1986
, Sch 2, Pt 3;
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
In South Australia and Western Australia, the relevant legislation is an Imperial Act, (1351-52) 25 Edw 3 st 5 c 5. See also QLRC,
Discussion Paper MP 37 at 40-45; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at para 6.1-6.17.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
s 44(2)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(1)(c).
. For background see Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 2(1), cl 3(2);
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.23 and recommendation 4;
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 3-5.
In the Will of Rofe
(1904) 29 VLR 681.
In the Will of Rofe
(1904) 29 VLR 681 at 682.
In the Will of Vivian
(1901) 23 ALT 37.
[1905] QWN 30.
See also T H Tristram,
Tristram and Coote’s Probate Practice
(28th ed, 1995) at para 18.94.
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.01(a).
. For background see
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.25(b) and recommendation 6(b);
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 5.
. See for example
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
Administration Act 1903
See also the
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 60.
. T H Tristram,
Tristram and Coote’s Probate Practice
(28th ed, 1995) at para 13.122.
. Tristram at para 18.101.
. Tristram at para 21.35.
. For background see
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.25(c);
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 6.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 41(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
Administration of Justice Act 1985
[1929] VicLawRp 10
[1929] VLR 53
. For background see
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.25(d).
Trustee Companies Act 1947
Trustee Companies Act 1964
Companies (Trustees and Personal Representatives) Act
(NT) s 14-17;
Trustee Companies Act 1968
Trustee Companies Act 1988
Trustee Companies Act 1953
Trustee Companies Act 1984
Trustee Companies Act 1987
Re Galletly
(1900) 10 QLJ 74 and
In the Will of Thornley
(1903) 4 SR (NSW) 246.
In the Will of Finn
(1908) 8 SR (NSW) 32
at 33 (Street J).
Re Sutherland
[1936] QWN 20.
Re Galletly
(1900) 10 QLJ 74.
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.01(c).
. Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 2(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 81(1)(a).
. For background see
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.24 and recommendation 5.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 101;
Administration Act 1903
Wills Probate and Administration Service New South Wales
(Butterworths) at para 1489.1.
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 17(1), r 597(1), r 617(2);
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 59.01;
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 1996
(Vic) r 5.07.
. For background see
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.35 and recommendation 13.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(1);
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) s 5(1);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 6(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
See QLRC, Discussion Paper MP 37 at 5-6; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at para 2.10-2.11.
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 619;
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.08;
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 53.
. For background see
(1984) at para 3.26 and recommendation 7.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) s 5(1);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
Administration and Probate Act 1935
(which refers to the opinion of a judge);
Administration Act 1903
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Emphasis added.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) s 83(b);
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 114(b).
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1958
. For background see Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 2(1), cl 3(1);
(1984) at para 3.27 and recommendation 8.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Public Trustee Act 1913
Public Trustee Act 1978
Public Trustee Act 1995
Public Trustee Act 1941
Public Trustee Act 1978
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Public Trustee Act 1995
Public Trustee Act 1941
s 10(1)(ab)
Public Trustee Act 1913
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Public Trustee Act 1995
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Public Trustee Act 1978
s 29(1)(b)(iii)
Public Trustee Act 1995
s 9(1)(c)(i)
Public Trustee Act 1941
s 10(1)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Public Trustee Act 1978
s 29(1)(b)(v)
Public Trustee Act 1995
Public Trustee Act 1941
s 10(1)(c).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Public Trustee Act 1995
Public Trustee Act 1941
Public Trustee Act 1913
Public Trustee Act 1978
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Public Trustee Act 1913
Public Trustee Regulation 2001
(NSW) cl 34(1);
Public Trustee Act
(NT) s 53, s 54,
Public Trustee Regulations
(NT) reg 7, Sch 3 and 4);
Public Trustee Act 1978
Public Trustee Act 1930
(Tas) s 20;
Trustee Companies Act 1984
and Sch 2; and
Public Trustee Act 1941
. However, in the Australian Capital Territory, the public trustee has the powers he or she would have had if the court had granted
an order to collect and administer:
Administration and Probate Act 1929
. In the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania.
. In New South Wales, Northern Territory, Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia.
Trustee Companies Act 1964
Trustee Companies Act 1968
Trustee Companies Act 1953
Trustee Companies Act 1984
Trustee Companies Act 1987
. QLRC, Discussion Paper MP 37 at 163-164; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at para 11.10-11.12.
. For background on the English practice, see: Registrar’s Direction, 24 March 1958 (referred to in T H Tristram,
Tristram and Coote’s Probate Practice
(28th ed, 1995) at para 18.86); Registrar’s Direction (Consolidated Direction), 20 November 1972; Registrar’s Direction,
18 June 1979; Practice Direction (Resealing: Elections to Administer), 2 March 1982
Solicitors Journal
For other background see:
(1984) at para 3.28-3.30 and recommendation 9;
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 7.
. Although the relevant rules are ones of general application and are not limited in their operation to applications for resealing.
Supreme Court Rules
(ACT) O 8 r 1;
Rules of the Supreme Court 1970
(NSW) Pt 4 r 4;
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 1.14, 88.01(2);
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 985(1);
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA) O 4 r 3;
Non-contentious Probate Rules 1967
(WA) r 3(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.01(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(1);
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
British Probates Act 1898
is the only statute in which the registrar receives no mention.
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 601, 617(2);
Non-contentious Probate Rules 1967
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 601(1)(a), r 617(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Supreme Court Rules
(ACT) O 72 r 19(a)(i);
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(3)(a),
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 88.89(1)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 601(2), r 617(2).
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 619;
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 53. But see
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.08.
. For background see Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 4(3), cl 5(1), cl 5(2);
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.32 and recommendation 10.
Supreme Court Rules
(ACT) O 72 r 5, r 14A;
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 88.07;
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 597, r 617(2);
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.02;
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 46;
Administration and Probate Rules 1994
(Vic) r 2.02;
Non-contentious Probate Rules 1967
(WA) r 6(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(1);
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) s 5(1);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 6(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
The Queensland legislation provides that a duplicate of any probate or letters of administration, sealed with the seal of the granting
court, or a copy certified as correct by or under the authority of the granting court, is sufficient:
British Probates Act 1898
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 88.26(4).
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 618(1);
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 51;
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.07;
Non-contentious Probate Rules 1967
(WA) r 43(1).
Supreme Court Rules
(ACT) O 72 r 14A;
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 88.26;
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.02;
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 46. In Queensland, the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) do not contain a rule setting out the matters to be included in the oath, although there is an approved form for an affidavit
in support of an application for resealing (Form 113).
. For background see: Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 3(4)(a) and (b);
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.33 and recommendation 11;
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 7.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(1);
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
. For background see: Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 5(1);
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.22 and recommendation 3.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 88.11.
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 49;
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.0.
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 52.
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 88.26(1)(b)(iv).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(4)(a);
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
. For background see: Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 6(1); and
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.53 and recommendation 17.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(4)(b);
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration Act 1903
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.01(b)
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1919
. For background see: Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 6(2);
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.25(a), 3.54, recommendation 6(a) and 18;
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 9.
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Re Watmough
[1913] VicLawRp 102
[1913] VLR 435.
(1894) 16 ALT 95.
Permezel v Hollingworth
[1905] VicLawRp 50
[1905] VLR 321.
. For background see: Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 6(2).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
. See also Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 7.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) s 81;
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 112;
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
In Queensland, the rules about the lodging of a caveat against the making of an original grant also apply to the lodging of a caveat
against the resealing of a grant:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 623-628.
Administration Act 1903
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 52.01.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.45.
WALRC Report
(1984) at recommendation 15. See also
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.45.
. Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 4.
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 52.02-52.13.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) s 82(3);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 113(3);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
For additional provisions in rules of court see
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 88.09.
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 617(1).
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.03.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.38.
. For background see: Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 3(3);
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.42;
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 8.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(6), s 113(2);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 47;
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.04;
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Supreme Court Act 1981
(UK) s 120(1), s 152(4) and Sch 7.
Administration Act 1903
dministration and Probate Act 1958
(Vic) s 57.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 6(5) and (6).
. QLRC, Discussion Paper MP 37 at 135; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at para 9.42-9.43 and Proposal 61.
. For background see: Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 5(1)(b);
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.52.
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) r 620, r 641;
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.09, r 50.10;
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 54, r 55. Revocation of the grant by the jurisdiction that issued it empowers the resealing jurisdiction to revoke the reseal:
[1930] VicLawRp 47
[1930] VLR 309.
. Letter from the Registrar of the Supreme Court of Western Australia to the Queensland Law Reform Commission, 12 November 2001.
WALRC Report
(1984) at recommendation 19.
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 9-10.
. See para 4.35.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Supreme Court Rules
(ACT) O 72 r 37;
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Supreme Court Rules 1970
(NSW) r 28A;
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 111(4)(b),
Supreme Court Rules
(NT) r 88.27;
Administration and Probate Act 1919
, and see also
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 8.01-8.03;
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 63;
Administration Act 1903
Non-contentious Probate Rules 1967
. QLRC, Discussion Paper MP 37 at 128-129; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at para 9.19-9.21 and Proposal 60.
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1919
. For further background see:
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 3.34 and recommendation 12;
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 8.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) s 82(1);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 113(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
British Probates Act 1898
. Duty was abolished on the estates of persons dying on or after the following dates: Commonwealth: 1 July 1979 (
Estate Duty Assessment Amendment Act 1978
(Cth)); New South Wales: 31 December 1981 (
Stamp Duties (Further Amendment) Act 1980
(NSW)); Northern Territory: 1 July 1978 (
Succession Duties Repeal Ordinance 1978
(NT)); Queensland: 1 January 1977 (
Succession and Gift Duties Abolition Act 1976
(Qld)); South Australia: 1 January 1980 (
Succession Duties Act Amendment Act 1979
(SA)); Tasmania: 1 October 1982 (
Deceased Persons’ Estates Duties Amendment Act 1982
(Tas)); Victoria: 1 January 1984 (
Probate Duty (Amendment) Act 1983
(Vic)); Western Australia: 1 January 1980 (
Death Duty Assessment Act Amendment Act 1978
Succession Duties Act 1929
(SA). The Act applies to the administrator of the estate of a person who died before 1 January 1980:
Succession Duties Act 1929
Stamp Duties (Amendment) Act 1991
(NSW) s 3, Sch 3, Item (11);
Succession Duties Repeal Ordinance 1978
Statute Law Revision Act 1995
(Qld) s 5(1), Sch 6;
Deceased Persons’ Estates Duties Amendment Act 1982
(Tas) s 10, SR 48 of 1997.
State Taxation Acts (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2000
Statutes (Repeals and Minor Amendments)
. For further background see: Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 5(1)(a);
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 7.42.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
6. Countries whose grants may be resealed
History of this Reference (Digest)
The current law
Some proposals
Preliminary view
6.1 There is considerable diversity among the various Australian jurisdictions as to the countries whose grants may be resealed. The
legislative techniques used to prescribe the countries whose grants may be resealed also differ considerably, and some operate more
successfully than others. Those that adopt the option of setting out lists of countries in regulations or other subordinate legislation
are particularly vulnerable to political developments concerning the status and allegiance of particular countries, which render
the lists out of date unless they are regularly reviewed. However, the use of general expressions such as “Commonwealth country”
and “Her Majesty’s dominions”,
rather than a list approach, may not be any more satisfactory, since political changes can affect the original intentions of the
drafter as to the countries intended to be included.
6.2 In South Australia, the Supreme Court may, amongst other things, reseal “any probate or administration granted by a foreign
which is defined as:
… any document as to which the Registrar [of the Supreme Court] is satisfied that it was issued out of a court of competent
to a probate of a will or to an administration in this State.
SOME PROPOSALS
6.3 Clause 3(1) of the Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill
provided for the resealing of “a grant of probate or letters of administration of the estate of any deceased person …
made by a court in any part of the Commonwealth or in any other country”.
6.4 The draft model bill did not restrict in any way the countries whose grants could be resealed; instead, the issue turned on whether
the grant in the country in question had a sufficiently similar effect to a grant of probate or letters of administration made in
the resealing jurisdiction. Much depended on the definition of “grant of administration”:
… a probate or letters of administration or any instrument having, within the jurisdiction where it was made, the effect of
appointing or authorising a person (in this Act referred to as “the grantee”) to collect and administer any part of the
estate of a deceased person and otherwise having in that jurisdiction an effect equivalent to that given, under the law of ________,
to a probate or letters of administration.
The WALRC recommended that all Australian States and Territories should adopt a provision based on that in the Commonwealth Secretariat
draft model bill.
6.5 In 1990, the Probate Registrars suggested that:
All Australian States and Territories should by uniform legislation allow the resealing of a grant of probate or administration made
by a court of competent jurisdiction in any country gazetted from time to time by the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
This alternative, while it relies on the list approach, would at least ensure that the countries recognised for this purpose by Australian
PRELIMINARY VIEW
6.6 There are two principal alternatives for prescribing the countries whose grants may be resealed. Grants of probate and administration
could be recognised when they have been made by a competent court either:
in any part of the Commonwealth of Nations or any other country; or
in any country gazetted from time to time by the Commonwealth Minister for Foreign Affairs.
6.7 The first alternative makes it unnecessary to have an official list of countries and keep it up to date. It would rely on the
courts to determine whether particular grants were sufficiently similar to Australian grants of probate and administration to be
recognised. Over time, a body of precedent would accumulate which would assist in this process. There is, however, no certainty that
the courts of all Australian jurisdictions would make the same decision in relation to instruments issued from a particular country.
6.8 The second alternative relies on the Minister for Foreign Affairs to keep the list up to date. It would be necessary, however,
for Commonwealth legislation to be passed conferring on the Minister for Foreign Affairs the power to proclaim certain countries
for this purpose.
What provision should be made to identify the countries or parts of countries whose grants may be resealed by Australian courts?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. For example,
British Probates Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 6(1) and s 111(1).
. For example,
Administration and Probate Act 1929
. For example,
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1919
The phrase “probate or administration granted by a foreign court” is defined in
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1919
. The Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill is reproduced in Appendix A to this Issues Paper.
. Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill cl 2(1).
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 4.22, 4.23 and recommendation 20.
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 10.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
7. Jurisdictional issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
Original grants
7.1 When a court is considering whether to make an original grant of probate or letters of administration, or to reseal a grant made
in another jurisdiction, it may have to consider whether it has the power to make or reseal the grant. At present, some jurisdictions
require that the deceased should have left assets within the jurisdiction as a condition of making a grant of probate or letters
of administration, while others do not.
7.2 If the deceased died domiciled in a jurisdiction in which he or she had no assets, in the absence of a rule allowing a court to
make a grant whether or not the deceased left property in that jurisdiction, there would be no jurisdiction capable of making a grant
that would be entitled to automatic recognition.
ORIGINAL GRANTS
7.3 In five Australian jurisdictions, the court cannot make a grant unless the deceased left property within the jurisdiction.
In the remaining jurisdictions, the court may make a grant despite the absence of property.
In the United Kingdom
and in New Zealand,
the court may also make a grant despite the absence of property within the jurisdiction. For example, in Queensland:
The court may in its discretion grant probate of the will or letters of administration of the estate of a deceased person notwithstanding
that the deceased person left no estate in Queensland or elsewhere or that the person to whom the grant is made is not resident or
domiciled in Queensland.
7.4 In Tasmania and Victoria, the requirement that the deceased should have left property within the resealing jurisdiction is specifically
stated in the legislative provisions on resealing.
7.5 In New South Wales, South Australia and Western Australia, which require that the deceased must leave property within the particular
The question whether the courts in these jurisdictions can reseal a grant where there is no property within the jurisdiction turns
on the interpretation of the relevant legislation.
7.6 In Queensland, the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory, where property within the jurisdiction is not required
for an original grant, the resealing provisions do not specifically require property within the resealing jurisdiction. Consequently
it can be assumed that a grant may be resealed in these jurisdictions despite the absence of property within the particular jurisdiction.
7.7 The WALRC suggested that, in a number of circumstances, the making of an original grant or the resealing of a grant was desirable,
despite the absence of property within the jurisdiction:
(a) The making of a grant may have effects on foreign revenue laws beneficial to the estate.
(b) If a testator died leaving property in one jurisdiction, but none in a second, and his executor obtained a grant only after a
trespasser had removed the testator’s movable property from the first to the second, probate could not be resealed in the second,
if property there was required.
(c) Certain foreign countries apparently require a grant by the country of nationality of the deceased before themselves making a
(d) Where a will only appoints a testamentary guardian, the will is not admissible to probate.
(e) There may be litigation to which the deceased estate may be a party but where in reality any judgment would be payable by the
deceased’s insurers.
7.8 The WALRC also noted the comments of the Victorian Registrar of Probates, who said that in Victoria the problem could be overcome
by filing an affidavit that the deceased left personal property within the jurisdiction to a value of say $10. The WALRC considered
such artifices undesirable and an indication of the need for reform.
Preliminary view
7.9 The jurisdictional requirements for the making of original grants have already been considered by the National Committee in its
Discussion Paper on the administration of estates, where it was proposed that a provision based on the
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) should be adopted by all States and Territories.
It is clearly desirable for all jurisdictions to be able to reseal a grant in similar circumstances. The model legislation should
contain a provision giving the court jurisdiction to reseal a grant despite the absence of property within the jurisdiction, using
wording consistent with
Succession Act 1981
What provision, if any, should be made to allow the resealing of a grant of probate or letters of administration even though the deceased
left no property in the resealing jurisdiction?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
It appears, however, that the court may grant letters of administration
de bonis non
despite the absence of property within the jurisdiction, provided there is property somewhere that remains to be administered: See
Wimalaratna v Ellies
(WA, Supreme Court, Full Court, No 167 of 1984, 9 October 1984, unreported).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act
(NT) s 14(2);
Succession Act 1981
Supreme Court Act 1981
(UK) s 25(1).
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 5(2).
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
. See, for example,
[1924] VicLawRp 37
[1924] VLR 237
In the Will of Buckley
(1889) 15 VLR 820. But see R Hastings and G Weir,
Probate Law and Practice
(2nd ed, 1948) at 310; R S Geddes, C J Rowland and P Studdert,
Wills, Probate and Administration Law in New South Wales
(1996) at 625.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 9.27.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 9.28, note 1.
. QLRC, Discussion Paper MP 37 at 18; NSWLRC, Discussion Paper 42 at 28, Proposal 4.
. For background see
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 9.30-9.31;
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 19.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
8. Choice of laws issues: The person to whom the grant will be made
History of this Reference (Digest)
Original grants
Preliminary view
8.1 When a court has jurisdiction to make or to reseal a grant of probate or letters of administration, it can also determine to
whom the grant should be made or on whose application the grant may be resealed (sometimes referred to as “official succession”).
8.2 Where the deceased died domiciled in a jurisdiction other than the one in which the grant is sought, it is necessary to decide
whether the grant should be made according to the law of the jurisdiction in which the grant is sought or the law of the jurisdiction
in which the deceased died domiciled.
8.3 If legislation were introduced under which a grant made by the Australian jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled would
be automatically recognised in all other Australian jurisdictions then the discretion presently exercised in relation to grants made
in another State or Territory by the resealing jurisdiction would disappear.
ORIGINAL GRANTS
Most Australian jurisdictions
8.4 In all Australian jurisdictions other than South Australia, the test for determining who is entitled to a grant depends on whether
the estate consists entirely of movables, or whether it consists of, or includes, immovables.
Movable property
8.5 Where the estate within the jurisdiction of the court where the grant is sought consists of movable property, the court will generally
follow the rules of the domicile and make a grant to the person entitled under that law (for reasons of convenience and expediency).
8.6 When a grant has already been made by the court of the deceased’s last domicile, the court of the jurisdiction in which
a grant is subsequently sought will usually, without further investigation, follow the existing grant and make a grant to the person
who has been recognised as the personal representative in the domicile.
If a grant has not been made in the domicile, a grant will normally be made to the person who would be entitled to a grant under
the law of the domicile.
8.7 If the law of the domicile does not recognise executors and administrators as understood by the common law, the court must follow
the law of the domicile as closely as it can and appoint the person whose function it is to administer the estate under the law of
the domicile.
8.8 The granting court retains a residual discretion to refuse to make a grant, or to refuse to make a grant to a particular applicant,
in exceptional cases.
Immovable property
8.9 Where the estate within the jurisdiction of the court where a grant is sought consists of or includes immovable property, the
situation is different. The High Court has held that the only law that can determine the title to land is the law of the jurisdiction
where the property is situated (the “lex situs”).
8.10 Accordingly, in Australian jurisdictions other than South Australia, where the assets within the jurisdiction consist of or include
immovables, the court will not simply follow the grant made in the domicile, but must decide for itself questions concerning the
validity of any will and entitlement to a grant. This means that, in determining who is entitled to a grant of probate or letters
of administration, it will follow its own rules.
South Australia
8.11 In South Australia, the situation depends on whether the deceased died domiciled in an Australian jurisdiction or overseas. The
South Australian rules
were amended with the aim of adopting the practice that applied in England
and provide that where the deceased died domiciled outside Australia:
the grant will normally follow the law of the deceased’s domicile, not only where the estate consists entirely of movables,
but also where it consists of both movables and immovables;
where the estate in South Australia consists entirely of immovables, the court may follow the lex situs and make a grant, limited
to the immovable property in South Australia, in accordance with the law that would have applied if the deceased had died domiciled
in South Australia;
8.12 It is presumed that where the deceased died domiciled in another Australian jurisdiction and:
the estate consists of movable property, the grant will normally follow the law of the deceased’s domicile; and
the estate consists of or includes immovable property within South Australia, the grant will normally follow the lex situs.
8.13 The law in England differs from the law that applies in Australian jurisdictions (except in South Australia where the deceased
died domiciled overseas) in that it allows a grant to be made to the personal representative appointed by the law of the domicile,
even where the estate includes immovable property.
8.14 The considerations that weighed strongly with the High Court in relation to the disposition of land
have been outweighed by the advantage of having the administration of the estate in the same hands in both the domicile and the place
where the property is situated.
New Zealand
8.15 In New Zealand also, it appears that the court will follow the grant made by the court of the deceased’s domicile, and
will make no distinction between whether the estate consists entirely of movables or consists of, or includes, immovables.
8.16 In determining whether to reseal a grant Australian courts apply the same principles as those that govern the making of an original
Consequently, where an application is made for the resealing of a grant and the property within the resealing jurisdiction consists
only of movables, the court may reseal the grant on the application of the personal representative appointed by the court of the
deceased’s domicile.
8.17 Where an application is made for the resealing of a grant and the estate within the resealing jurisdiction consists of, or includes,
immovable property, then the court will look to its own law as the lex situs of the property. This means that the court will not
reseal a grant dealing with immovables situated within its jurisdiction unless the grant was made to a person who would be entitled
to receive an original grant from that court.
South Australia
8.18 It is presumed that, in South Australia, where the deceased died domiciled outside Australia, the court may reseal a grant on
the application of the person entitled to the grant by the law of the place where the deceased died domiciled both when the estate
consists entirely of movables and also when it includes immovables.
8.19 In England a grant cannot be resealed, except by leave of a registrar, unless it was made:
to the person entrusted with the administration of the estate by the court having jurisdiction at the place where the deceased died
where no such person has been entrusted – to the person beneficially entitled to the estate by the law of the place where the
deceased died domiciled; or
in the case of a will that is admissible in England and Wales – to the executor named in the will (where the will is in English
or Welsh) or to the executor according to the tenor of the will (regardless of the language in which the will is made).
8.20 This rule applies both where the estate in England and Wales consists of movables, and where it includes immovables.
PRELIMINARY VIEW
8.21 A number of factors support the adoption of a uniform rule based on the English rule:
the convenience, as a general rule, of having the whole administration carried on by the same person irrespective of where the estate
is situated;
the unanimous support of the Probate Registrars for such a rule;
the fact that the Australian Law Reform Commission has also concluded that, in matters of succession, it is undesirable to have different
rules for succession to movables and immovables, and recommended that a single rule should be adopted referring all questions of
succession to the law of the deceased’s last domicile.
8.22 A uniform rule should, therefore, be adopted to specify the persons to whom a grant may be made where the deceased has died
domiciled outside the State or Territory in which the grant is sought. The rule should be based on the English provisions,
rather than on the South Australian rule (which applies only to cases where the deceased died domiciled outside Australia).
8.23 This is contrary to the recommendation of the WALRC which concluded that no change was desirable in the existing law.
What provision, if any, should be made as to the law governing the person to whom a grant or reseal should be made?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. See E I Sykes and M C Pryles,
Australian Private International Law
(3rd ed, 1991) at 735.
Lewis v Balshaw
[1935] HCA 80
(1935) 54 CLR 188.
Lewis v Balshaw
[1935] HCA 80
(1935) 54 CLR 188
at 193 (Rich, Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
In the Goods of Whitelegg
[1899] P 267.
In the Goods of Meatyard
[1903] P 125.
Lewis v Balshaw
[1935] HCA 80
(1935) 54 CLR 188
at 195 (Rich, Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ). See also
Zerefos v Panagos
(NSW, Supreme Court, No PD 11 of 1979, Waddell J, 4 December 1985, unreported).
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 40.01.
Non-Contentious Probate Rules 1954
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 40.01.
Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 40.01 proviso (2).
Lewis v Balshaw
[1935] HCA 80
(1935) 54 CLR 188.
. A V Dicey,
Dicey and Morris on the Conflict of Laws
(13th ed, 2000) vol 2 at 1010-1011; and G C Cheshire,
Cheshire and North’s Private International Law
(13th ed, 1999) at 978.
Re O’Driscoll
[1952] NZLR 890
at 891. See also
Re the Will of Ronaldson
(1891) 10 NZLR 228.
[1924] VicLawRp 37
[1924] VLR 237.
Non-Contentious Probate Rules 1987
(UK) r 39(3).
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 19, 21, 22.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
Choice of Law
(Report 58, 1992) at para 9.7-9.9. It also recommended that the rule should apply to both interstate and international issues.
Non-Contentious Probate Rules 1987
(1984) at para 9.41 and recommendation 34.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
9. Resealing where original grant not made in domicile
History of this Reference (Digest)
Movable property
Immovable property
Restrictions on resealing
Preliminary view
9.1 This chapter considers the law that applies where an application is made for the resealing of an original grant that has not
been made in the jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled.
MOVABLE PROPERTY
9.2 Where the estate in the resealing jurisdiction consists entirely of movables, the resealing court of an Australian jurisdiction,
other than Tasmania, will still endeavour to follow the grant that would have been made in the domicile even though the grant was
not made in the jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled.
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY
9.3 In a case where the estate in the resealing jurisdiction consists of or includes immovables, Australian courts do not follow the
grant made in the deceased’s domicile, but decide for themselves whether or not to reseal the grant.
RESTRICTIONS ON RESEALING
9.4 The probate rules in Tasmania provide for a special restriction on resealing if the deceased did not die domiciled within the
the seal shall not be affixed unless the grant is such as would have been made by the Supreme Court of this State.
Where the estate in the resealing jurisdiction consists entirely of movables, the adoption of such a rule by the other Australian
South Australia
9.5 The probate rules in South Australia, unlike the Tasmanian rule, do not expressly restrict resealing to those cases where the
grant is one that would have been made by the Supreme Court of South Australia:
If the deceased was not at the date of death domiciled within the jurisdiction of the Court from which the grant issued, the seal
shall not be affixed except by order of the Registrar.
Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill
9.6 Clause 5(3) of the Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill is expressed to apply in the same circumstances as the Tasmanian
rule, namely, where an application is made for the resealing of a grant that has issued from the court of a jurisdiction in which
the deceased did not die domiciled. However, whereas the Tasmanian rule permits the resealing of the grant only where it is one that
“would have been made” by the Supreme Court of Tasmania, clause 5(3) of the Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill
provides that the grant can not be resealed unless the grant is one that the resealing court “would have had jurisdiction to
9.7 Although clause 5(3) is not as restrictive in its operation as the Tasmanian rule, its adoption in other Australian jurisdictions
still has the potential to limit the range of grants that can be resealed.
PRELIMINARY VIEW
9.8 The Tasmanian provision should not be adopted in the model legislation.
The South Australian provision is preferred.
It does not expressly preclude the recognition of particular foreign grants, but simply adds an extra mechanism for ensuring that
proper consideration is given to the matter. However, it is debatable whether such a provision is necessary, since the court has
an overriding discretion not to reseal a grant.
What provision, if any, should be made where an application is made for the resealing of an original grant that has not been made
in the jurisdiction in which the deceased died domiciled?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Lewis v Balshaw
[1935] HCA 80
(1935) 54 CLR 188.
Probate Rules 1936
(Tas) r 50.
The Probate Rules 1998
(SA) r 50.06.
WALRC Report
(1984) at para 9.51, 9.52 and recommendation 36.
Report of the Conference of Probate Registrars
(1990) at 23.
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
Appendix A - Commonwealth Secretariat draft model bill
History of this Reference (Digest)
GRANTS OF ADMINISTRATION (RESEALING) ACT, 198-
[Revised 1 February, 1980]
An Act to make new provision for the resealing in ________ of probates and letters of administration and instruments having similar
effect granted outside ________; to repeal the [Probates (Resealing) Act] and for matters incidental thereto.
Short title
1. This Act may be cited as Probates and Letters of Administration (Resealing) Act, 198-.
Interpretation
2.(1) For the purpose of this Act, the expression -
includes any competent authority, by whatever name it is designated, having jurisdiction to make a grant of administration;
“grant of administration”
means a probate or letters of administration or any instrument having, within the jurisdiction where it was made, the effect of appointing
or authorising a person (in this Act referred to as “the grantee”) to collect and administer any part of the estate of
a deceased person and otherwise having in that jurisdiction an effect equivalent to that given, under the law of ________, to a probate
or letters of administration;
“personal representative”
means the executor, original or by representation, or administrator for the time being, of a deceased person and includes any public
official or any corporation named in the probate or letters of administration as executor or administrator as the case may be;
“Registrar”
means the Registrar of the Supreme Court;]
means reseal with the seal of the Supreme Court.
(2) Any references in this Act to the making of a grant of administration shall include any process of issuing by or filing with
a court by which an instrument is given an effect equivalent to that of a grant of probate or of letters of administration.
(3) This Act shall apply in relation to grants of administration granted before or after the passing of this Act.
Applications for resealing
3.(1) Where a grant of probate or letters of administration of the estate of any deceased person has been made by a court in any part
of the Commonwealth or in any other country, an application may be made under this section for the resealing of the grant of administration.
(2) An application under this section shall be made to the Registrar and may be made by -
(a) a personal representative or the grantee, as the case may be; or
(b) a person authorised by power of attorney given by any such personal representative or grantee; or
(c) a legal practitioner registered in ________ acting on behalf of any such personal representative or grantee or of a person referred
to in paragraph (b).
(3) Not less than twenty-one days before making an application under this section, the person intending to make it shall cause to
be published in a newspaper or newspapers circulating in ________ and approved for the purpose of this section by the Registrar an
advertisement which -
(a) gives notice that the person named in the advertisement intends to make an application under this section;
(b) states the name and the last address of the deceased person;
(c) requires any person wishing to oppose the resealing of the probate or letters of administration to lodge a caveat with the Registrar
by a date specified in the advertisement which shall be a date not less than twenty-one days after the date of the publication of
the advertisement.
(4) An applicant under this section shall produce to the Registrar -
(a) the grant of administration or an exemplification thereof or a duplicate thereof sealed with the seal of the court by which the
grant was made or a copy of any of the foregoing certified as a correct copy by or under the authority of that court;
(b) where the document produced under paragraph (a) does not include a copy of the will, a copy of the will, verified by or under
the authority of that court;
(c) an affidavit stating that an advertisement has been duly published pursuant to subsection (3);
(d) where the applicant is a person referred to in subsection (2)(b), the power of attorney authorising him to make the application
and an affidavit stating that the power has not been revoked;
(e) [an Inland Revenue certificate affidavit] as if the application were one for the making of a grant of administration by the Supreme
(f) such evidence, if any, as the Registrar thinks fit as to the domicile of the deceased person,
and shall deposit with the Registrar a copy of the grant of administration.
4.(1) Any person who wishes to oppose the resealing of a grant of administration shall, by the date specified in the advertisement
published pursuant to section 3(3), lodge a caveat against the sealing.
(2) A caveat under subsection (1) shall have the same effect and shall be dealt with in the same manner as if it were a caveat against
the making of a grant of probate or letters of administration by the Supreme Court.
(3) The Registrar shall not, without an order of the Supreme Court, proceed with an application under section 3 if a caveat has been
lodged under this section.
Resealing of grants of administration
5.(1) Subject to this section, where an application has been duly made under section 3 and the date specified in the advertisement
published pursuant to section 3(3) has passed and no caveat has been lodged under section 4 or any caveat so lodged has not been
sustained, the Registrar may, if he is satisfied that -
(a) such estate duties, if any, have been paid as would have been payable if the grant of administration had been made by the Supreme
(b) security has been given in a sum sufficient in amount to cover the property in ________ to which the grant of administration relates
and in relation to which the deceased died intestate,
cause the grant of administration to be resealed.
(2) It is not necessary for security to be given under subsection (1)(b) in the case of a grant of administration which was made
to any public official outside ________.
(3) Where it appears that a deceased person was not, at the time of his death, domiciled within the jurisdiction of the court by which
the grant was made, probate or letters of administration in respect of his estate may not be resealed, unless the grant is such as
the Supreme Court would have had jurisdiction to make.
(4) The Registrar may, if he thinks fit, on the application of any creditor require, before resealing, that adequate security be given
for the payment of debts or claims due from the estate to creditors residing in ________.
(5) The Registrar -
(a) may, if he thinks fit, at any time before resealing refer an application under section 3 to the Supreme Court; and
(b) shall make such a reference if so requested in writing by the applicant at any time before resealing or within twenty-one days
after he has refused to reseal,
and where an application is so referred, the grant of administration may not be resealed except in accordance with an order of the
Supreme Court.
Effects of resealing
6.(1) A grant of administration resealed under section 5(1) shall have like force and effect and the same operation in ________, and
such part of his estate as is in ________ shall be subject to the same liabilities and obligations, as if the probate or letters
of administration had been granted by the Supreme Court.
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1), the personal representative or grantee, where the application is made by him or is made under
section 3(2)(c) on his behalf or the person duly authorised under section 3(2)(b), where the application is made by him or is made
under section 3(2)(c) on his behalf, shall, after the resealing, be deemed to be, for all purposes, the personal representative of
the deceased person in respect of such of his estate as is in ________, and, subject to section 7, shall perform the same duties
and be subject to the same liabilities as if he was personal representative under a probate or letters of administration granted
by the Supreme Court.
Duties of person authorised by personal representative, etc
7.(1) A person duly authorised under section 3(2)(b) who is deemed to be a personal representative by virtue of section 6(2) shall,
after satisfying or providing for the debts or claims due from the estate of all persons residing in ________ or of whose debts or
claims he has had notice, pay over or transfer the balance of the estate in ________ to the personal representative named in the
grant or the grantee, as the case may be or as such personal representative or grantee may, by power of attorney, direct.
(2) Any such person referred to in subsection (1) shall duly account to the personal representative or grantee, as the case may be,
for his administration of the estate in ________.
Rules of court
8. Rules of court may be made for regulating the practice and procedure, including fees and costs, on or incidental to an application
under this Act for resealing a grant of administration.
9. The [Probates (Resealing) Act] is hereby repealed.
Commencement
10. This Act shall come into force on such date as the [Head of State] shall, by order, designate.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
Table of legislation
History of this Reference (Digest)
Commonwealth
Corporations Act 2001
Domicile Act 1982
Estate Duty Assessment Amendment Act 1978
Life Insurance Act 1995
New South Wales
Domicile Act 1979
Imperial Acts Application Act 1969
Public Trustee Act 1913
Public Trustee Regulation 2001
Rules of the Supreme Court 1970
Stamp Duties (Amendment) Act 1991
Stamp Duties (Further Amendment) Act 1980
Supreme Court Regulation 2000
Schedule 1, Item 1(3)
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Trustee Companies Act 1964
Probate and Administration Act 1898
5.34, 5.38, 5.63
5.4, 5.34, 5.57, 5.63, 5.66, 5.77,
2.6, 5.74, 5.76, 5.77, 5.100
British Probates Act 1898
2.6, 5.34, 5.57, 5.63, 5.66, 5.74
Domicile Act 1981
Public Trustee Act 1978
Statute Law Revision Act 1995
Succession Act 1981
Succession and Gift Duties Abolition Act 1976
Trustee Companies Act 1968
Uniform Civil Procedure (Fees) Regulation 1999
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
r 601(1)(a)
5.32, 5.57, 5.58, 5.60
South Australia
Administration and Probate Act 1919
233">2.6, 5.34, 5.57, 5.63, 5.66, 5.74, 5.76, 5.77,
233">2.6, 5.41, 5.63,
5.100, 5.101
Domicile Act 1980
Probate Rules 1998
r 8.01-8.03
r 52.02-52.13
Public Trustee Act 1995
Succession Duties Act 1929
Succession Duties Act
Amendment Act 1979
Supreme Court (Probate Fees) Regulations 1999
Trustee Companies Act 1988
Administration and Probate Act 1935
175">5.4, 5.29, 5.55, 5.63, 7.4
175">2.6, 5.34, 5.57, 5.66, 5.74, 5.76
175">2.6, 5.93
175">2.6, 5.93
175">2.6, 5.80
Deceased Persons’ Estates Duties Amendment Act 1982
Domicile Act 1980
Fees Units Act 1997
Probate Rules 1936
Public Trustee Act 1930
Supreme Court Civil Procedure Act 1932
Trustee Companies Act 1953
Administration and Probate Act 1958
161">2.6, 5.42, 5.63
161">5.4, 5.42, 5.55, 5.63, 6.1,
161">2.6, 5.34, 5.57, 5.66, 5.74
161">2.6, 5.86
161">2.6, 5.90
161">2.6, 5.93
161">2.6, 5.80
161">2.6, 5.83
161">2.6, 6.1
Administration and Probate Rules 1994
Domicile Act 1978
Probate Duty (Amendment) Act 1983
State Taxation Acts (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 2000
Supreme Court (Fees) Regulations 2001
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 1996
Trustee Companies Act 1984
Western Australia
Administration Act 1903
5.34, 5.38, 5.63
195">5.4, 5.34, 5.57, 5.63, 5.66, 5.77,
195">2.6, 5.74, 5.76, 5.77, 5.100
195">2.6, 5.93
Death Duty Assessment Act Amendment Act 1978
Domicile Act 1981
Non-contentious Probate Rules 1967
Public Trustee Act 1941
s 10(1)(ab)
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
Statutes (Repeals and Minor Amendments) Act 1997
Supreme Court (Fees) Regulations 2002
Trustee Companies Act 1987
Australian Capital Territory
Administration and Probate Act 1929
5.34, 5.38, 5.63
203">5.4, 5.34, 5.47, 5.57, 5.63, 5.66,
5.76, 5.100
203">2.6, 5.86
Imperial Acts (Substituted Provisions) Act 1986
Supreme Court Act 1933
Supreme Court Rules
O 72 r 19(a)(i)
Trustee Companies Act 1947
Northern Territory
Administration and Probate Act
5.34, 5.63,
185">5.4, 5.34, 5.47, 5.57, 5.63, 5.66,
s 111(1)(c)
s 111(3)(a)
s 111(4)(a)
s 111(4)(b)
5.76, 5.100
185">2.6, 5.86
Companies (Trustees and Personal Representatives) Act
Domicile Act
Public Trustee Act
Public Trustee Regulations
Succession Duties Repeal Ordinance 1978
Supreme Court Regulations
Supreme Court Rules
r 88.26(1)(b)(iv)
r 88.89(1)(a)
New Zealand
Administration Act 1969
United Kingdom
1351-52, 25 Edw 3 st 5 c 5
Administration of Estates Act 1971
Colonial Probates Act 1892
Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1973
Non-Contentious Probate Rules 1954
Non-Contentious Probate Rules 1987
Supreme Court Act 1981
United States of America
Uniform Probate Code
International Instruments
Hague Convention Concerning the International Administration of the Estates of Deceased Persons
Article 13-17
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
Table of cases
History of this Reference (Digest)
Arnot v Chapman (1884)
Banque Internationale de Commerce de Petrograd v Goukassow (1923)
Bell, Re (1929)
Benn, Re (1905)
Blackwood v The Queen (1882)
Boyd v Leslie (1964)
Buckley, In the Will of (1889)
Carlton, Re (1924)
Cash v The Nominal Defendant (1969)
Degazon v Barclays Bank International Ltd (1988)
Electronic Industries Imports Pty Ltd v Public Curator of the State of QLD (1960)
Finn, In the Will of (1908)
Fitzpatrick, Re (1952)
Galletly, Re (1900)
Hall, Re (1930)
Lewis v Balshaw (1935)
8.5, 8.6, 8.9, 8.14, 9.3
Meatyard, In the Goods of (1903)
New York Breweries Company, Limited v The Attorney-General (1899)
O’Driscoll, Re (1952)
Pedersen v Young (1964)
Permezel v Hollingworth (1905)
Puttick v Attorney-General (1980)
Ricketson, Re (1917)
Rofe, In the Will of (1904)
Ronaldson, Re the Will of (1891)
Sutherland, Re (1936)
Thornley, In the Will of (1903)
Vivian, In the Will of (1901)
Watmough, Re (1913)
Webb, Re the Estate of (1991)
Welch, Re (1894)
Whitelegg, In the Goods of (1899)
Whyte v Rose (1842)
Wimalaratna v Ellies (1984)
Zerefos v Panagos (1985)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 21 (2002) - Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of interstate and foreign grants of probate and letters of administration
Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Choice of Law
(Report 58, 1992)
CHESHIRE, G C,
Cheshire and North’s Private International Law
(13th ed, 1999)
COMMONWEALTH SECRETARIAT,
Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments and Orders and the Service of Process within the Commonwealth: A Report of a Working Meeting
held at Basseterre, St Kitts, 24-28 April 1978
CRAGO, N, “Executors of Unproved Wills: Status and Devolution of Title in Australia” (1993) 23
University of Western Australia Law Review
CRETNEY, S, “Administration of Estates Act 1971”
Solicitors Journal
DICEY, A V,
Dicey and Morris on the Conflict of Laws
(13th ed, 2000)
GEDDES, R S, ROWLAND, C J and STUDDERT, P,
Wills, Probate and Administration Law in New South Wales
HASTINGS, R and WEIR, G
Probate Law and Practice
(2nd ed, 1948)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Succession Laws: Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(Discussion Paper 42, 1999)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Succession Laws: Family Provision
(Issues Paper 11, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Issues Paper 10, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Report 85, 1998)
Conflict of Laws in Australia
(6th ed, 1995)
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(Discussion Paper MP 37, 1999)
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General on Family Provision
(Miscellaneous Paper 28, 1997)
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Letters of Administration
(Discussion Paper WP 55, 2001)
STEIN, R A, “Probate Reformation: The Impact of the Uniform Laws” (1997) 23
The Probate Lawyer
SYKES, E I and PRYLES, M C,
Australian Private International Law
(3rd ed, 1991)
TRISTRAM, T H,
Tristram and Coote’s Probate Practice
(28th ed, 1995)
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Report on Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Administration
(Project 34 Part 4, 1984)
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Working Paper on Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Letters of Administration
(Project 34 Part 4, 1980)
WILLIAMS, W J,
Williams on Wills
(7th ed, 1995)
Wills Probate and Administration Service New South Wales
(Butterworths)
WOOD, O and HUTLEY, N C,
Hutley, Woodman and Wood: Cases and Materials on Succession
(3rd ed, 1984)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter