URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDRP/1997/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:32:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
A Matter of Priority Children and the Legal Process [1997] ALRCDRP 3
Draft Recommendations Paper
A matter of priority
Children and the legal process
Your comments and submissions on the draft recommendations in this Draft Recommendations Paper are welcome.
Terms of reference
Abbreviations
1. Key definitions, principles and assumptions
2. Legal processes in education
3. Children as consumers
4. Federal government services
5. Children's evidence
6. Jurisdictional arrangements in family law and care and protection
7. Legal representation and the litigation status of children
8. Children's involvement in family law proceedings
9. Children's involvement in the care and protection system
10. Children's involvement in criminal processes
11. Sentencing and detention
12. Advocacy, accountability and co-ordination
Participants
Written submissions
Background to this Paper
On 28 August 1995, the then federal Attorney-General, the Honourable
Michael Lavarch MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission
and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) to
inquire jointly into children and the legal proc
Our terms of reference are reproduced in this Paper.
The ALRC is a federal statutory authority that examines, by referral
from the Attorney-General, legal issues requiring reform. It
appropriate recommendations to the Attorney-General and the Parliament.
HREOC is an independent federal body with a variety
of investigative
powers to promote and protect the human rights of all people in
Australia. HREOC can examine alleged infringements
of human rights and
make recommendations to remedy those infringements.
Throughout this paper, the ALRC and HREOC will be referred to collectively as the Commissions.
In March 1996, the Commissions released two issues papers entitled
Speaking for ourselves: Children and the legal process
The first of these, Issues Paper 17, was a brief document aimed
specifically at young people. The second, Issues Paper 18 (IP
a more comprehensive overview of the issues. The Commissions have
received 226 written submissions from individuals, organisations
government departments on the questions raised in our Issues Papers.
These are listed at appendix B.
Over the past 12 months the Commissions have conducted extensive
consultations including public hearings in all capital cities and
number of regional centres at which we received over 170 oral
submissions. We also held legal practitioners' forums and young
people's focus groups in each jurisdiction, targeted meetings and a
meeting of our honorary consultants who are listed at appendix
have received 843 responses to a survey distributed to public,
independent and Catholic schools and detention c
entres throughout
Purpose of this Paper
The primary purpose of this draft recommendations paper (DRP) is to
indicate the current directions of the Inquiry in terms of priorities
and proposals for reform.
The DRP is based on detailed and continuing research and analysis
and on the evidence received during our national consultations.
material will be presented in detail in the final report that is now
due to be presented to the Attorney-General by 3
0 September
The DRP is deliberately brief, giving an introduction to each
subject, outlining the key issues and arguments and then listing the
relevant recommendations. The reason for this approach relates to the
breadth of the subject matter covered by the terms of reference.
provide a more detailed analysis of the issues at this stage would
require a lengthy document that would not be easily digestible
many individuals and organisations who have an interest in children and
the legal process in the shor
t time available
for comment.
ALRC reference:
0 642 27111 9
How to make comments and submissions
You are invited to make comments and submissions on the draft recommendations in this Paper.
Written comments and submissions should be sent to
The Secretary
Australian Law Reform Commission
Level 10, 133 Castlereagh St
SYDNEY NSW 2000
(GPO Box 3708 SYDNEY NSW 2001)
Phone: 02–9284–6333
TTY: 02–9284–6379
Fax: 02–9284–6363
ALRC homepage: http://www.alrc.gov.au/
Closing date:
30 June 1997
It would be helpful if comments addressed specific draft recommendations or paragraphs in the Paper.
Confidentiality
Unless a submission is marked confidential, it will be made available to any person or organisation on request.
If you want your submission, or any part of it, to be treated as
confidential, please indicate this clearly. A request for a submission
marked 'confidential' will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
The Commission will include in its final report on this project a
list of submissions received in response to this Paper. It may
refer to those submissions in the text of the report and other
Commission publications. It may decide to publish them. If
want your submission or any part of it to be used in any one of these
ways please indicate this clearly.
© Commonwealth of Australia 1997
This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part for
ALRC public consultations, study or training purposes subject
inclusion of an acknowledgment of the source and no commercial usage or
sale. Reproduction for purposes other than those
indicated above,
require the written permission of the Australian Government Publishing
Service. Requests and inquiries concerning
reproduction and rights
should be addressed to the Manager, Commonwealth Information Services,
Australian Government Publishing
Service, GPO Box 84, Canberra ACT 2601.
Terms of reference
INQUIRY INTO CHILDREN AND THE LEGAL PROCESS
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
I, MICHAEL HUGH LAVARCH, Attorney-General of Australia, in pursuance of
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
and sub-section 11(1) of the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
, HEREBY REFER to the Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission for inquiry and report, matters relating
to children and young people and the legal process.
In particular the Commissions are to inquire into and report on:
(i) legal advice and access for children and young people and their legal representation before courts and tribunals in the exercise
of federal jurisdiction;
(ii)the appropriateness of procedures for pre-trial investigation and taking of evidence from children and young people;
(iii)the appropriateness of rules of evidence for, and procedures for taking evidence in courts and tribunals from children and young
(iv)the question of the desirability of children giving evidence in family law and associated proceedings and the appropriate safeguards
in such circumstances;
(v) sentencing of children and young people for federal offences;
(vi)the treatment of children and young people convicted of federal offences;
(vii)advocacy of the interests of children and young people before courts and tribunals;
(viii)the appropriateness and effectiveness of the legal process in protecting children and young people as consumers;
(ix)the particular needs in these and related areas of children and young people for whom the Commonwealth has a special responsibility;
(x) any related matters of particular relevance to Australia's remote communities.
The Commissions may recommend legislative and non-legislative measures that should be taken to address any issues arising from their
IN PERFORMING their functions in relation to the Reference, the Commissions shall:
(i) have regard to the Commonwealth's special responsibilities for children arising under the
Constitution
and Australia's international human rights obligations, particularly under the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
(ii)consult widely among the Australian community and relevant bodies including organisations with an interest in children and young
people, community legal centres, legal aid commissions, consumer organisations, and courts and tribunals;
(iii)consult relevant Federal, State and Territory government authorities;
(iv)in recognition of work already undertaken, have regard to all relevant reports, including relevant ALRC reports, Family Law Council
Reports and Reports of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission;
(v) have regard to relevant law, practice and experience overseas.
THE COMMISSIONS ARE REQUIRED to report not later than 30 June 1997.
Dated 28th August 1995
MICHAEL LAVARCH
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
Abbreviations
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Australian Broadcasting Authority
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Australian Federal Police
Australian Government Publishing Service
Australian Institute of Judicial Administration
Australian Law Reform Commission
Administrative Review Council
Administrative Review Tribunal
Beijing Rules
UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice
Crisis Accommodation Program
children's courts
State and Territory children's courts and youth courts
Closed Circuit Television
Council of Australian Governments
Crimes Act 1914
UN Convention on the Rights of the Child
Department of Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs
Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
Director of Public Prosecutions
Department of Social Security
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Act
Family Law Act 1975
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Immigration Review Tribunal
magistrates' courts
State and Territory courts of summary jurisdiction
Ministerial Council on Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs
National Crime Authority
Office for Children
Office of Film and Literature Classification
Refugee Review Tribunal
Supported Accommodation Assistance Program
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General
Social Security Appeals Tribunal
Trade Practices Act 1974
Victim Impact Statement
Youth Training Allowance
1. Key definitions, principles and assumptions
Introduction
The context of childhood
Children's contact with legal processes
Introduction
Income support and employment
Care and protection
Juvenile justice
Courts and tribunals
Children's participation in legal processes
The Commonwealth's role
Current initiatives and responsibilities
Problems of structure, service delivery and co-ordination
A role for the future
Introduction
This chapter outlines the major conclusions reached by the Commissions on the extensive evidence presented to the Inquiry to date,
and provides an overview of the key definitions, principles and assumptions on which those conclusions are based. These conclusions
are central to our approach in this Paper. In the final report we will provide the documentary evidence and full, detailed arguments
for these conclusions.
In the course of the Inquiry, the Commissions have received extensive evidence documenting the problems and failures of legal processes
for children. Of particular concern to the Commissions is evidence of
failures by all entities of the legal process to accommodate changing notions of children's evolving maturity, responsibilities and
intellectual independence and, in particular, a consistent failure to consult with and listen to children in matters that affect
the marginalisation of children involved in legal processes, whether by teachers, social workers, lawyers or judges, when decisions
that are of significant concern to children are being made
a lack of co-ordination in the delivery of, and serious deficiencies in, much needed services to children, particularly to those
who are already vulnerable
the systems abuse of children involved in legal processes, particularly the appalling state of care and protection systems throughout
Australia and the subjection of children involved in various legal processes to multiple interviews and examinations by often well-meaning
professionals
the increasingly punitive approach to children in a number of juvenile justice systems
the discriminatory impact of legal processes which results in the over-representation of some groups, particularly Indigenous children,
in the juvenile justice and care and protection systems
the concentration of specialist services and programs in metropolitan areas, disadvantaging rural and remote children in their access
to services, legal processes and advocacy
inconsistencies in legislation dealing with legal capacities and liabilities of children.
The rectification of these failures in legal processes cannot be left to particular, often idiosyncratic, arrangements at local,
State or Territory levels. Just as the decision to make 18 the age of legal and political maturity for children was a nationally
co-ordinated decision, there is a continuing national responsibility to co-ordinate arrangements for and ensure consistent treatment
of children in legal processes.
The context of childhood
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CROC) defines a child as a person under the age of 18. The term 'young people' is often used in relation to people between the ages
of 13 and 25. The Commissions have adopted CROC's definition of child for the purposes of this Inquiry and propose, for the sake
of clarity, to use the term 'child' throughout this Paper unless it is clear that only those above the age of 13 are being considered.
Childhood refers not only to the period during which a person is under the age of 18; it also refers to the place and condition of
children in society and encompasses notions of how society views a child's maturation and development and responds to age differences.
In contemporary western societies childhood is often seen as a time of innocence, during which children are in need of protection
and not fully responsible or self-reliant. This representation of childhood has produced laws that make parents responsible for caring
for and protecting their children and allows the state to intervene in families when children are being neglected or abused. Western
societies can also view children as 'demons', in need of firm, often coercive control. This image has justified corporal punishment
of children and, increasingly, laws that control or prevent children from gathering in places where it is considered they may be
susceptible to adverse influences.
These views of childhood are reflected in a variety of legislation and practices affecting children. The Commissions have sought,
where appropriate, to question these underlying assumptions in examining and making recommendations concerning legislation and legal
In particular, the Commissions' approach to childhood is that it is a process by which children prepare for adulthood. As their developmental
levels and capacities change, children become more independent and secure associated interests, rights and responsibilities. The
ramifications of this approach for children's involvement in legal processes include the right of children capable of articulating
their own views to express them freely, and to have those views given due weight in accordance with their age, maturity and intellectual
independence.
Children's contact with legal processes
Introduction
For the purposes of this Inquiry, legal processes are interpreted broadly to include administrative processes, interaction with law
enforcement and regulatory agencies, and court processes. All children have some contact with legal processes through their experiences
as school students, consumers or employees. However, some children have direct, often frequent, contact with legal processes, and
a smaller number of children are at risk of serious consequences from the often adverse outcomes of this contact.
The numbers of children directly involved in the formal legal process are small when compared with the nearly 5 million children
in Australia.
It is the Commissions' view that, given the small numbers of children directly involved in formal legal processes, it should be possible
to assist and protect such children without creating financial burdens on the Commonwealth, States or Territories.
Although the total number of children involved in legal processes is impossible to quantify, the following provides an indication
of the number of children in contact with legal processes and those at risk of adverse outcomes from such contact.
Most children in Australia have extensive contact with the formal education system, where they have their first exposure to information
of protection from abuse or neglect, as well as those disposed to offending behaviour. As a forum where decisions are made to discipline
and exclude children from the school or the education system, it also forms part of legal processes. There are few formal protections
for the children involved in such processes, although disciplinary decisions can and do have far reaching significance. Many children
in the juvenile justice system, for example, have had poor experiences with the education system, whether through poor academic performance,
persistent truancy or a significant number of exclusions and suspensions.
3 109 337 children were attending Australian primary and secondary schools full-time as at July 1995.
In 1995, nearly 30 000 students were suspended from schools in NSW alone, a 16% increase over the figures for 1994, which in turn
were 50% higher than those for 1993.
In 1994 there were 1 137 suspensions in Tasmania, 1 630 suspensions in term 3 alone in Western Australia and between 200 and 1 000
suspensions each month in Queensland.
According to the 1991 Census, 15% of all young people aged 12 to 25 had left school before the age of 15. One third of all Indigenous
young people in the same age group had left school before the age of 15.
In one NSW study on children serving control orders in detention facilities, 82.2% of the young people had left school before being
incarcerated. Of those who had left school and were at least 15 at the time of their arrest for the offence for which they were serving
the control order, 33.3% had left school before they had turned 15. Over half of all respondents stated that they had truanted from
school on average at least one week out of every school month, 79.3% said that they had been suspended or excluded from school at
least once in their lives and 30.1% said that they had been suspended or excluded from school at least five times.
Income support and employment
Many children have some involvement with the legal process through their employment. Other young people have contact with legal processes
when they require income support. The legal and bureaucratic processes involved in the provision of benefits for young people are
excessively complicated and often bewildering and intimidating for young people. Contact with these processes can sometimes result
in the delay or denial of benefits to vulnerable young people who are entirely dependent on such services.
In 1995, 59% of 15–19 year olds were in some kind of employment. 47% of these employed young people were in part-time employment.
These numbers reflect the fact that many teenagers attend school full-time and either do not work or work part-time while attending
The full-time unemployment rate for young people aged 15 to 19 grew to 28.1% in 1995–96, a rate equivalent to 7.2% of the teenage
population.
In June 1996, approximately 34 200 young people were receiving Youth Training Allowance (YTA), the benefit for unemployed young people
under the age of 18.
Other income support schemes for young people include Austudy and Abstudy. In 1995–96, the Austudy program assisted 204 900
secondary school students.
In 1994–95, 26 283 primary and secondary school students benefitted from Abstudy.
These benefits were generally paid to parents on behalf of students although some independent young people receive Austudy and Abstudy
Care and protection
Children in care and protection systems are among the most vulnerable children in Australia, having suffered physical, emotional
and psychological harm or neglect at the hands of their families. Their involvement with the legal and administrative processes that
make up care and protection systems often exposes them to further, and sometimes greater, harms. The evidence presented to the Commissions
consistently deplored the significant failures of the care and protection systems to provide for and address the needs of the children
for whom they are directly responsible, with many such children experiencing multiple placements, having limited education or drifting
into the juvenile justice system.
In 1995–96, approximately 91 800 cases of child abuse or neglect were reported to State and Territory welfare departments. Around
29 800 cases, or 32% of all notifications, were substantiated.
Only a small portion of children in substantiated cases are made the subjects of care and protection orders from children's courts:
4 000 children were placed under new orders in Australia in 1995–96. There were 12 300 children under care and protection orders
in Australia as at 30 June 1996.
Most children in formal substitute care are the subjects of court orders. As at 30 June 1996, there were approximately 14 000 children
in formal substitute care placements. In 1995–96, more than 20 000 children experienced at least one substitute care placement.
Indigenous children made up 19% of those children in formal substitute care placements despite constituting only about 3 % of the
child population.
Studies of young people in care and leaving care show serious disadvantage attached to being in care, including increased contact
with the juvenile justice system, lower educational outcomes and high rates of homelessness.
Children who have been made wards of the state in NSW are 15 times more likely to enter a juvenile justice centre than the rest of
the juvenile population.
In Victoria, of the 1 297 children in care over 10 years of age at April 1995, 21% had been formally processed as offenders during
the preceding two years — a rate substantially higher than that for adolescents in the general community.
23.4% of young people discharged from wardship who were interviewed for one NSW study had left school before they completed Year 10.
35.6% had completed Year 12 and the Higher School Certificate prior to leaving wardship. By comparison, of young people who lived
at home and were interviewed for the study, only 5% had left school before Year 10 and 80% completed Year 12 and HSC.
23% of children given emergency accommodation at a particular welfare organisation in Victoria during April 1995 were identified as
children in care.
Children are involved with a number of Family Court cases. Their part may be an indirect one, with their views on residence and contact
with their parents disclosed through counsellors' reports, or their interests may be directly represented through the appointment
of a lawyer to act as a child's representative. The Commissions heard a good deal of criticism concerning the paternalistic approach
of the Court and lawyers representing children. Court processes focus on the parental contest. A more constructive arrangement would
be for children, particularly those children who have clear views as to their preferred residence and contact rights and who are
keen to express these, to have a voice in these proceedings.
From 7 January 1995 to 30 April, 1996, the Family Court ordered the appointment of 4 528 child representatives for children involved
in family matters before it.
In 1995–96, 18.6% of all Family Court orders sought guardianship/custody of children, 20.3% sought access orders and 1.1% sought
child support orders.
That same year, the Family Court counselling service prepared 1 190 court-ordered family reports in contested cases involving children.
The Family Court deals with many cases involving allegations of child abuse. In 1995–96, the Family Court counselling service
made 1 605 notifications of suspected child abuse to State and Territory welfare departments.
Juvenile justice
The juvenile justice system is the legal process that most directly involves and affects children. The system operates in a discriminatory
manner. Children from rural and remote areas have limited access to bail facilities and, if detained in custody, can have lengthy
separations from their families. Indigenous children are greatly over-represented within all aspects of the system, particularly
in detention facilities.
In 1995–96, 14 759 appearances before specialist children's courts and generalist magistrates' courts in NSW involved criminal
charges against children and young people.
Outcomes for these appearances included 1 018 control (detention) orders, 922 community service orders, 1 797 supervision orders,
2 764 unsupervised orders, 2 205 fines and 3 157 orders dismissing the matter after it was proven (sometimes with a caution).
Of the 456 children and young people in detention centres in NSW in 1995–96 (both on remand and on control orders), 127 were
Aboriginal, 117 were from non-English speaking backgrounds and 212 were from an English-speaking background.
In 1995–96, 6 694 juvenile defendants appeared before Queensland magistrates', children's, District and Supreme courts. 15 681
young offenders received cautions from police.
Recent studies have shown that the majority of young offenders do not re-appear in children's court after their first proven offence.
In addition, most young offenders have a relatively short period of involvement in crime. A small number of children who re-offend
account for a disproportionately large percentage of children's court appearances: in one NSW study 45.4% of appearances were accounted
for by only 15.4% of the children appearing.
Courts and tribunals
Children appear in courts not only as the accused but frequently as victims and witnesses in criminal and civil proceedings. Children
may also be involved in tribunals as applicants. Both of these legal processes were primarily designed by and for adults. Notwithstanding
modifications to rules of evidence and arrangements for some children who must give evidence at trial, generally court and tribunal
processes have not been appropriately adapted to allow the effective participation of child witnesses and parties.
During the period 1 February 1994 to 1 January 1997, 1 216 children gave evidence in criminal proceedings involving sexual assault
charges in Queensland.
From 1 January 1996 to 14 November 1996, 31 children gave oral evidence through Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) and 25 children
gave evidence using a screen in criminal proceedings in Western Australian District and Supreme Court trials and in preliminary hearings.
Another 8 children had their evidence in chief taken prior to trial.
In 1995–96, the Witness Assistance Service in the Victorian Office of Public Prosecutions assisted victim witnesses in approximately
73 matters involving child sexual assault.
In 1995–96, 103 appeals were lodged in the SSAT by young people regarding the YTA.
Only about 30 of these young people were represented in their appeals. Approximately 200 children were represented by parents in
relation to appeals involving Austudy.
Children's participation in legal processes
Most children are assisted in their dealings with legal processes by their parents. The Commissions' developmental approach to children
and legal processes is not meant to involve children in these processes to the exclusion of their parents and families. Parents can
be extremely effective advocates for their children, but in some cases, this support is lacking or insufficient. It is in these cases
that legal processes must be most sensitive to the needs of children.
As detailed above, some children have significant contact with legal processes, many without the support or assistance of their parents.
However, the fact that children have contact with legal processes is not to say that they are always able to participate in those
processes. One barrier to children's participation relates to their developmental capacity. The assumptions of a legal system designed
by and for adults present other important, and generally inappropriate, barriers to children's participation.
Traditionally, the law has used generalised assumptions about children's development to determine their capacity to participate in
legal processes. Psychological studies have allowed for a fuller, more sophisticated understanding of children's evolving capacity
to understand legal processes and make reasoned decisions. These studies are prompting a re-evaluation of legal rules regarding children's
legal capacity and focusing attention on the individual child rather than applying fixed rules regarding all children's capacity
to participate. This view of childhood is already reflected in aspects of Australian common law.
Article 12 of CROC embodies the developmental principle. It recognises that a child who is capable of forming a view has the right
to express that view in all matters affecting him or her, and to have that view taken into account and given due weight in accordance
with the age and maturity of the child. The Commissions have concluded that definitions of children's legal capacity should take
account of the stage of development of the particular child.
Even where a child has the developmental and legal capacities to participate in legal processes, appropriate participation can be
extremely difficult because the process itself is not designed to accommodate their participation.
Further, children rarely initiate legal proceedings. Rather, they are directly or indirectly thrust into legal processes by police,
welfare department officers, parents and school personnel.
Throughout this Inquiry, the Commissions have attempted to focus on the interaction of children with this adult system, to describe
the various systems and the problems of interaction and to address these issues through recommendations that focus on developmental
capacity (what children need to understand in order to deal with the legal process), legal capacity (how children should be engaged
appropriately within the legal process) and the adult system (how to ensure that the legal process itself does not add to the problem).
Legal issues affect all children, particularly through their interaction with legal processes as consumers and in the education system.
The issues identified by the Commissions in these areas are mainstream issues, applicable to all children. However, the issue of
participation has particular force for children who have extensive contact with legal and administrative systems, who depend on those
systems to protect and provide for them and who may be without family support to assist them in dealing with these legal processes.
This group of children includes those who are involved in care and protection systems, excluded from school, in receipt of income
support or housing assistance and in the juvenile justice system. For many, contact with legal processes is related to disadvantages
they already face due to family breakdown, socio-economic and educational disadvantages, systems abuse, psychiatric conditions or
drug and alcohol dependency. These children are a particular focus of this Paper.
Some of these children may have contact with the legal system that produces a satisfactory result and reduces the risk of any further
adverse contact with legal processes. For others, contact with one area of the legal process exacerbates the risk that they will
have further, and increasingly adverse, contact. Children in this last group have a significant need for assistance and the Commissions
consider that legal and administrative processes should aim to provide appropriate and effective support and assistance to them.
As discussed in the following chapters, we consider that the Commonwealth should ensure that all legal processes reach this goal.
The Commonwealth's role
Current initiatives and responsibilities
To a significant degree, the Commonwealth already funds research on, and promotes and develops national policy concerning children
and their families and provides services, programs and initiatives for them. While some of these funding responsibilities are in
exclusively 'federal' areas, many are in areas of State and Territory responsibility where the Commonwealth has taken a co-ordination
and oversight role. The following is a small sample of the many federal initiatives in funding programs that provide assistance to
children. These programs have some relationship to the legal processes addressed in this Paper, including some education and welfare
initiatives that affect children directly and others that provide assistance to their families.
Recognising the link between social and economic outcomes for adults and childhood education levels and outcomes and the need to
direct resources to vulnerable children, the Commonwealth supports and promotes education.
In its 1995–96 funding for schools, the federal government focused its spending on general assistance and targeted assistance.
General assistance included general recurrent grants of $2.513 billion, capital grants of $320 million and national priorities totalling
$44.2 million.
Targeted assistance includes the National Equity Program for Schools.
The Program funds access, equity, national priorities and incentives elements, with each element comprising a number of components.
Commonwealth funding for the various components during the 1995 program year totalled $295.5 million.
In 1995–96, the federal government spent $552 million on the Austudy program to benefit secondary school students.
In 1994–95, $44.8 million was spent on Abstudy for primary and secondary students.
Income support and social welfare.
The Commonwealth is also involved in the provision of funds and services to children and young people outside of their families,
particularly for homeless children or those independent young people who need income support in their own right.
In 1995–96, the total federal expenditure on YTA was $146.3 million.
Youth Policy and Support programs (including the Youth Training Initiative, Homeless and At Risk Youth Support and Youth Policy)
cost the Commonwealth an additional $23 million.
A large portion of the Crisis Accommodation Program (CAP) and the Supported Accommodation Assistance Program (SAAP), which are jointly
funded with the States and Territories to provide housing and support services for people who are or who are at risk of becoming
of federal funding under CAP and $72 955 000 of SAAP funding was for services directed at youth.
Care and protection.
Federally funded programs can impact on child protection and assist in providing support for children who would otherwise be involved
in care and protection systems. Many of these programs, however, are not specifically aimed at child protection.
Direct federal responsibility in child protection includes jointly funding and implementing with the States and Territories the National
Prevention Strategy for Child Abuse and Neglect. The federal aspects of the strategy were budgeted in 1994–95 at $12 million
over the following four years.
Other direct costs involve the Family Court of Australia, such as when it hears cases involving child abuse allegations.
Indirect federal spending on child protection includes the provision of family support services through the funding of housing assistance,
health care, community services and income support.
Child care and the Child Support Agency.
The child care program and the child support scheme involve significant expenditure by the federal government. Although children
can benefit from these programs, they are directed at working or custodial parents.
The Commonwealth supported 306 600 child care places in 1995–96, at a cost to the federal government of $980 million.
The main focus of the program is to promote work force participation, however child care centres eligible for Childcare Assistance
must also give priority to children at risk of abuse or neglect, children with disabilities, children of parents with more than one
child below school age and children of sole parents. Access is further prioritised within each of these categories, with preference
going to lower income, Indigenous, culturally and linguistically diverse and socially isolated families.
The objective of the Child Support Agency is to assist the payment of child support between the payer and the payee for the benefit
of children. Total outlays for this program were $114.8 million in 1995–96.
Through this agency, $387 156 200 was disbursed to custodial parents for the benefit of their children.
Although the prevention of child abuse or neglect is not a stated purpose of this program, child protection may be one of the effects
of its services for custodial parents.
The Commonwealth's role in protecting and promoting the interests and welfare of children is entirely consistent with the commitments
that Australia has made to its children at international law. Australia is committed to international instruments covering guardianship,
foster placement and adoption, child abduction, discrimination in education, minimum employment age and the employment of children
on night work. In addition, Australia is committed to a number of instruments concerning juvenile justice and related issues.
The most comprehensive statement of Australia's international commitments regarding children's interests is contained in CROC which
was ratified by Australia in January 1991. This Convention is broadly conceived, encompassing civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights for children. In addition it contains provisions regarding their care and protection and a recognition of children's
evolving claims to participate in legal and administrative processes.
Despite assertions in
Australia's Report under the Convention on the Rights of the Child
that Australia complies with CROC,
many Australian laws and legal processes fail to protect the rights and interests of children as articulated in the Convention. Further,
it is the Commissions' view that the services and assistance currently provided for children within legal processes are inadequate.
Despite the Commonwealth's involvement in children's matters, children's policy is not given adequate national focus or profile.
The draft recommendations in this paper seek to address some of the problems which lead to these failures.
Problems of structure, service delivery and co-ordination
Legislative responsibility for matters affecting children is divided between State and Territory governments and the federal government.
Services are delivered to children and families by a variety of government departments and agencies. Frequently, responsibility for
a particular service area is borne by a number of agencies at different levels of government. This complex system poses particular
problems for children who have significant levels of interaction with legal processes and whose well-being depends on the outcomes
of their contact.
The multiplicity of agencies means that these children may be unaware of or have difficulty accessing services or remedies available
to them. In addition, budget constraints and staff workloads often predispose agencies to wait and refrain from dealing with a child's
problem until a different agency is required to intervene. In many cases, jurisdictional limits mean that no single agency is able
to deal with the whole problem presented by one child.
Legal formalities required by administrative and court systems pose further difficulties. Form filling, questionnaires and documentary
arrangements are an integral part of these processes. In areas such as social security and immigration, these problems are compounded
by constantly changing terminology and eligibility requirements.
The interests of these children cannot be met by considering only those parts of their lives affected by federal laws and processes.
The federal/state jurisdictional division is itself part of the problem for children caught in the formal legal system. A solution
to these problems requires the Commonwealth to undertake a better focused, more effective role in oversight and assistance, in developing
best practice models relating to children in the legal process and in the active co-ordination of the delivery of services to children
in the legal process by States and Territories.
A role for the future
Many of the draft recommendations in this Paper require a national effort to develop solutions, although the implementation of many
solutions essentially remains a matter of State and Territory responsibility. The draft recommendations inevitably reflect the Commissions'
position in reporting to the federal Attorney-General and our assessment of what is appropriate for the Commonwealth to undertake
and achieve. However, the Commissions have concluded that the participation of children in legal processes is a national issue that
requires federal oversight and assistance in developing standards for and co-ordinating the delivery of services to children by all
levels of government. The principle beneficiaries of this Commonwealth intervention should be those children who have extensive dealings
with legal processes and who are dependant on legal and administrative services to protect and provide for them.
In particular, the Commissions propose to recommend in chapter 12 the establishment of a federal body within the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet called the Office for Children (OFC).
OFC would carry out a number of discrete functions, including
providing an annual report to Parliament on the status of children in Australia
monitoring international obligations, particularly CROC, and providing advice and information on the preparation of reports pursuant
to art 44 of CROC to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child
providing leadership and co-ordination in the preparation and implementation of national standards in areas of law recommended in
this Paper, in consultation with the States and Territories
monitoring new legislation, programs and initiatives for compliance with CROC, and national standards
encouraging federal departments to incorporate the principles of CROC in their practice
co-ordinating the development of models of best practice for dealing with child consumers of government services or programs, including
best practice guidelines for grievance and complaints handling procedures for young people
advising governments on the most effective use of funds appropriated by Parliament for expenditure in relation to children
providing advocacy of the interests of children from a national perspective
undertaking research in conjunction with federal, State and Territory agencies and the ABS on children's involvement in legal and
administrative processes and the effects of those processes on children
liaising with federal complaint handling bodies relevant to children, particularly HREOC and the Commonwealth Ombudsman
liaising with State and Territory children's advocacy and complaints bodies throughout Australia
providing reports on its own initiative to Ministers, Ministerial Councils, and Parliament, dealing with State or Territory matters
of concern for children
assisting in the development of a network of individual advocates for children by accrediting, training and providing information
to advocates
encouraging and facilitating public debate and community awareness on matters relating to children
consulting with relevant interest and community groups and with children and young people to determine the problems faced by them
and the most appropriate strategies for improving conditions for children.
The Commissions propose that the OFC would work within a network of ground level advocates for children and State and Territory agencies.
In chapter 12 we recommend the development of separate State and Territory based agencies with advocacy and complaints handling roles.
The draft recommendations set down in detail in the following chapters build on these proposals in discussing particular areas of
law and legal processes concerning children.
In the Commissions' view, it is inappropriate to attempt to drive national policy making for children through a complaints based
system, mostly because in reality very few children make complaints. The Commissions consider that the priority for government should
be the establishment of agencies that provide co-ordination of government responses to children and policy advice that gives a priority
to children's issues. These functions can best be provided by the network of State, Territory and federal agencies proposed, and
in particular by OFC. It is for this reason that a Commissioner for Children, while important, is a secondary priority for the Commissions
at this time. Our draft recommendations in chapter 12 reflect this judgement.
See para 10.12.
This conclusion reflects a trend in approaches to children's capacities: see para 1.19.
Bureau of Immigration, Multicultural and Population Research
Australia's Population Trends and Prospects 1995
AGPS Canberra 1996, 4.
Year Book Australia 1997
ABS Canberra 1997, 237.
S Raethel 'Parents blame teachers for rise in school suspensions'
The Sydney Morning Herald
23 January 1997, 7.
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training
Report of the Inquiry into Truancy and Exclusion of Children and Young People from School
AGPS Canberra 1996, 12.
National Youth Affairs Research Scheme & ABS
Australia's Young People
ABS Canberra 1993, 51.
P Salmelainen
The Correlates of Offending Frequency: A Study of Juvenile Theft Offenders in Detention
NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics & Research Sydney 1995, 13.
Australian Social Trends 1996
AGPS Canberra 1996, 97.
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 12. The teenage full-time unemployment rate measures the number of unemployed teenagers looking for full-time
employment as a share of the teenage full-time labour force (teenagers who are either unemployed and looking for full-time work or
working full-time).
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 160.
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 151–152. Breakdowns of recipients are provided only for secondary students because it is assumed that tertiary
students are generally above the age of 18 years and therefore do not fall within this Inquiry.
Yearbook Australia 1996
ABS Canberra 1996, 293. 1994 figures are given here because the 1995–96 data does not differentiate between secondary and tertiary
students. In 1995–96 there were a total of 48 000 student receiving Abstudy: DEETYA
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 164.
The percentage of substantiated cases to finalised investigations is approximately 48%: Steering Committee for the Review of Commonwealth/State
Service Provision
Report on Government Service Provision 1997
Industry Commission Melbourne 1997, 535–536.
id 547. Note that the number of children in substitute care as at 30 June 1996 may actually be greater as that figure includes numbers
provided by Qld and NT which counted only those children on legal orders.
Most of the available statistics on outcomes for children in care come from NSW and Vic. The Commissions have been unable to obtain
relevant statistics from other jurisdictions but anecdotal evidence to the Inquiry suggests that the situation differs little around
Australia. See draft recs 9.5, 9.17, 11.17 regarding data collection.
NSW Community Services Commission
The Drift of Children in Care into the Juvenile Justice System: Turning Victims into Criminals
, NSW Community Services Commission Sydney 1996, 8.
Victorian Auditor General's Office
Protecting Victoria's Children: The Role of the Department of Human Services
Victorian Government Printer Melbourne 1996, 266.
J Cashmore & M Paxman
Wards Leaving Care: A Longitudinal Study
Social Policy and Research Centre & NSW Dept of Community Services Sydney 1996, 150.
Victorian Auditor General's Office
Protecting Victoria's Children: The Role of the Department of Human Services
Victorian Government Printer Melbourne 1996, 263. Of young people leaving care who were interviewed for one US study, one third had
become homeless at some point after leaving care: RP Barth 'On their own: The experiences of youth after foster care' (1990) 7
Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal
Outcomes Report for financial year 1995–96 (unpublished) supplied by the Family Court of Australia.
Family Court of Australia
Annual Report 1995–96
Family Court of Australia Melbourne 1996, 50. These statistics include equivalent orders following the introduction of the
Family Law Reform Act 1995
NSW Dept of Juvenile Justice
Annual Children's Court Statistics — Criminal Matters 1995–96
NSW Dept of Juvenile Justice Sydney 1996, 15.
NSW Dept of Juvenile Justice
Information Package for 1995–96
NSW Dept of Juvenile Justice Sydney 1996, 6.
Children's Court of Qld
Third Annual Report 1995–96
Children's Court of Qld Brisbane 1996, 61, 63.
eg in one NSW study, 69.7% of young offenders did not re-appear. C Coumeralos
Juvenile Offending: Predicting Persistence and Determining Cost-effectiveness of Interventions
NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research Sydney 1994, 7.
C Coumeralos
Juvenile Offending: Predicting Persistence and Determining Cost-effectiveness of Interventions
NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research Sydney 1994, 7.
Letter from Youth Justice Manager, Qld Dept of Families, Youth and Community Care, 21 March 1997.
Letter from Registrars' Chambers, WA Supreme Court, 15 November 1996.
Victorian DPP
Annual Report of Operations: Office of Public Prosecutions 1995–96
Victorian DPP Melbourne 1996, 49.
Letter from Operations Manager SSAT National Secretariat 2 October 1996.
Letter from Operations Manager SSAT National Secretariat 30 December 1996.
Secretary, Dept of Health & Community Services v JMB & SMB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 15 Fam LR 392
Marion's case
(1995) FLC 92–598.
The problem of child witnesses exemplifies the difficulties faced by children who interact with legal processes. Despite recent advances
in rules of evidence that recognise children's developmental capacities to give accurate and reliable evidence and detail children's
legal capacity to be able to give that evidence, the process by which children's evidence is investigated, presented and questioned
subjects child witnesses to enormous stresses, making their participation difficult if not impossible in some cases: see ch 5.
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 44–46.
See para 2.7.
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 49. This figure was arrived at by adding together the program costs for all programs listed in section 1.2.1.
id 151–152. Expenditure figures are provided for secondary students only because it is assumed that tertiary students are generally
above the age of 18 years and therefore do not fall within this Inquiry.
Yearbook Australia 1996
ABS Canberra 1996, 293. Expenditure figures are provided for primary and secondary schools only because it is assumed that tertiary
students are above the age of 18 and therefore do not fall within this Inquiry. 1994 figures are given here because the 1995–96
data does not differentiate between secondary and tertiary students. In 1995–96 the federal government spent a total of $129
million on Abstudy: DEETYA
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 164.
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 160.
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 156.
Steering Committee for the Review of Commonwealth/State Service Provision
Report on Government Service Provision 1997
Industry Commission Melbourne 1997, 558.
Attorney-General
Australia's Report under The Convention of the Rights of the Child
Attorney-General's Dept Canberra 1996, 10.
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 386. The Cth not only funds child care but, through the National Child Care Strategy, it also sets and monitors
standards for child care providers.
Steering Committee for the Review of Commonwealth/State Service Provision
Report on Government Service Provision
1997 Industry Commission Melbourne 1997, 465–466.
Commissioner of Taxation
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 53.
See para 10.5.
Attorney-General
Australia's Report under the Convention on the Rights of the Child
Attorney-General's Dept Barton 1996, 2–3.
Implementation of the draft recs in the following chapters does not rely exclusively on the establishment of OFC. eg development of
national standards in the specific areas of legal processes and co-ordination of research could be handled by suitable alternative
bodies should the proposal for OFC not be implemented.
2. Legal processes in education
Introduction
Children at risk in the education system
Rights education and participation
Disciplinary measures
Introduction
Most Australian children spend a significant percentage of their time in the formal education system. Approximately 70% of Australian
children attend government schools. Of the children enrolled in independent schools, the majority (70%) attend Catholic schools.
It is at school that young people often have their first exposure to information about rights and responsibilities. Schools also
have a role in assisting children to learn to participate in society and to develop towards maturity.
The fundamental right of children to be educated is reflected in article 28(1) of CROC. In particular it requires that primary education
be compulsory and free to all and that different forms of secondary education, including general and vocational education, be available
and accessible to every child.
These principles are reflected in Australian requirements for compulsory education for children between 6 and 15 years (16 years
in Tasmania).
Children at risk in the education system
Some young people are disadvantaged in the education system. Children who receive little family support, those with health or emotional
problems and those with learning difficulties are the most at risk of failing in or leaving the education system.
Their disadvantage may also result in behaviour problems and lead to such children being excluded from school. Truanting or being
excluded from school substantially increases the risk of young people becoming enmeshed in the juvenile justice system.
These children need to be identified early and supported and encouraged to remain in the education system.
Other groups of children, while not necessarily at risk, may be disadvantaged in mainstream education. Language differences and cultural
prejudices may deny Indigenous children and children from a non-English speaking background equal access to education and there is
considerable concern about the difficulties children with a disability face in receiving education.
The Commissions are aware of the trend in many Australian jurisdictions towards the introduction of
school fees and charges in public schools.
For economically disadvantaged children, fees can present a barrier to the higher standard of education that is available to children
from more affluent families.
While there is no clear obligation at international law to provide free secondary education,
fees and charges levied by public schools should not effectively discriminate against children from economically disadvantaged families
by reducing their standard of education.
The Commonwealth has introduced programs aimed at ensuring accessible, quality education and has undertaken a monitoring role and
funding commitments in many areas of education.
For example, under the National Equity Program State and Territory non-government education authorities receive funding to run programs
to meet the needs of Indigenous students, students from a non-English speaking background and those who are educationally disadvantaged
because of poverty, disability or geographic isolation.
The Commissions consider that the Commonwealth should continue to play a leading role in ensuring that there is equity of access
to education services across Australia and in providing accountability and consistency across jurisdictions.
Draft recommendation 2.1.
Model education access and equity strategies, to be incorporated into policy and legislation as appropriate in each jurisdiction,
should be developed.
Implementation.
The Department of Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs (DEETYA) should develop these model strategies in conjunction
with the relevant State and Territory agencies.
Draft recommendation 2.2.
Guidelines ensuring that 'voluntary' school fees and charges do not impact on certain children in a discriminatory manner should
be implemented in each jurisdiction.
Implementation.
The Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs should seek the agreement of the Ministerial Council on Employment,
Education, Training and Youth Affairs (MCEETYA) to the development of these guidelines.
Draft recommendation 2.3.
Additional national programs aimed at identifying and supporting at-risk and disadvantaged students and encouraging their continued
participation in education should be developed. In particular, these programs should include the provision of transport to schools,
assistance with meals and primary health care and the provision of homework support and mentoring systems.
Implementation.
These programs should be developed and implemented by DEETYA in conjunction with State and Territory education departments.
Draft recommendation 2.4.
All teachers and school counsellors should receive in-service training in identifying children at risk and referring them to appropriate
Implementation
State and Territory education departments should provide this training.
Draft recommendation 2.5.
National standards for student welfare support services in primary and secondary schools should be developed. The standards should
provide guidance on matters such as the ratio of counsellors to students, identifying schools that require specialist services to
support disadvantaged families and young people, and intervention programs aimed at meeting the needs of children who are homeless
or at risk of homelessness.
Implementation.
DEETYA should develop these standards in conjunction with State and Territory education departments and in consultation with OFC.
Rights education and participation
Children are often disadvantaged in their dealings with institutions and adults because they have little understanding of their rights
and responsibilities, limited information about complaints mechanisms and provisions, and minimal understanding of the government
services available and the roles and functions of different persons in the legal system.
Rights education should include teaching children about their rights and responsibilities in general, such as those enumerated in
CROC, and about their particular rights in relation to education. Schools should also provide children with skills to promote their
participation in political, legal and community processes.
Rights education is most effective where children have a voice in decisions that affect them at school, particularly decisions about
punishment.
Giving students a sense of 'ownership' of the education processes that affect their daily lives is likely to assist in the development
of their maturity and increase the sense of community in a school.
Draft recommendation 2.6.
To ensure that all Australian students are able to develop an understanding of their rights and responsibilities in society, the
civics and citizenship education program developed by the Curriculum Corporation should be introduced into school curricula at the
earliest opportunity.
Implementation
DEETYA should seek the agreement of the relevant State and Territory authorities to the early implementation of the civics and citizenship
education program
Draft recommendation 2.7.
As part of the citizenship and education program, guidelines on national best practice with respect to student participation in school
decision making should be developed. A handbook for teachers and students should be developed and distributed to all schools in Australia.
Implementation.
DEETYA should develop these guidelines in consultation with OFC and co-ordinate the distribution of the handbook.
Disciplinary measures
The standard set by CROC requires that school discipline be administered in a manner consistent with children's human dignity and
other rights, such as children's right to be heard on matters that affect them.
These principles are regarded as protecting children in private as well as public schools.
Disciplinary measures range from detention after class to exclusion from school and may include corporal punishment.
Excluding children from school, on a short or long term basis, may have a serious impact on their education and life chances.
Procedures for exclusion differ between jurisdictions.
While due process is supposed to be followed in exclusion processes, this is often not the case.
nature of discipline in some schools is a cause for considerable concern.
Corporal punishment remains lawful in some Australian jurisdictions although most States and Territories have limited the practice
by legislation, regulation or policy.
There are often no administrative processes available to children, or their carers acting on their behalf, to challenge a decision
to administer corporal punishment and there is limited legal redress.
Children deserve the same level of protection from assault as adults. Corporal punishment conveys unfortunate signals to children
with the child's human dignity.
Draft recommendation 2.8.
National standards suitable for enactment by each jurisdiction should be developed setting out the permissible grounds for exclusion
and the processes to be followed when a government school proposes to exclude a student. The standards should require that
students facing exclusion and their carers be informed in writing of the reasons why exclusion is being considered and be given sufficient
time to respond to the allegations
reviews of serious exclusions, including repeat exclusions, exclusions for longer than 30 days and permanent exclusions, be heard
by an independent panel of school and community representatives
each State or Territory department of education establish a unit with responsibility for ensuring appropriate arrangements are made
for each excluded child, including counselling or other support and alternative schooling or education
an advocate for the child be involved in the disciplinary process where a serious exclusion is proposed
the legislative provisions regarding discipline be widely publicised to students and their carers in readily understandable language,
including community languages where appropriate
each State and Territory provide OFC with annual statistics on excluded students including age, sex, race, length of exclusion, reasons
for exclusion and the support provided to excluded children.
Implementation.
DEETYA should co-ordinate the development of these national standards for school discipline.
Draft recommendation 2.9.
Research should be conducted nationally to determine the extent to which young people are excluded from school by informal processes
and the extent of the connection between school exclusion and criminal behaviour.
Implementation.
This research should be co-ordinated by OFC.
Draft recommendation 2.10.
Corporal punishment should be banned in all Australian schools (including independent schools).
Implementation.
The Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs should seek the agreement of MCEETYA to the passage of uniform
legislation to that effect. In the meantime, the Minister should take all available measures, including attaching conditions to financial
grants, to endeavour to eliminate corporal punishment in schools.
ABS & National Youth Affairs Research Scheme
Australia's Young People
ABS Canberra 1993, 47. These calculations are based on 1991 figures. The proportion of young people attending government schools
is higher than average among Indigenous families (89%), one parent families (81%) and families living outside the metropolitan area
Focus of Families: Education and Employment
ABS Canberra 1994, 16.
This provision is complemented by art 13(1) of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
which provides that everyone has the right to education.
Only NSW has enshrined the right to an education in legislation:
Education Reform Act 1990
(NSW) s 4(1). It should also be noted that every Australian State and Territory allows parents to apply to teach their children at
All Our Children: Child poverty policy review No 4
Brotherhood of St Laurence Melbourne 1990, 10.
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training
Report of the Inquiry into Truancy and Exclusion of Children and Young People from School
AGPS Canberra 1996, 40. See also para 1.11.
See, eg, C Flynn
Disability Discrimination in Schools: Students and Parents Speak Out
National Children's & Youth Law Centre Sydney 1997.
Many primary and secondary schools levy students for the use of materials or other facilities or for activities that their budgets
do not cover. One common example is the provision of computing facilities: see S Raethel 'Chalking up the cost
' The Sydney Morning Herald
24 October 1995, 11; InSearch Youth Support Centre
Public Hearing Submission
Wagga Wagga 8 May 1996. In Tasmania, government schools cannot levy tuition fees but can seek authority to charge for incidental
costs and expenses in providing educational instruction to children:
Education Act 1994
See P Harris
All Our Children: Child poverty policy review No 4
Brotherhood of St Laurence Melbourne 1990, 72. Income support is available to the families of some financially disadvantaged secondary
students and to some independent students: see para 4.4–9.
G Van Bueren
The International Law on the Rights of the Child
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers Dordrecht 1995, 235.
See para 1.26.
State Grants (Primary and Secondary Assistance) Act 1992
(Cth) s 75–77. s 3 of the Act provides that a student at risk is likely to be characterised by one or more of the following:
'Aboriginality, family dislocation, ethnic background, homelessness or poverty'. This Program includes the Students at Risk Program.
See para 2.11.
See Standing Committee on Social Issues Report 8
A Report into Youth Violence in NSW
Parliament of NSW Sydney 1995 rec 82.
arts 28(2), 12.
R Ludbrook 'Children's rights in school education' in K Funder (ed)
Citizen Child: Australian Law and Children's Rights
Australian Institute of Family Studies Melbourne 1996, 90.
id 109; House of Representatives Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training
Report of the Inquiry into Truancy and Exclusion of Children and Young People from School
AGPS Canberra 1996, 41–46. See also Brisbane Practitioners' Forum 29 July 1996.
See House of Representatives Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training
Report of the Inquiry into Truancy and Exclusion of Children and Young People from School
AGPS Canberra 1996, 17–18.
In this regard, evidence to this Inquiry, particularly at the Wagga Wagga Focus Group 9 May 1996 and the Perth Focus Group 1 July
1996, supported evidence to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training
Report of the Inquiry into Truancy and Exclusion of Children and Young People from School
AGPS Canberra 1996, 20.
eg the use of corporal punishment has been banned in all NSW schools and in Victorian government schools:
Education Reform Amendment (School Discipline) Act 1995
(NSW) Sch 1[2]; Education Regulations 1988 (Vic) reg 5.5.
Unless the correction was excessive and can be characterised as unlawful assault for which the child may be awarded damages by a court.
3. Children as consumers
Introduction
Scope of inquiry
Children's awareness of remedies
Enforcing children's contracts
Trade practices and consumer protection
Introduction
Time limits on actions under the TPA
Product safety
Financial services
Media regulation
Advertising
Introduction
Scope of inquiry
Children are significant consumers of goods and services. Markets in toys, fast food, entertainment and clothes are directed explicitly
at children.
Young people often have direct spending power from pocket money and their own earnings.
In addition, children have an indirect effect on the marketplace through the influence they have on the way their parents and other
adults spend money.
Some young people are relatively sophisticated consumers. However, many children, especially those of primary school age, may make
uninformed purchases or be particularly susceptible to aggressive selling techniques.
The terms of reference require the Commissions to consider the appropriateness and effectiveness of the legal process in protecting
children and young people as consumers.
The key legal processes that affect children as consumers are those relating to trade practices and consumer protection, financial
services, advertising and the media.
Children's awareness of remedies
As in many other areas of the law, the major barrier to children taking advantage of their consumer rights is that they generally
do not know they have those rights. Even if they do know they have rights, children may not understand how to enforce them or feel
confident about pursuing a remedy. Children do not often make complaints or follow them through. The Commissions consider that the
position of young consumers will, therefore, not be protected through a complaint system alone. Manufacturers, distributors and industry
regulators must give the highest priority to safeguarding child consumers' well-being.
Departments in various States have distributed students' guides to consumer affairs.
In addition, the National Primary School Consumer Education Working Party has produced resources, directed at different age groups,
that provide consumer information to children.
These are positive initiatives. National co-ordination of approaches of this kind would ensure the greatest number of children are
well informed consumers.
Draft recommendation 3.1.
National child consumer education strategies for implementation in all Australian primary and secondary schools should be developed.
The strategies should include information on consumer services and the remedies available, where to find such services and good consumer
practices such as reading and understanding labelling.
Implementation.
The Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs should develop these strategies in conjunction with the relevant State and Territory authorities.
Enforcing children's contracts
Commerce often involves consumers in contractual arrangements. At common law contracts are not binding on people under the age of
A child can enforce a contract against the other party but the contract cannot be enforced against him or her. This is one of the
consequences of children's historical classification as people under a legal disability.
The main exception to this rule is that young people are liable on contracts for necessaries.
There are other statutory exceptions in some jurisdictions.
These rules can make service providers reluctant to contract with young people.
Some 16 and 17 year olds are in full time employment and living independently. These young people in particular should have greater
contractual capacity, including the ability to enter credit contracts. The
Minors (Property and Contracts) Act 1970
(NSW) reverses the general principle that a contract is not binding on a minor. It provides that where a minor participates in a civil
act (including a contract) for his or her own benefit that act is presumptively binding on him or her provided he or she has the
necessary understanding to participate in it.
Draft recommendation 3.2.
Legislation similar to the
Minors (Property and Contracts) Act 1970
(NSW) should be adopted on a national basis.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should promote the passage of such legislation at the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General (SCAG).
Trade practices and consumer protection
Introduction
Australia has federal and State and Territory consumer protection regimes.
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (TPA) provides protections for consumers who conduct transactions with corporations or the Commonwealth.
All States and Territories have mirrored many of the consumer protection provisions in the TPA in their fair trading legislation.
A person who suffers loss or damage as a result of a breach of the consumer protection provisions of the TPA may recover damages
for that loss.
In certain circumstances where a breach of the legislation is established, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
may negotiate with a corporation on behalf of a consumer to resolve a dispute.
Each State and Territory has an office that administers its consumer legislation and provides advice and other services to consumers.
Consumers can take action under this legislation in specialist tribunals or small claims divisions of local courts.
There are some differences between the remedies available in each jurisdiction.
The variety of consumer protection systems may constitute a barrier to young people accessing complaints mechanisms. The Federal
Bureau of Consumer Affairs is currently conducting an audit of Australian consumer protection laws as part of a commitment by the
Ministerial Council on Consumer Affairs to seek consistent legislation wherever useful and practicable.
The Commissions will await the outcome of this audit before making recommendations in this area.
Time limits on actions under the TPA
At common law and by statute
there are time limits on the commencement of civil actions. Such limitations generally do not apply to those under a legal disability,
including children, for the period of the disability. However, the Federal Court has held that State limitations statutes have no
application to actions for damages under
of the TPA which sets a three year time limit on commencing proceedings.
This means, for instance, that a child who is injured by a defective product must commence any action for damages within three years
of the date on which the cause of action accrued.
Draft recommendation 3.3.
The same exception to time limitations should apply to child litigants under the TPA as to other child civil litigants.
Implementation.
Section 82(2)
of the TPA should be amended to enable a person who suffers damage or loss as a child to commence an action at any time within the
three years following his or her eighteenth birthday.
Product safety
The TPA has provisions designed to ensure that certain goods meet particular standards and that dangerous goods are not sold. The
Act requires that minimum conditions and warranties be met in transactions.
A person who is injured or whose property is damaged by a defective product has a right to claim compensation against the manufacturer
of the product.
Legislation in each State and Territory prescribes product information and safety standards complementing the product liability provisions
in the TPA.
The Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs oversees the enforcement of safety standards declared under the TPA. Mandatory safety standards
can only be introduced when a product has been shown to be dangerous.
This regime has been criticised as reactive rather than proactive. The European Union system is cited as an appropriate model to
adopt because it requires manufacturers and distributors to determine a product's level of safety before it is marketed.
Draft recommendation 3.4.
The European Union products standard should be examined to determine whether it would provide more effective protection for children
from injury from defective or dangerous products than the regime currently in place in Australia.
Implementation.
The Minister for Small Business and Consumer Affairs should commission this investigation.
Financial services
Young people often have considerable difficulties accessing banking and other financial services. In particular independent young
people rarely obtain credit.
The Wallis Inquiry into the Australian Financial System (Wallis Inquiry) recently recommended the creation of a new agency to provide
federal regulation of the finance sector including consumer protection.
The Wallis Inquiry considered the particular financial needs of the aged population but made no specific reference to young consumers
of financial services.
The Commissions welcome any comments on the impact that the Wallis Inquiry findings and recommendations may have for young people.
Comments sought.
The Commissions invite comments on the impact that the Wallis Inquiry findings and recommendations may have for young people.
Media regulation
Children are avid consumers of media and information services, including television, radio, magazines and the internet. Children
aged between 5 and 12 years, for example, watch an average of 17 hours 27 minutes of television each week.
Article 17 of CROC requires States Parties to recognise '... the important function performed by the mass media ...' and encourage
the dissemination of information that is of social and cultural benefit to children. It also requires parties to protect children
from harmful material.
Media industry regulators set standards for products and services and investigate complaints about breaches of those standards. For
example, the Australian Broadcasting Authority (ABA) enforces standards for children's programs shown on commercial television.
Complaints about the classification of printed material can be made to the Classification Review Board.
There is currently no specific government regulation or classification system for material accessible to children on the internet.
Children tend not to make complaints about media services on their own behalf.
The Inquiry is not in a position to determine whether children are actually protected from harm by the legal processes governing
the media industry. However, to enable the federal government to ascertain this in the medium term, the Commissions consider that
the Department of Communications and the Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs should review the international research in this area
to enable OFC to develop guidelines for all providers of children's media services.
Draft recommendation 3.5.
International and available Australian research on the effects of media on children, particularly those of primary school age, should
be reviewed to enable the development of guidelines for all providers of media services to protect children from harm.
Implementation.
The Department of Communications and the Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs should conduct this review, provide the results to OFC
and assist OFC to develop appropriate guidelines.
Advertising
Given the high levels of consumption by children, an increasing proportion of advertising and marketing is targeted directly at them.
There is widespread community concern about the effects of advertising on children. Considerable research has been done in this area.
However, there is continuing debate about the level of regulation needed to protect children from harm.
There are self-regulatory Codes of Practice in the advertising industry for most types of advertising and media. Industry bodies
check that advertising meets the various laws and codes before it is released.
The Advertising Standards Council ceased operation on 31 December 1996. Complaints about advertisements considered to be in breach
of the Codes of Practice must now be made directly to the advertiser and/or the publisher or broadcaster.
The Commissions are concerned that children and parents no longer have access to an independent complaints mechanism.
Draft recommendation 3.6.
The research on the effects of advertising on children should be reviewed to enable the development of guidelines for all advertisers
to protect children from harm. The research should include a determination of what constitutes misleading practices in relation to
young media consumers.
Implementation.
The Department of Communications and the Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs should conduct this review, provide the results to OFC
and assist OFC to develop appropriate guidelines.
Draft recommendation 3.7.
The Minister for Communications and the Arts and the Minister for Industry, Science and Tourism should call on the advertising industry
to re-establish an independent complaints body.
From a commercial point of view, 10 to 17 year olds represent a possible market of $3.9 billion a year: K Scott 'Consumer kids: Winning
the hearts and minds and $$$ of the next generation of consumers by understanding their behaviour' in Marketing to Kids Conference
Papers IIR Conference Sydney 24–25 July 1995, 10.
Children aged 10 to 17 spend an average of $37 a week: K Scott 'Consumer kids ibid. The number of teenagers with part time jobs rose
from 121 700 in 1978 to 344 300 in 1995: T Allard & S Molitorisz 'Virtual war in big plays for teen dollar'
The Sydney Morning Herald
16 September 1995, 9.
Consumers are generally defined as those who purchase goods and services for personal or household use. Individuals using government
services are also regarded as consumers. The legal processes in relation to children's dealings with certain federal government service
providers are examined in ch 4.
The Cth has obligations under art 17 of CROC to ensure that mass media is not harmful to children: see para 3.18.
eg the NSW Dept of Consumer Affairs publishes
which targets 16 to 18 year olds and includes information on consumer rights, using credit, product safety and making complaints:
Dept of Consumer Affairs
Fair Go! Every Student's Guide to Fair Trading
Dept of Consumer Affairs Sydney 1994.
eg the Consumer Power interactive learning packages.
Dillon v Wood
(1881) 2 NSWR 298
Rubinovich v Emmett
(1901) 27 VLR 265.
See para 7.2.
There is considerable jurisprudence on the meaning of necessaries. Generally it is interpreted to mean goods and services that are
in fact necessary to a minor, such as food, clothing, accommodation and employment: J Carter & DJ Harland
Contract Law in Australia
3rd ed Butterworths Sydney 1996, 277– 282.
eg a young person who has turned 16 can effect a life insurance policy:
Life Insurance Act 1945
(Cth) s 85. In Vic certain contracts by minors for the repayment of loans are valid:
Property Law Act 1958
In SA, a court may approve a minor's contract rendering it binding:
Minors' Contracts (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1979
The limited scope of federal consumer protection law is a result of constitutional restrictions on the legislative power of the Cth.
Fair Trading Act 1987
Fair Trading Act 1989
Fair Trading Act 1987
Fair Trading Act 1990
Fair Trading Act
Fair Trading Act 1987
Consumer Affairs and Fair Trading Act 1990
Fair Trading Act 1992
(ACT). In addition to legislative consumer remedies, there are private complaint schemes in a number of industries.
s 82. This provision is mirrored in State and Territory fair trading legislation, eg,
Fair Trading Act 1987
There are other remedies available, such as injunctions
and orders to disclose information or publish advertisements (s 80A), but an action for damages is the most likely avenue for any
complainant acting in a personal capacity to pursue.
In consumer protection matters, the ACCC gives priority to matters of national significance that adversely affect large numbers of
Consumer affairs agencies in States and Territories assist to resolve complaints about breaches of fair trading legislation. Often
they will conduct mediation sessions to resolve the problem or assist the consumer in small claims before the appropriate court or
Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1987
Small Claims Tribunals Act 1973
Small Claims Tribunals Act 1973
Magistrates Court Act 1991
Small Claims Tribunals Act 1974
Magistrates Court (Small Claims Division) Act 1989
Small Claims Act 1974
Small Claims Act 1974
Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs
Audit of Consumer Protection Laws: First Report Identifying Inconsistencies, Gaps and Overlaps on Australian Consumer Protection Legislation
Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs Canberra 1997.
Limitations of Actions Act 1936
Limitation Act 1985
Limitation of Actions Act 1974
Limitation of Actions Act 1958
Limitation Act 1974
Halsbury's Laws of Australia
Butterworths Sydney 1992 Vol 3 65–2245.
Vink v Schering Pty Ltd & Ors
(No 1) (1991) ATPR 41–064.
Generally a cause of action accrues as soon as loss is first suffered:
Calmao Pty Ltd v Stradbroke Waters Co-owners Co-operative Society Ltd & Ors
(1989) ATPR 40–984. See draft rec 7.2 regarding child civil litigants' capacity in general.
These conditions include that goods and services be of merchantable quality and fit for their purpose:
TPA s 75AD.
Fair Trading Act 1987
Fair Trading Act 1989
Sale of Hazardous Goods Act 1977
Goods (Trade Descriptions) Act 1971
Consumer Affairs Act 1972
(Vic) Pt IV;
Fair Trading Act 1987
Consumer Affairs and Fair Trading Act 1990
(NT) Pt IV;
Consumer Affairs Act 1973
(ACT) Pt IIIA;
Manufacturers' Warranties Act 1974
Currently, there are mandatory safety standards for toys for children aged under 3 years, flotation toys, swimming aids and children's
nightclothes.
Dept of Fair Trading
Submission 157
Financial System Inquiry
Final Report
AGPS Canberra 1997, 31. The Inquiry has recommended that a new body called the Corporations and Financial Services Commission be
established, combining roles currently performed by the Australian Securities Commission, the Insurance and Superannuation Commission
and the Australian Payments System Council.
Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs
Discussion Paper: Advertising Directed at Children
Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs Canberra 1994, 2. For detailed information on what kinds of programs children watch see: ABA Monograph
'Cool 'or 'Gross': Children's Attitudes to Violence, Kissing and Swearing on Television
ABA Sydney 1995; ABA Monograph 7
Kids Talk TV: 'Super Wickid' or 'Dum
' ABA Sydney 1996.
The standards are established under the
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) and are designed to ensure the availability of quality programs that add to children's experience and understanding. The national
broadcasters, the ABC and SBS, have their own codes of practice for TV and radio. The ABA can investigate complaints about alleged
breaches of these codes. Pay TV is largely unregulated.
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
s 42(1)(d).
The Classification Board within the federal Office of Film and Literature Classification classifies print media on behalf of the
ACT, NSW, Vic, SA and the NT. Other States operate their own schemes. Material that exploits children is 'Refused Classification'
and may not be sold or displayed. There are no other provisions specific to children. The classification scheme administered by the
Board is voluntary and not all publications are submitted for classification.
A review of on-line services recently completed by the ABA and the Dept of Communications found that while concerns about the accessibility
of objectionable and unsuitable material to children on-line are warranted, the majority of parents will accept responsibility for
managing their children's use of on-line services in the home: ABA
Investigation into the Content of On-Line Services
ABA Sydney 1996, 75.
In 1995, the ABA received 3051 complaints, 91 of which alleged that material shown on commercial television was unsuitable for children:
Your Say: A Review of Audience Concerns about Australia's Broadcast Media
ABA Sydney 1996, 10. There are no statistics available on how many complaints were made by young people but anecdotal evidence suggests
it is generally less than 50 a year.
eg the Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs has found that children below the age of five years are unable to discriminate consistently
between programs and advertisements, especially when they are similar in style. Further, children below seven or eight years are
said to possess little or no ability to recognise the persuasive intent of television advertising:
Final Report: Advertising Directed at Children
Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs Canberra 1995, 4.
See, eg, Australian Association of National Advertisers
Submission 132
; Advertising Federation of Australia
Submission 162
; B Biggins
Submission 197
; B Biggins
Submission 218.
eg the Federation of Australian Television Stations clears television commercials.
In some instances complainants will also be able to approach the ACCC, eg, where they consider the advertisement to be deceptive or
misleading.
4. Federal government services
Introduction
Service delivery to children
Income support
Introduction
Income support for homeless children
Immigration
Introduction
Citizenship
Non-citizen children
Review mechanisms
Internal review
Merits review
Introduction
This chapter makes some general comments about best practice service delivery and focuses on the federal government services that
most directly affect children, that is, income support and immigration. The Commissions are not concerned with the substantive laws
in these areas but with the legal processes associated with service delivery. We are concerned with issues relating to the co-ordination
of services within and between governments, the protection of at-risk children, young people's ability to access the services and
their capacity to challenge administrative decisions that affect them.
Material presented to the Commissions makes it clear that young people generally find it difficult to deal with government departments.
Few agencies have processes, forms or information brochures that are adapted to children's needs and level of comprehension. Evidence
to the Inquiry suggests that poor inter-governmental and inter-departmental co-ordination and delays in decision making often impact
adversely on vulnerable children.
Service delivery to children
There is limited information available specifically for children concerning federal, State or Territory government services, even
where the services are expressly designed for children. In addition, there is little recognition that children are an important client
group of government agencies even in areas such as care and protection where they are the predominant clients. In the Commissions'
view, there is a real need for such entities to focus on developing appropriate and effective service delivery to children.
Draft recommendation 4.1.
Models of agency best practice should be developed for service delivery to young people having regard to the following.
Most young people will have no, or relatively limited, experience of dealing with government agencies.
Often young people approach government departments with little expectation that they will succeed with their claim. It requires considerable
fortitude for a child to make a complaint about agency staff or service delivery. A child will quickly lose the confidence necessary
to pursue a claim or make a complaint if agency processes are lengthy or complicated or if staff are dismissive of the child's claim.
Government agencies should consult with their child clients and with relevant non-government organisations to determine the most
effective ways of informing children about available services.
Publicity and information about services and review mechanisms should be directed specifically at young people. Such material may
be most effective if it is in the form of stickers, comics, posters and specifically designed brochures for distribution through
schools and youth centres. The information should also be available by telephone and on the internet.
Staff in government agencies should be trained to deal sympathetically with young people and to communicate in age appropriate language.
A culture of listening to children should be cultivated. Information and evidence provided by children should be treated with the
same degree of seriousness as that provided by adults.
Given children's developing capacities, it will often be inappropriate for agencies to rely on written material as a means of communicating
with them. Wherever possible communication with children should be in person rather than in writing.
It is inappropriate to expect most young people to deal with complicated forms and elaborate bureaucratic requirements. Where such
processes cannot be avoided or adapted for children, the relevant agency should ensure that children are provided with a support
person to assist them to negotiate the process.
Administrative decisions concerning children should be made in a timely manner. Where children are dependent on the provision of
services, delay in providing them can put the child at risk. Further, children's perception of time is such that they may interpret
any delay as an indication that their application has been rejected. Where delays in decision making are unavoidable, agencies should
Access and equity programs should be revised where necessary to ensure that children are identified as a target group.
Children should be entitled to have a support person present whenever they are interviewed by a government department or give evidence
to a review body in regard to an administrative decision.
Except where it is necessary for the protection of the child, government agencies generally should not interview young children.
It is particularly inappropriate for agencies to interview young children to obtain evidence adverse to a parent's claim to entitlements.
Where younger children are interviewed, including where they are interviewed on a matter relating to their parents, the process should
be carefully explained to the child and a support person of the child's choice should be present.
Implementation.
All federal, State and Territory government agencies that have dealings with children, including complaint or review bodies that
do or should receive complaints or applications from young people, should develop such models in consultation with OFC and ensure
that relevant staff members are trained in implementing them.
Income support
Introduction
The discussion in this section is limited to income support that the Commonwealth provides directly to young people who are unemployed,
studying or homeless.
In administering these benefits the Commonwealth implements its obligation under CROC to ensure that children have the right to benefit
from social security.
The main benefits paid to young people are YTA and Austudy or Abstudy.
The departments administering these benefits are the Department of Social Security (DSS) and DEETYA.
Young people indicated to the Inquiry that the current administrative processes associated with income support applications are bewildering
and intimidating. They find government departments unhelpful, the level of co-ordination between them poor, that there is insufficient
information available about entitlements and that application forms are difficult to fill out without assistance.
The federal government has announced proposals to create a single service delivery agency to administer all benefits and to replace
YTA and Austudy with a single youth allowance as of 1 January 1998 although it is not clear that the latter proposal will proceed.
Draft recommendation 4.2.
The proposed income support arrangements for a single youth allowance should be in a form that ensures there is no need for a fresh
application or decision where there are minor changes in a child's circumstances.
Implementation.
The Minister for Social Security and the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs should develop legislation
to this effect.
Draft recommendation 4.3.
Particular attention should be given to the provision of income support to young people living in rural and remote communities having
regard to the difficulties they experience making and pursuing applications.
Implementation.
The Minister for Social Security and the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs should ensure this takes
Draft recommendation 4.4.
Consideration should be given to developing models of service delivery specifically for young Indigenous people and young people
from non-English speaking backgrounds to take account of cultural differences regarding family structures and relationships.
Implementation.
The proposed service delivery agency should develop these models in consultation with appropriate community groups and OFC.
Draft recommendation 4.5.
Youth service units (modelled on those recently piloted by DSS) should be established in each region.
Implementation.
The proposed service delivery agency should ensure these units are established as a matter of priority.
Income support for homeless children
are more likely to have been involved in care and protection processes.
This is especially so for homeless children aged 15 and under who are not eligible for YTA, Austudy or Abstudy and must rely on a
discretionary Special Benefit.
The Commonwealth/State Youth Protocol for the case management of homeless children (the Protocol) has been in operation in all States
and Territories since January 1995. The Protocol sets out a procedure for the assessment of applicants for income support at the
The Protocol requires amendment to ensure homeless young people are appropriately supported.
recommendation 4.6.
The Commonwealth/State Protocol for the case management of homeless children should be amended to provide that homeless young people
must be assessed by the relevant State or Territory welfare department within seven days of making an application for income support.
Implementation.
All parties to the Protocol should expedite these changes.
Draft recommendation 4.7.
Technical requirements, particularly those concerning identification, should be interpreted flexibility in regard to young homeless
applicants and should not of themselves bar them from receiving income support.
Implementation.
The proposed service delivery agency should ensure that eligibility requirements for young homeless applicants comply with this recommendation.
Draft recommendation 4.8.
In addition to the information on sex and age already collected, data concerning young homeless clients' race and sexual identification
should be collected anonymously and by consent in order better to document and to help resolve the problems of youth homelessness.
Implementation.
All federal, State and Territory departments that provide services to young homeless people should collect such data. The data should
be collated by DEETYA.
Draft recommendation 4.9.
Ongoing independent research into the adequacy of the homeless rate of benefits paid to young people should be conducted to ensure
appropriate minimum rates are maintained.
Implementation.
The Minister for Social Security and the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs should jointly commission
such research in consultation with OFC and ensure that appropriate minimum rates are fixed.
Immigration
Introduction
Children come into contact with the Australian immigration system as refugees,
migrants and temporary entrants such as students.
The discussion in this section is limited to the circumstances in which a child is the primary visa applicant, such as a dependent
child joining his or her citizen parent or a child sponsor for a parent seeking a visa to enter or stay in Australia.
Citizenship
Children sometimes have difficulty proving their entitlement to be registered as Australian citizens when the relationship between
their parents has ended in hostile circumstances and their citizen parent refuses to co-operate with the certification process. There
is provision for people under 18 to apply for citizenship in their own right.
However, these arrangements are little known or understood and are rarely used by young people.
Draft recommendation 4.10.
A Citizenship Information Kit aimed specifically at young people and their guardians should be developed, explaining the procedures
by which children can obtain certificates of Australian citizenship. The Kit should include information on the evidence needed to
establish a claim to citizenship, particularly where parental conflict may impede a child's capacity to do so.
Implementation.
The Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (DIMA) should develop the Kit, distribute it to child applicants and applicants
with dependent children and appropriately advertise the Kit, targeting Australian communities with high immigrant populations.
Non-citizen children
Sometimes children who are in Australia on temporary visas or whose stay is unauthorised are subject to exploitation, abuse or neglect.
Where such non-citizen children
come to the attention of welfare authorities, it may be necessary to extend or regularise the child's immigration status as an ancillary
measure to provide protection for the child. The Migration Regulations do not currently permit this.
Co-ordination between DIMA and State and Territory welfare agencies is required where the child visa applicant is, or is in the process
of being, adopted. Cases reviewed in the Immigration Review Tribunal (IRT) indicate that welfare agencies generally do not provide
evaluations for private, overseas intra-family adoptions.
There are instances where children have been denied visas for the purposes of apparently genuine adoptions because such a welfare
assessment was not undertaken. While better co-ordination between the relevant departments could assist in such cases, it is important
to ensure that there are appropriate safeguards concerning intercountry adoptions. The 1993
Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in respect of Intercountry Adoption
, which has yet to be ratified by Australia, contains such safeguards.
All visa subclasses provide that, before granting a visa to a child applicant, the Minister must be satisfied that granting it would
not prejudice the rights and interests of any other person who has custody or guardianship of, or access to, the child.
If applied strictly this provision can lead to injustice.
For example, a child applicant may be refused a visa on the basis that a person has access to him or her even though a court in the
child's home country has approved the migration.
Draft recommendation 4.11.
Co-operative arrangements should be developed to resolve immigration problems for children whom a welfare department or court has
determined are in need of care. In some cases this may mean enabling a child to change immigration status to in order to allow for
appropriate supervision of him or her or an alternative family placement.
Implementation.
DIMA and State and Territory welfare departments should develop these arrangements jointly and take steps to implement them in legislation
or policy as appropriate.
Draft Recommendation 4.12.
Guidelines for overseeing and evaluating overseas intra-family adoptions should be developed.
Implementation
DIMA should develop these guidelines in co-operation with State and Territory welfare departments and take steps to implement them
in legislation or policy as appropriate.
Draft Recommendation 4.13.
The Commonwealth should give priority consideration to ratifying the
Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in respect of Intercountry Adoption
Implementation.
SCAG should consider this issue as a matter of priority.
Draft recommendation 4.14.
Provisions stating that, before granting a visa to a child applicant, the Minister must be satisfied that granting the visa would
not prejudice the rights and interests of any other person who has custody or guardianship of, or access to, the child should be
redrafted to be consistent with the principles underlying the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), that is, that parents have responsibilities for children rather than rights over them.
Implementation.
The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs should develop legislation to this effect.
Review mechanisms
Internal review
Young people who wish to challenge administrative decisions about income support must first apply for internal review.
The current process is protracted and particularly disadvantages child complainants who are homeless or have other compounding risk
factors to deal with. The Commissions have received evidence of young people who have been left without income for weeks, sometimes
months, while the internal review process is completed despite DSS's timeliness performance standard indicating that such reviews
should ideally be completed within 14 days.
Draft recommendation 4.15.
Internal review applications by child income support applicants should be taken also to be applications for external merits review.
If internal review is not completed within two weeks, the external review process should be automatically activated, the case given
priority and the review completed within a short time frame.
Implementation.
The Minister for Social Security and the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs should develop legislation
to this effect.
Merits review
Currently, if a child income support or visa applicant is not satisfied with the result of an internal review, he or she can apply
for review of the original decision by the relevant merits review tribunal. Decisions regarding income support are currently heard
by the SSAT.
Certain visa applicants can apply for merits review by the Immigration Review Tribunal (IRT) or the Refugee Review Tribunal (RRT)
depending on the visa subclass.
In its 1995 report
Better Decisions
, the Administrative Review Council (ARC) recommended the amalgamation of federal merits review tribunals into a single body, the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART).
On 20 March 1997, the Attorney-General announced Cabinet's in principle decision to implement this proposal.
Better Decisions
proposed that applicants would apply for review by a specialist division of the ART rather than by the IRT, RRT, SSAT, Veteran's
Review Board or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). In effect, this would expand and recast the AAT's current jurisdictions.
Decisions of the divisions would be reviewable by a Review Panel with leave of the ART President.
The Commissions believe it is important for the proposed ART to maintain initiatives taken by existing merits review tribunals, particularly
the SSAT, to adapt their processes to certain client groups including children. For the purposes of children's matters, the Commissions
favour the more informal processes used in the SSAT rather than the legalism of the AAT.
To ensure that external review is accessible to young people, the proposed ART should conduct matters involving child applicants
or witnesses expeditiously and flexibly. For example, there should be scope for young people to make applications orally, either
in person or by telephone.
Draft recommendation 4.16.
An access and equity strategy should be developed to ensure that children can properly participate in merits review. Publicity material
should be prepared specifically for young people explaining merits review procedures, how to prepare a case for hearing and what
sorts of evidence will be required (including how to obtain and present it).
Implementation.
The proposed ART should develop a young people's access and equity strategy and publicity material aimed specifically at young clients.
Draft recommendation 4.17.
Directions hearings and preliminary conferences for matters involving young people should include the provision of information directly
to young people on tribunal practice, procedure and evidentiary requirements.
Implementation.
The proposed ART should develop practice guidelines to this effect.
Draft recommendation 4.18.
Merits review procedures should accommodate child applicants and witnesses appropriately. Hearings should be run in an informal and
flexible manner. To this end, guidelines should be developed for handling applications by children.
Implementation.
The proposed ART should develop these guidelines in consultation with relevant interest groups.
Draft recommendation 4.19.
The program begun by the AAT of using community centres in rural areas as venues for matters involving Indigenous applicants should
be extended. Such venues could also be used for matters involving child applicants in those areas.
Implementation.
The proposed ART should oversee the extension of this program.
Draft recommendation 4.20.
An advocate with continuing instructions should be able to pursue an external review application on behalf of a homeless child applicant
with whom the advocate has lost contact.
Implementation.
The proposed ART should develop a practice direction to this effect.
The Australian Association of Young People in Care has proposed that key stakeholders, including child consumers of care and protection
services, develop models of best practice in collaboration with the relevant government agencies: see para 9.5.
Some benefits, such as Austudy, are not paid directly to the child in all cases. See para 1.12 for statistics on income support.
To qualify for YTA the applicant must be an Australian resident under 18 who is registered as unemployed
: Student and Youth Assistance Act 1973
(Cth) s 65(1)(g). In certain circumstances 15 year olds are eligible for YTA: s 65(3). Young people who were receiving Job Search
Allowance prior to the introduction of YTA in 1994 continue to do so. Austudy and Abstudy are paid to students who satisfy a means
Student and Youth Assistance Act 1973
(Cth) Pt 2.
Adelaide Focus Group 29 April 1996; Darwin Focus Group 15 July 1996; Newcastle Focus Group 13 May 1996; Rockhampton Focus Group 2
August 1996; Alice Springs Focus Group 19 July 1996.
A Vanstone, Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs
Media Release
20 August 1996; J Brough & M Millett 'Backlash fear over study and dole payments'
The Sydney Morning Herald
19 April 1997, 15.
See para 1.13. Given the mobility of this group, it is difficult to obtain accurate statistics on the number of Australian young people
who are homeless at any particular time. There is anecdotal evidence that Indigenous young people, young people from non-English
speaking backgrounds and gay and lesbian young people are over represented in the homeless population: Boss et al
Profile of Young Australians
Churchill Livingstone Melbourne 1995, 175; Australian Centre for Lesbian and Gay Research
As Long As I've Got My Doona: A Report on Lesbian and Gay Youth Homelessness
Twenty-Ten Association Sydney 1995, 14–17.
Social Security Act 1991
At May 1995, 6.1% of all Special Benefit recipients were aged under 16: DSS
Annual Report 1994–95
AGPS Canberra 1995, 272. By May 1996 this figure had dropped to 2.9%: DSS
Annual Report 1995–96
AGPS Canberra 1996, 266.
The Protocol covers all young people under 15, 15 to 17 year olds who are considered to be at risk of harm and all under 18 year olds
who are state wards.
Approximately half of the world's refugees are children: G Van Bueren (ed)
International Documents on Children
Save the Children Netherlands 1993, 350. Children are refugees because their parents have been the victims of persecution or because
they themselves have been subjected to persecution.
arts 8–10, 22 of CROC are relevant to child migrants and refugees.
Children can also be joined as secondary applicants in the visa application of a parent seeking to enter or stay in Australia.
See the Citizenship Instructions issued by the Dept of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs: ch 5.
See K Cronin 'A primary consideration: Children's rights in Australian immigration law' (1996) 2
Australian Journal of Human Rights
195, 205–208. The
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) uses the term 'non-citizen' to refer to all persons who are not Australian citizens. For the sake of clarity, that term will
be used in this document although the Commissions recognise that non-citizens will almost always be citizens for the purposes of
another country's laws.
This is in contrast to the British Immigration Rules that allow children born in the UK to secure permanent residence where there
has been a genuine transfer of parental responsibility on the ground of the parent's inability to care for the child: Statement of
Changes in Immigration Rules HC 251, r 134. In other cases, the Home Secretary has discretion to permit temporary or permanent stay
if the welfare arrangements for the child require it.
Re Williamson
IRT decision V94/00938 Melbourne 29 May 1995;
IRT decision N92/01902 Sydney 18 October 1993.
Migration Regulations 1994
reg 101.228.
See K Cronin 'A primary consideration: Children's rights in Australian immigration law' (1996) 2
Australian Journal of Human Rights
195, 198–9.
Student and Youth Assistance Act 1973
(Cth) Pt 9 Div I for Austudy and YTA.
Social Security Act 1991
for Special Benefit. On 20 March 1997 the federal government announced that as part of a re-structuring of immigration review processes,
internal review of visa application decisions will no longer be available: P Ruddock, Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Media Release
20 March 1997.
eg Marrickville Legal Centre
Submission 221
Student and Youth Assistance Act 1973
(Cth) Pt 9 Div 2 for Austudy and YTA.
Social Security Act
(Cth) s 1245 for Special Benefit.
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ss 346,
ARC Report 39
Better Decisions: Review of Commonwealth Merits Review Tribunals
AGPS Canberra 1995 rec 87.
D Williams, Attorney-General
Media Release
20 March 1997.
Note, however, that the ARC recommended that all applications to a review tribunal should have to be made in writing but not in any
prescribed form: ARC Report 39
Better Decisions: Review of Commonwealth Merits Review Tribunals
AGPS Canberra 1995 rec 55.
5. Children's evidence
Introduction
Investigations and pre-hearing processes
Rules of evidence
The child witness in the courtroom
The child's voice in sentencing
Children's evidence in certain proceedings
Introduction
The law has traditionally viewed children as unreliable witnesses, based on perceptions that they are prone to fantasy, that they
are suggestible and that their evidence is otherwise inaccurate. Despite some advances,
structural, procedural and attitudinal deficiencies in the legal system still prevent children from performing effectively as witnesses.
The Commissions' draft recommendations in this chapter focus on developing processes that
ensure that child witnesses are able to give reliable evidence
enhance the status of children as witnesses so that their evidence is given due weight
minimise the stresses placed on child witnesses.
In Australia, children appear as witnesses in court most frequently as victims in criminal proceedings. Children also appear as witnesses
in a variety of other court and tribunal proceedings, such as in the Family Court, State and Territory civil courts, care and protection
proceedings, juvenile justice proceedings and before tribunals such as the RRT, the IRT, the SSAT and the AAT.
They may also appear as witnesses in criminal proceedings when they have information about events that have happened to others.
The Commissions' concern for child witnesses stems from the structures, procedures and attitudes within legal processes that inhibit
children from giving evidence. Children are frequently discounted and effectively silenced as witnesses. In some cases, particularly
for very young children, where the child has a continuing relationship with one of the parties or where the evidence is particularly
sensitive, a child may become so intimidated or distressed by the process that he or she is unable to give evidence either satisfactorily
The draft recommendations in this chapter focus most often on children who give evidence in criminal proceedings either as victims
or other witnesses because of the relative frequency with which children appear in these circumstances and the high proportion of
these child witnesses who become intimidated and distressed by the process, and also because a great deal of research has focused
on children giving evidence in these proceedings. However, many of the draft recommendations in this chapter are applicable to all
child witnesses.
Investigations and pre-hearing processes
Children, like adults, can give reliable accounts of events that they have witnessed but they should not be treated as miniature
adult witnesses. Children, and indeed some adult witnesses, often cannot cope with the pressures of multiple interviews, highly leading
questions, misleading and intimidating cross-examination and lengthy delays between the incident and trial.
Investigatory and pre-hearing processes must be adjusted to the needs and capacities of the child.
Draft recommendation 5.1.
Specialised interview teams comprising, as appropriate, a police officer, welfare department worker, counsellor and/or lawyer should
deal with all alleged child victims of abuse. These teams should have as their goal eliciting accurate and reliable information from
children in a manner that allows the information to be presented in a number of different proceedings (criminal, care and protection,
civil etc) as the evidence in chief of the child.
Implementation.
These interview teams should be developed jointly by State and Territory police and welfare departments as well as other relevant
agencies. OFC should develop national standards for the staffing of interview teams and for interviewing child victims of abuse in
consultation with child advocacy organisations, police, Legal Aid Commissions, welfare departments and other experts on interviewing
Draft recommendation 5.2.
Regardless of whether interview teams are established, all interviews of potential child witnesses should be conducted in accordance
with national interview standards. These national standards should include requirements that
all professionals responsible for investigating and interviewing potential child witnesses have appropriate training in the areas
of child psychology and development, non-misleading questioning techniques and the rules of evidence for the various proceedings
in which children may be involved
interviews with children be as short as possible and the number of interviews be kept to a minimum
every child who is being interviewed as a potential witness, whether as a victim of abuse, assault or other criminal act or as a
witness to any relevant event or occurrence, has the right to have an independent person of his or her choice present while being
interviewed.
Implementation.
OFC should develop the national interview standards in consultation with child advocacy organisations, police, Legal Aid Commissions,
welfare departments and other experts on interviewing children.
Draft recommendation 5.3.
A multidisciplinary working group on videotaping the evidence of child witnesses should be convened to
develop protocols to be used by interview teams in taping, storing and maintaining the videotapes
establish mechanisms to permit children to be further interviewed in relation to newly remembered details
propose evidentiary law reforms to allow the videotapes to be used as evidence in court.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should recommend to SCAG that it convene such a multidisciplinary working group on videotaping the evidence
of child witnesses.
Draft recommendation 5.4.
A multidisciplinary working group should be convened to develop legal guidelines on therapeutic counselling for child witnesses prior
to their appearance in court. These guidelines should address
limits on adverse inferences that may be drawn from the fact of counselling
the desirability of communication between the child and the counsellor being privileged.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should recommend to SCAG that it convene such a multidisciplinary working group on pre-trial therapeutic counselling
for child witnesses.
Draft recommendation 5.5.
There should be a presumption that child witnesses should not give live evidence at committal hearings. The rules of evidence should
be amended to permit hearsay and other relevant evidence to be produced instead of the live evidence of the child.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment by the States and Territories of similar legislation.
Draft recommendation 5.6.
When setting hearing dates, courts should give priority to cases involving child witnesses. Court rules should be amended to provide
that the prosecutor or legal representative for a party calling a child as a witness should be required to inform the court that
a child is scheduled to appear so court can prioritise the matter and set the hearing for a specified time rather than allocating
it to a rolling list.
Implementation.
The Federal and High Courts, along with State and Territory courts, are encouraged to amend their Rules to this effect.
Rules of evidence
In general, rules of evidence ensure that the trial process is fair for the parties. However, justice requires that these rules are
not used to silence a child witness in effect. Competency rules, judicial warnings regarding children's evidence,
rules against hearsay, prohibitions on expert testimony and on tendency and coincidence evidence are significant ways in which children
are effectively silenced as witnesses. These rules often interfere with the ability of the judge and/or jury to hear the words of
a child witness and the special context in which they are spoken.
The following recommendations attempt to redress these problems. Some of the recommendations incorporate existing provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) (Evidence Act) and other State and Territory legislation. The recommendations are addressed to those jurisdictions in which
the relevant amendments have not been made.
Draft recommendation 5.7.
All children should be presumed
prima facie
competent to give evidence. Courts should have the power to adopt a flexible approach to competency testing, including obtaining
the opinions or reports of experts, in cases involving child witnesses. Where children are competent to give sworn evidence, the
declaration should be simple and in language that the child understands.
Implementation.
Evidence Act
is an appropriate model for these provisions. The Attorney-General, through SCAG, should encourage those jurisdictions that have
not introduced legislation based on the
Evidence Act
to enact a similar provision.
Draft recommendation 5.8.
Judges should be prohibited from warning or suggesting to the jury that child witnesses are an unreliable class of witness.
A warning about the reliability of a particular child witness should only be given at the request of a party and relate only to the
status of the evidence itself rather than to general assumptions about the abilities of children.
The onus should be on the party requesting the warning to show there are exceptional circumstances warranting it.
There should be a standard form for warnings, that reduces the effect of bias against, or general assumptions about, the abilities
of children as witnesses.
Implementation.
Evidence Act
should be amended to reflect the above provisions. The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of similar legislation
in all jurisdictions.
Draft recommendation 5.9
There should be a presumption in favour of the use of Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) in matters involving child witnesses in criminal
proceedings, other than proceedings where the child is the accused. Should the accused object to the use of CCTV, he or she should
have to rebut the need for its use. Where CCTV is not available, a screen should be used.
Implementation.
Evidence Act
should be amended to reflect the above provisions. The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of similar legislation
in all jurisdictions.
Draft recommendation 5.10.
Giving evidence by way of CCTV should be available in non-criminal proceedings where the child's age, cultural background, relationship
to a party in the proceedings, or the nature of the subject matter makes it likely that the child will be intimidated or distressed
while giving live evidence. The decision to use CCTV or to give evidence in open court should be made by the child.
Where CCTV is not available, a screen should always be used where a child wishes to give evidence outside the presence of a party.
Implementation.
Evidence Act
should be amended to this effect. The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of similar legislation in all
Draft recommendation 5.11
Evidence, including expert evidence, relating to a child's prior disclosures of abuse should be admissible as relevant to the facts
in issue in any civil or criminal case involving child abuse allegations.
Implementation.
Evidence Act
should be amended to this effect. The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of similar legislation in all
Draft recommendation 5.12.
Judges should have the discretion to allow expert evidence that informs on the credibility of child witnesses. In particular, this
evidence should be allowed in cases involving allegations of child abuse to assist the judge and/or jury in understanding Child Sexual
Abuse Accommodation Syndrome or other patterns of children's disclosure in abuse cases and the effects of child abuse on children's
behaviour and demeanour in court.
Implementation.
Evidence Act
should be amended to reflect the above provisions. The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of similar legislation
in all jurisdictions.
Draft recommendation 5.13.
Multiple proceedings involving more than one incident concerning the same child victim and accused or more than one child victim
and the same accused should be joined in a single trial to avoid the necessity of children giving evidence in numerous proceedings
over long periods of time and the problems associated with rules against tendency and coincidence evidence. To this end, there should
be a review of joinder rules and rules against tendency and coincidence evidence in light of the hardship such rules cause to child
victim witnesses.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should recommend to SCAG that it convene a working group to conduct such a review. The working group should
consider appropriate legislative amendments of the principles in
DeJesus v The Queen
[1986] HCA 65
(1986) 68 ALR 1
, in which it was held that sexual offences form a special class of offences that should almost always be tried separately except
where evidence on one count is admissible upon the other count. The working group should also recommend reforms to the rules against
tendency and coincidence evidence that take into account the effects of these rules on child victim witnesses.
The child witness in the courtroom
The adversarial nature and formal setting of proceedings involving children as witnesses do not effectively support children in this
role. Inadequacies include facilities which do not provide privacy for the child, harassing or intimidating questioning, inappropriate,
confusing and misleading language and grammar, and lack of support and preparation for the experience of giving evidence.
Draft recommendation 5.14.
Age appropriate literature for all child witnesses should be developed to explain various proceedings, possible parties to the proceedings,
the roles of each person involved in the process, the types of questions that may be encountered and the reasons for them and the
meaning of common terms, legal and otherwise, that may be encountered by the child while giving evidence.
Implementation.
Courts should promote the development of this literature in conjunction with the relevant State and Territory authorities.
Draft recommendation 5.15.
Child witnesses should have the right to have a qualified support person appointed by the court at the earliest possible stage in
the proceedings to assist and support the child through the process of appearing as a witness.
To facilitate the provision of support people who can provide support for child witnesses in a manner that does not contaminate their
evidence, each jurisdiction should introduce and properly resource expert child witness support units.
The functions of child witness support units and/or individual support people could include: explaining the court process and preparing
the child for the experience of giving evidence; keeping the child informed of the progress of the case and liaising with prosecutors,
solicitors and police on behalf of the child; accompanying the child to court and appearing with the child in court; and making necessary
referrals for the child and his or her family to therapeutic counselling, medical care and other services necessary to assist the
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of the above provisions through legislation or court rules in all
standards for child witness support units in consultation with the relevant State and Territory agencies.
Draft recommendation 5.16.
The court should have the power to appoint a 'child interpreter' to facilitate the giving of evidence by a child where the court
is satisfied that the child is unable to understand questions put by counsel or where there is difficulty understanding the child's
Implementation.
Evidence Act
should be amended to this effect. The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of similar provisions in all jurisdictions.
Draft recommendation 5.17.
Child witnesses should be provided with appropriate waiting facilities. These should ensure privacy and separation from the public
and in particular from a defendant or hostile opposing party, that party's counsel and the media.
Implementation.
Courts should designate an appropriate facility in or near the court building as a children's waiting room. Where facilities are
not available in the court building, the prosecutor or legal representative for the party calling the child as a witness should be
responsible for taking all necessary steps to ensure that the child is provided with appropriate facilities.
Draft recommendation 5.18.
Guidelines should be developed to assist judges in preventing harassment of child witnesses by counsel. These guidelines should include
provisions that
set maximum periods of time in which a child witness may be examined or cross-examined
provide for breaks for a child witness within specific periods of time
prevent aggressive or confusing examination tactics
ensure questions are stated in language that is appropriate to the age and comprehension of the child witness and
set training requirements for judicial officers in the areas of child development and language skills.
Implementation.
AIJA should develop such guidelines and training programs for use in all relevant courts.
Draft recommendation 5.19.
Prosecutors or legal representatives for parties presenting the child as a witness should always meet the child prior to the court
appearance and should attempt to establish a rapport. Wherever possible the same prosecution team should conduct the case at committal
and trial in a way that minimises the number of people involved in the process of preparing and presenting the child witness.
Implementation.
Guidelines for federal, State and Territory Directors of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and relevant practice directives for each jurisdiction
should be drafted to this effect.
Draft recommendation 5.20.
All prosecution staff who have contact with child witnesses should receive training on the emotional impact on children of giving
evidence and of delaying legal proceedings and on age appropriate language for use with child witnesses.
Implementation.
Federal, State and Territory DPPs should ensure appropriate training is provided to all prosecution staff having contact with child
witnesses. Where appropriate, child witness units should be developed in each DPP.
The child's voice in sentencing
The NSW Law Reform Commission has suggested that cross-examination on the content of Victim Impact Statements (VIS) should be allowed
with leave of the court in all cases.
The Commissions disagree with this conclusion in relation to a VIS submitted directly by a child as cross-examination has the potential
to traumatise the child to a greater degree than would be the case for an adult.
Draft recommendation 5.21.
Child victims, or a family member or a professional on their behalf, should be able to submit a VIS to be considered prior to sentencing.
The child's participation in preparing a VIS should be voluntary. In cases where the child has prepared a VIS on his or her own behalf,
cross-examination on the VIS should only be allowed in exceptional circumstances.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of similar legislation in all jurisdictions.
Children's evidence in certain proceedings
Evidentiary matters are also discussed in other chapters of this paper in the context of children's participation in specific legal
processes. Draft recommendations that touch upon the evidence of children have been made in the following contexts.
In care and protection proceedings, most jurisdictions have dispensed with strict adherence to the rules of evidence. There is some
concern, however, that the avoidance of strict rules of evidence leads to lack of rigour in the presentation of evidence. See draft
recommendation 9.13.
As a matter of course, the Family Court generally prefers that children do not give evidence. A corollary of this preference is the
modification in the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (Family Law Act) of some of the rules of evidence,
including a relaxation of the rule against hearsay. See draft recommendation 8.5.
Juvenile suspects are often investigated by police with a view to obtaining statements or other evidence from the child that may
be used as evidence against him or her in criminal proceedings. Legislative protections regarding police investigation of suspects
need modifications and/or additions to compensate for the vulnerability of children and young people during questioning. See draft
recommendation 10.9.
eg presumptions that children are competent to testify:
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
See also moves to abolish mandatory corroboration and judicial warning requirements with regard to children's testimony:
Evidence Act
(Vic) s 23A;
Evidence Act 1906
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 136;
Evidence Act 1910
(Tas) s 22D;
Evidence Act
Evidence Act
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 1995
See para 4.17–20 for a discussion of the proposed ART which is to replace these tribunals. Children will no doubt continue to
appear in the relevant divisions of this new body.
Children can participate in many of these proceedings without necessarily giving evidence. The participation of children in tribunals,
care and protection matters, family matters and juvenile justice proceedings is discussed in the relevant chapters.
Acts Amendment (Evidence of Children and Others) Act 1992
specified these factors as determinative of whether a judge may declare a person a 'special witness' eligible for the protections
in the Act that are generally available for child victim witnesses.
See G Goodman et al 'Children's concerns & memory: Ecological issues in the study of children's eyewitness testimony' in R Fivush
& J Hudson (eds)
What Young Children Remember and Why
Cambridge University Press Cambridge 1990; G Davies et al 'Close encounters of the witness kind: Children's memory for a simulated
health inspection' (1989)
British Journal of Psychology
80, 425; M A King & J Yulle 'Suggestibility and the child witness' in J Ceci et al (eds)
Children's Eyewitness Memory
Springer-Verlag New York 1987, 24.
Although most jurisdictions have removed requirements that a warning be given regarding the evidence of children, warnings are still
permissible in NSW, ACT, SA and under the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth). They may not be given in Vic, WA, Tas and NT unless they relate to the special circumstances of the case. In all jurisdictions,
research and evidence to the Inquiry has shown that warnings are often still given regarding children's evidence despite these changes
in the law.
NSW Law Reform Commission Sydney 1996, 45.
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) applies to the Family Court wherever the
Family Law Act
is silent on evidentiary matters:
Evidence Act
6. Jurisdictional arrangements in family law and care and protection
Introduction
Problems associated with the jurisdictional arrangements
Attempts to deal with the problems
Options for further reform
An extended cross-vesting scheme
State and Territory magistrates' courts
A Family Court magistracy
Alternative or consequential reforms
Introduction
law. This division arises from the constitutional limits on the Commonwealth's power to legislate in family matters. These jurisdictional
arrangements present a particularly complicated maze. They have resulted in judicial decision making being divided between Family
Court judges, judicial registrars exercising delegated judicial power, children's court magistrates or judges exercising State or
Territory care and protection jurisdiction and State and Territory generalist magistrates exercising both federal family law and
State or Territory care and protection jurisdictions. In evidence to the Inquiry there was wide agreement that the current jurisdictional
arrangements fail to serve the interests of the many children in the family law and care and protection systems who are already among
the most vulnerable and disadvantaged in Australia. Indeed it was widely observed that these arrangements add to the disadvantage
and distress of those children.
Problems associated with the jurisdictional arrangements
There are a number of problems associated with the current jurisdictional arrangements.
Proceedings in a State or Territory children's court running in tandem with or following Family Court proceedings concerning the
same child and essentially the same allegations.
This lack of co-ordination results in duplication between proceedings, delays in deciding a child's future, the possibility of repeated
interviews for the child and a potential increase in the risk of abuse or the creation of situations of damaging uncertainty for
Forum shopping or the inappropriate choice of forum.
A party may approach the Family Court in relation to issues which are essentially relevant to care and protection proceedings. The
relevant welfare department may decline to commence proceedings in the children's court if there is a suitable parent or carer available
to initiate proceedings in the Family Court. In some cases, this may be an unsatisfactory arrangement. In other cases, an inappropriate
choice of forum may mean that later care and protection proceedings are also necessary.
A reluctance by certain welfare departments to give priority to investigation of Family Court notifications of suspected child abuse.
A common lack of expertise in the range of often overlapping issues relating to care and protection and family law matters on the
part of the judicial officers in these jurisdictions
Care and protection orders and jurisdiction ending at State and Territory boundaries.
This can allow parents or guardians to move interstate to avoid proceedings or to escape orders and may require that litigation be
conducted in more than one State or Territory to protect a child.
Attempts to deal with the problems
The Commonwealth and the States and Territories have recognised some of these problems and have made attempts to rectify them. These
attempts include the following initiatives.
The early adoption by the Family Court of broad judicial interpretations of such terms as 'custody', 'guardianship' and 'child of
a marriage'.
The introduction of protocols between the Family Court, children's courts dealing with care and protection matters and the State
and Territory welfare departments.
The 1983 conferral on the Family Court of a statutory welfare jurisdiction in relation to children of a marriage.
The introduction by the Commonwealth and all States and Territories, except Western Australia, of cross-vesting legislation.
This applies to the Federal and Family Courts and each of the Supreme Courts of the States and Territories.
Any participating court may now exercise the jurisdiction of another participating court wherever it becomes relevant and is able
to transfer a matter to another participating court where appropriate.
The transfer to the Family Court of power in relation to 'custody and guardianship of, and access to ' ex-nuptial children by all
States except WA.
The introduction of legislative arrangements in some jurisdictions allowing the Family Court to exercise the care and protection
An agreement by the States and Territories and the Commonwealth to consider mechanisms to increase the portability of care and protection
orders interstate.
While each of these steps has been useful, they have collectively fallen short of satisfactorily resolving the difficulties with
the complex jurisdictional arrangements. These arrangements affect a significant number of the most vulnerable children each year.
Options for further reform
An extended cross-vesting scheme
One suggestion frequently offered to the Inquiry to overcome the jurisdictional problems was that the care and protection jurisdictions
of the States and Territories should be transferred wholesale to the Family Court. While this has the attraction of a single entity
for family proceedings, the transfer of jurisdiction is unlikely to attract the necessary political support in all jurisdictions.
An alternative scheme would be to empower the Family Court to deal with care and protection issues under State or Territory legislation
wherever they are relevant to matters already before it. State and Territory children's courts would be empowered reciprocally to
deal with relevant family law matters when considering care and protection applications.
In this way, all relevant issues could be dealt with in the one forum and in the one set of proceedings. Under this scheme, legislative
power for care and protection would remain solely with the States and Territories but would require additional cross-vesting of jurisdiction
between the Family Court and the children's courts of the States and Territories.
It would be necessary to restrict the operation of this new scheme to certain kinds of proceedings and powers, particularly those
that are generally limited to superior courts such as injunctive powers. The Commissions envisage the cross-vesting scheme operating
so that the first court to acquire a matter would hear the entirety of the relevant issues under both jurisdictions.
The successful operation of such a scheme for proceedings commenced in the Family Court would be dependent on the co-operation of
State and Territory welfare departments. In particular, the exercise of State and Territory care and protection jurisdiction would,
under the arrangements envisaged by the Commissions, remain dependent on the initiation of care and protection proceedings by the
relevant welfare department.
At present, courts of summary jurisdiction are able to determine matters relating to children under the
Family Law Act
only with the consent of the parties.
Under a cross-vesting scheme such as that suggested here, there would be no requirement for consent.
, which allows orders to be made under the
Family Law Act
only in restricted circumstances where there is a care and protection order in place, would be removed.
While such a scheme would minimise the risk that the parties would seek to institute proceedings in the court that afforded what
appeared to be the most advantageous procedures in terms of rules of evidence, confidentiality,
burdens of proof and the like, the possibility of forum shopping would need to be further examined and additional rules put in place
where necessary.
Draft recommendation 6.1.
A cross-vesting scheme should be established between the relevant State and Territory children's courts and the Family Court in relation
to the exercise of State and Territory care and protection and related federal family law matters. The cross-vesting scheme should
operate in the following way.
The first court to receive a matter involving issues relevant to the other jurisdiction should be able to deal with the whole range
of matters. Only where considerations of justice so require or where proceedings are considered to have been instituted in the court
as a result of inappropriate choice of forum or forum shopping should the proceedings be transferred to the other court. In considering
a transfer, the court should prefer the court which will allow the most effective and expeditious, and least expensive, resolution
of the matter.
To prevent inappropriate reviews of care and protection decisions, the cross-vesting scheme should not extend to the hearing of rescission
or variation applications from State or Territory care and protection matters.
The scheme should not extend to the cross-vesting of all family law matters, particularly the statutory welfare jurisdiction of the
Family Court and its injunctive powers which in general are restricted to superior courts.
Where issues relevant to the care and protection jurisdiction arise in the course of family law proceedings, the Family Court should
immediately notify the relevant welfare department and invite it to initiate care and protection proceedings under the cross-vesting
arrangements or to intervene in the proceedings.
Section 67ZA
Family Law Act
, which currently provides a broad interpretation of matters able to be notified by court personnel or family and child counsellors
or mediators, should be further extended to allow the notification to the relevant welfare department of all care and protection
To minimise the adverse consequences of a decision of a State or Territory welfare department not to act on a notification to it
in the course of family law proceedings, the Family Court should have the power, where it considers that care and protection orders
may be necessary, to require the relevant officer from the department to appear before it and provide a report explaining the reasons
for the decision not to pursue the notification and/or to provide information on the outcome of any investigation. This provision
should be used to ensure appropriate co-operation and communication between the department and the Family Court rather than to require
litigation of a matter which would more appropriately be dealt with informally by the department. The Family Court could adjourn
a matter and seek regular reports from the department on progress of informal work with the family.
Section 69N
Family Law Act
should be amended to provide that, in care and protection matters heard in a State or Territory court of summary jurisdiction in
which relevant
Family Law Act
issues arise, the State or Territory court should be able to hear the family law issues without the consent of the parties.
Under the recommended cross-vesting scheme,
Family Law Act
should be repealed as it would become redundant.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek the agreement of SCAG to the implementation of such a scheme. The relevant legislation, protocols
and procedures should be amended accordingly.
Draft recommendation 6.2.
The Family Court should undertake research, in conjunction with State and Territory children's courts and relevant welfare departments,
into consequential amendments and practical changes required to ensure the smooth operation of the cross-vesting scheme. In particular,
such research should address the effect on the scheme of the differences in the procedures and rules of evidence, delays, costs of
proceedings and issues of confidentiality of information in each jurisdiction.
Implementation.
The Family Court should seek the agreement of the relevant agencies to conduct such research and to introduce appropriate procedures
and protocols in consultation with OFC. The Family Court should introduce any necessary amendments to the Family Law Rules.
State and Territory magistrates' courts
To address some of the problems associated with access to the Family Court, the Commonwealth and the States and Territories have
come to an agreement whereby each State and Territory court of summary jurisdiction can exercise federal jurisdiction in some matters
relating to families and children.
These magistrates represent a significant resource, particularly in rural areas. However, detailed national statistics remain unavailable
on the extent of the use of magistrates' courts for family matters. Moreover, magistrates courts do not have any associated counselling
services or primary dispute resolution processes and there are limited Family Court counselling services on circuit in rural areas.
In the short term the Commissions consider that this jurisdictional arrangement should continue.
In the long term a specialist magistracy should be cultivated to handle family law and children's matters, including care and protection
and juvenile justice, in all jurisdictions including on circuit in rural areas.
In areas where generalist magistrates presently operate on circuit, these specialist family and children's magistrates could operate
on similar circuits. Such a specialist magistracy would assist the development of expertise in family and children's matters and,
in conjunction with the proposed cross-vesting arrangements, allow many matters concerning both care and protection and family law
issues to be dealt with in the one proceeding.
Draft recommendation 6.3.
States and Territories should develop a specialist magistracy able to exercise federal family law jurisdiction as well as to handle
care and protection and juvenile justice matters. All major population centres should have their own specialist family and children's
magistrates, while in more remote areas specialist magistrates should operate on circuit.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek the agreement of SCAG to the development of such a magistracy.
Draft recommendation 6.4.
States and Territories should produce uniform statistics on family law matters heard in magistrates' courts.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek the agreement of States and Territories through SCAG to the development of such statistics.
A Family Court magistracy
The introduction of a federal magistracy that specialises in family matters would further streamline the jurisdictional arrangements
for the determination of family law and care and protection matters, particularly under the proposed cross-vesting scheme. It would
allow matters dealt with by State and Territory magistrates exercising family law jurisdiction to be heard at a similar level in
the Family Court. Further, a federal family magistracy would simplify the Court's structure and increase its capacity.
There are several influential recommendations, including those by the Family Law Council and the Chief Justice of the Family Court,
for the introduction of such a magistracy in the Family Court. The introduction of a federal magistracy is being considered by the
Attorney-General.
Draft recommendation 6.5.
A specialist Family Court magistracy should be established. These magistrates should be judicial officers in their own right, empowered
to hear and determine contested children's matters.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should introduce a specialist federal magistracy for family matters.
The above proposals raise the question of how appellate jurisdiction should be shared by the Family Court and the relevant State
and Territory courts. Appeals from State and Territory courts of summary jurisdiction in family law matters may currently be dealt
with by either the relevant Supreme Court or the Family Court.
Appeals from care and protection matters in State and Territory children's courts may be to the District or Supreme Courts, and in
those children's courts headed by a judge, there is the possibility of appeals within the children's court.
The Commissions favour the establishment of a single court of appeal on all issues appealed from matters dealt with under the proposed
cross-vesting arrangements. Having regard to the desirability for national consistency and in view of the developing expertise of
the Family Court in child abuse matters, the Commissions consider that the appellate jurisdiction for all matters with a cross-vested
element under the proposed scheme should be conferred on the Family Court alone.
The more radical step of a full transfer of appellate jurisdiction to the Family Court from all care and protection decisions by
State or Territory children's courts would have the benefit of simplicity and was raised as an option for discussion in the Issues
Paper released by the Commissions in March 1996.
Responses to this option were evenly and strongly divided. Given this response, and in the light of the other draft recommendations
in this paper, the Commissions consider it to be appropriate to seek further response on the question of whether appeals should lie
to the Family Court from all State and Territory care and protection decisions.
Draft recommendation 6.6.
In relation to matters heard under the proposed cross-vesting arrangements, all appeals should lie to the Family Court. Matters originally
heard in a court of summary jurisdiction, a children's court or by a magistrate from the proposed Family Court magistracy should
be heard on appeal by a single judge of the Family Court
. Matters originally heard by a judge in the Family Court should go on appeal to the Full Court of the Family Court.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek the agreement of the States and Territories through SCAG to the proposal that appeals should lie
to the Family Court from decisions made pursuant to the proposed cross-vesting scheme.
Comments sought.
The Commissions invite comment, particularly in the context of the other draft recommendations in this paper, on whether appellate
Alternative or consequential reforms
As an alternative to the proposed model, the care and protection and family law jurisdictions could be rationalised by a reference
of powers to the Commonwealth similar to those given by Tasmania and NSW.
This reference of powers allows orders under the
Family Law Act
, such as contact orders, to be made concerning a child in care with the consent of the State or Territory welfare Minister. Proclamations
by the Governor-General to activate
s 69ZK(1)(b)
Family Law Act
would also be needed.
In principle, there should be no procedural reason why the family law jurisdiction should not be invoked by children's courts magistrates
in each State or Territory. Where necessary this would require children's courts to be proclaimed as courts of summary jurisdiction
for the purposes of the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) allowing them to be invested with federal family jurisdiction. For those children's courts that already have district court
status, alternative arrangements should be developed to ensure they are able to exercise federal family jurisdiction where appropriate.
Other reforms would assist in streamlining current jurisdictional arrangements whether or not the model discussed above is pursued.
In particular, continuing confusion over the extent of the welfare and
parens patriae
Continuing developmental work and training is also required in relation to protocols and data collection and analysis.
Draft recommendation 6.7.
The States should refer power to the Commonwealth to legislate for the welfare of ex-nuptial children, excluding matters falling
within the care and protection jurisdiction of the States.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek the agreement of SCAG to such a referral of power.
Draft recommendation 6.8.
The process of developing protocols for inter-agency contact between the Family Court, State and Territory welfare departments and
the relevant children's courts should continue where protocols are not already in place. All protocols should be regularly reviewed
to ensure that they enhance co-operation between, and the professionalism of, the agencies concerned, that they promote the best
interests of the child and that they continue to be relevant to workers in the field. Family Court, children's and magistrate courts
and welfare department staff should receive training in the protocols on a regular basis and protocols should be widely published,
particularly when they are updated.
Implementation.
The protocols committees established in each jurisdiction should pursue the development and regular review of protocols and associated
training measures.
Draft recommendation 6.9.
The Family Court should collect, analyse and publish data concerning child abuse notifications made to State or Territory welfare
departments and about outcomes of such notifications. In particular, all allegations of abuse should be recorded along with information
Court matter and of any departmental investigation including care and protection proceedings.
Implementation.
The Family Court should establish an appropriate database for the collection of these statistics and ensure appropriate procedures
and protocols are in place to allow their collection and publication.
Draft recommendation 6.10.
Notifications of care and protection issues arising in family law proceedings should be tracked through the Family Court, welfare
department and children's court and reports provided to the Family Court on the outcomes of investigations.
Implementation.
In conjunction with the State and Territory children's courts and welfare departments, the Family Court should develop mechanisms
to ensure that these notifications are appropriately tracked and reported.
J Seymour 'The role of the Family Court of Australia in child welfare matters'
Federal Law Review
Secretary Department of Health and Community Services v JMB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 15 Fam LR 392
also deals with this matter in detail.
All entitled the
(ACT). One of the effects of this legislation in relation to family law appears to be that the Family Court may exercise the residual
parens patriae
scheme: J Seymour 'The role of the Family Court of Australia in child welfare matters' (1992) 21
Federal Law Review
The scheme has indirect coverage of 'non-Supreme' courts of the States and Territories, in that, under
of the cross-vesting legislation, matters can be removed from these courts to the Supreme Court of the relevant jurisdiction and
from there may be transferred to any other more appropriate participating court.
of the cross-vesting legislation of each jurisdiction.
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law — Children) Act 1986
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law — Children) Act 1986
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law — Children) Act 1986
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law) Act 1987
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law — Children) Act 1990
(Qld). The Cth passed legislation in the form of the
Family Law Amendment Act 1987
Tas and NSW have introduced the
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law) Amendment Act 1994
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law — Children) Act 1996
(NSW) respectively
That legislation adds s 3(2A) to the primary legislation which allows referral of matters specified to the Family Court if the Minister
of the Crown responsible for the administration of the relevant legislation or someone authorised on his or her behalf consents in
writing. This has allowed the
Family Law Act
s 69ZK(1)(b)
to be brought into force by way of proclamation pursuant to s 69ZF of the Act in relation to those States. See also
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
(Vic) s 103, 114.
Victorian Dept of Human Services
Discussion Paper: Resolving cross jurisdictional problems in child protection
Dept of Human Services Melbourne 1996.
It is difficult to determine how many children are adversely affected by Australia's jurisdictional arrangements.
There were 1 518 notifications of child abuse made by counselling staff of the Family Court of Australia to the relevant welfare
dept in the financial year to July 1996: Family Court of Australia
Annual Report 1995–96
Family Court of Australia Sydney 1996, 72. In addition, there were an unknown number of notifications passed by the Family Court
to the department from parties under the
Family Law Act
It must be remembered that a notification as defined by the Family Court may not be accepted by the relevant dept as a notification
for the purposes of its legislation.
In addition to the jurisdictional division between the courts of different levels of government, there are problems in the State-based
system of care and protection. It has been estimated that between 200 and 250 children the subject of a care order may be living
outside the jurisdiction in which the order was made: Victorian Dept of Human Services
Discussion Paper: Resolving Cross Jurisdictional Problems in Child Protection
Dept of Human Services Melbourne 1996, 6.
Such a scheme would be subject to the outcome of the current challenges to the constitutionality of the cross-vesting scheme in the
appeal to the High Court against the Federal Court decisions of
BP v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd; Cortaus Ltd (in liq) v Larken Ltd and ors; Southern Steel Suppliers Pty Ltd v Favelle Favco Holdings
(1996) 137 CLR 447.
This matter was dealt with by the Family Law Council in its report
Child Sexual Abuse
AGPS Canberra 1988. AIJA also recommended that the cross-vesting scheme be extended to inferior courts at least to the level of the
main civil trial courts: G J Moloney & S McMaster
Cross-vesting of Jurisdiction: A Review of the Operation of the National Scheme
AIJA Melbourne 1992, 120. The discussion dealt mainly with areas of law other than family law but the principle was to apply generally.
The Family Law Council envisaged that the State and Territory children's courts should take precedence in hearing matters that involve
allegations of child sexual abuse or care and protection issues: Family Law Council
Child Sexual Abuse
AGPS Canberra 1988, 33.
Family Law Act
See para 6.10–11 for a discussion of the magistracy in family law.
See also Family Law Council
Child Sexual Abuse
Report AGPS Canberra 1988, 35.
Further, to function effectively a substantial degree of consistency in care and protection legislation is necessary. This is discussed
in more detail at para 9.4–5. It would also be necessary for the judiciary and magistracy to become more proactive in their
adjudication. These issues are discussed at 8.10, 9.11.
Some jurisdictions have provisions that are interpreted narrowly and that would have implications for such a cross-vesting scheme.
See, eg, the circumstances of
(1997) 20 Fam LR 651.
eg the requirement in the
Evidence Act
that it take precedence over State or Territory rules of evidence where proceedings concern State or Territory as well as federal
legislation should be examined. It may be that the less stringent rules of evidence in care and protection jurisdictions may assist
in the proper resolution of matters in cases where both care and protection and family law issues are involved.
Family Law Act
Courts of summary jurisdiction have been described as those courts that '... have exclusive power to hear and determine complaints
of simple offences — that is, statutory offences which are expressed to be triable summarily or which are not expressed to be
triable on indictment [ie by a jury].': J Crawford
Australian Courts of Law
3rd ed Oxford University Press Melbourne 1993, 94.
Draft recs 8.3-4, 8.20 relate to the Family Court counselling and dispute resolution services.
Draft recs 8.24, 9.12, 10.24-25 relate to the training and expertise of the magistracy.
Evidence presented to the Inquiry supported the development of specialised magistrates for care and protection and juvenile justice
matters, as well as for family law. In the States, children's courts do specialise in care and protection and juvenile justice proceedings.
However, in the Territories and in rural areas, generalist magistrates handle these matters along with the family law jurisdiction
and other proceedings.
Family Law Council
Magistrates in Family Law: An evaluation of the exercise of summary jurisdiction to improve access to the family law
AGPS Canberra 1995, 2; Family Court of Australia
Annual Report 1994–95
Family Court of Australia Sydney 1995, 24. It should be noted that the Family Court of WA has instituted a system whereby registrars
are able to sit as stipendiary magistrates under the
Stipendiary Magistrates' Act 1957
Family Court Act (1975)
WA s 23(1). These magistrates are thereby able to exercise the federal family jurisdiction conferred on State courts of summary jurisdiction
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
For those purposes, the Supreme Courts of the States and Territories are invested with federal family jurisdiction:
Victoria has a bifurcated appeals system where matters of fact are heard by the District Court and matters of law go on appeal to
the Supreme Court:
Children's and Young Persons Act 1989
(Vic) s 116, 117.
Such a proposal was also raised as an option in Fogarty J
Protective Services for Children in Victoria
Dept of Human Services and Health Melbourne 1993, 150.
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law) Amendment Act 1994
Commonwealth Powers (Family Law — Children) Act 1996
Family Law Act
For a discussion of the history of the jurisdictional arrangements concerning, and of the extent of, the
parens patriae
and welfare jurisdictions see J Seymour 'The role of the Family Court of Australia in child welfare matters'
Federal Law Review
7. Legal representation and the litigation status of children
Introduction
Representation in civil proceedings
Representation of children in family law and care and protection
Current arrangements
Observations and conclusions
Standards for all lawyers acting for children
Representation in family law
Appointment of the representative
Representation in care and protection
Funding and training issues
Introduction
Article 12 of CROC provides that children are entitled to express views freely in matters affecting them. It also states that legal
processes must be easily understood by and accessible to children and their participation in the legal process facilitated. Children's
understanding and participation in legal proceedings depends in part on the age of the child, the nature of the process, the forum
in which it is made and the form and quality of representation available to the child. The Commissions consider that clarification
of the role of children's representatives is necessary.
Representation in civil proceedings
Traditionally, children were considered to be under a 'disability' for the purposes of legal proceedings and were not entitled to
initiate or participate directly in any civil proceedings.
Courts recognised that in some circumstances litigation should be able to be instituted on behalf of a child by a next friend or
The next friend or guardian
does not represent children but brings matters that directly affect them before the court. These next friend and guardian
procedures apply to children initiating or defending civil proceedings in federal and State and Territory courts.
The next friend and guardian
model can be helpful to the child and the court.
However, the next friend or guardian
is not required by the relevant court rules to consider the best interests of the child when making decisions in the litigation.
Further, the model prevents mature and independent children from initiating civil proceedings directly.
Draft recommendation 7.1.
Court Rules should be amended to include a provision requiring the guardian
or next friend of a child to regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration in conducting proceedings on behalf
of that child. The Rules should stipulate that failure to consider the child's best interests constitutes grounds for removal of
the next friend or guardian
by the court.
Implementation.
The Federal and High Courts, along with State and Territory courts, are encouraged to amend their Rules to this effect.
Draft recommendation 7.2.
There should be a presumption that a child over the age of 16 years can litigate directly by instructing a legal representative.
The child may be required, on the application of any party or by the court on its own motion, to lodge security for costs and should
be liable on any costs orders.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should introduce legislation to this effect to apply to the Federal and High Courts and the Rules of those courts
should be amended to reflect that legislation. The Attorney-General should seek the agreement of the States and Territories through
SCAG to the introduction of similar legislation.
Draft recommendation 7.3.
Court Rules should be amended by the insertion of a subrule similar to that contained in the Family Law Rules O 23 r 3(1) whereby
the Court may require the appointment of a next friend for a child who has initiated proceedings directly where the court is satisfied
that the child does not understand the nature and possible consequences of the proceedings or is not capable of conducting proceedings
Implementation.
The Federal and High Courts, along with State and Territory courts, are encouraged to amend their Rules to this effect.
Representation of children in family law and care and protection
Current arrangements
Family Law Act
, children may commence proceedings in the Family Court.
The Family Law Rules allow the Court to appoint a next friend where it is satisfied the child does not understand the nature and
possible consequences of the proceedings or is not capable of conducting the proceedings directly.
In practice, children rarely litigate in family law either directly or by a next friend.
More commonly, children who are the subject of disputes in the Family Court are separately represented by a child's representative.
The Family Court can appoint a child's representative wherever it appears to the Court that a child ought to be separately represented.
The Court may make an order on its own initiative or on the application of any other person including the child.
The representative is required to represent the child's best interests and does not act upon the child's instructions.
The Australian care and protection systems have differing models of representation including the direct instructions model where
children are able to participate directly in the litigation and the best interests model where the child's best interests are advocated.
Observations and conclusions
In considering the models of representation for children in care and protection and family law proceedings, the Commissions have
reached the following conclusions.
Consistent with CROC, any model of representation should allow children the opportunity to be heard in matters affecting them and
to participate in family proceedings.
There are numbers of children with the maturity and judgement to direct their lawyer just as there are many adults with limited maturity
and poor judgement who instruct legal representatives. The Commissions received many complaints about lawyers who did not speak to
their child clients and who did not convey all relevant information from or concerning the child to the court. Children who are able
and willing to participate in litigation that affects them may effectively be denied the opportunity to be heard properly by the
imposition of best interests advocacy. Encouraging and facilitating children's participation should not be confused with burdening
children with unwanted or inappropriate decision making.
Best interests representation often presents the advocate with a confusion and conflict of roles: the representative is asked to
conduct investigations and make assessments that are properly within the area of expertise of social scientists and then to draw
conclusions in submissions on the basis of that assessment that are properly within the province of the judiciary. At the same time
the representative is intended to provide partial compliance with article 12 of CROC. These roles are different and often incompatible.
The representative's selection and presentation of evidence on the best interests of the child is not open to scrutiny by the court
by way of cross-examination as to the selection and presentation of evidence. Best interests advocacy reposes an unexaminable discretion
upon legal representatives.
In some cases, particularly in relation to very young children or those who are unwilling to participate, the representative may
in effect add nothing of substance to assist in the determination of the issues. In other cases where the child is unable or unwilling
to participate, the representative may add to the rancour of the litigation by simply supporting one party, creating a perception
of 'two against one' that does not assist in the resolution of the dispute.
In order to participate effectively in family litigation, children need clearly to understand the role of their lawyer. Children
in one NSW study and in evidence to the Inquiry generally expected their lawyer to act as an advocate or interpreter of their views.
Few of the lawyers who contributed to the study perceived that to be their role.
Representatives advocating for the child's best interests can be of most assistance to the court by testing evidence, adducing information
that may have been overlooked or that does not serve the interests of either party and assisting in the resolution of disputes prior
to hearing. These roles need not necessarily be filled by the representative for the child — they may be filled by a court counsellor
in primary dispute resolution or court report writing roles or by Court appointed experts.
Direct legal representation allows children to participate in proceedings if they are able and willing to do so and avoids role confusion
of representatives but requires that the child be competent to provide some form of instructions.
The role of a child's representative should remain fluid to account for the different needs, capacities and instructions of children.
The requirements of the role should be sufficiently clear, however, to be readily understood by the court representatives and child
clients. As far as possible, a standard lawyer/client relationship should operate.
The team approach which seeks to separate the different functions asked of the representative in the best interests model has received
considerable support in recent reports and in submissions to the Inquiry.
A team has substantial benefits,
but may add to the conflict, is resource intensive and introduces another element of paternalism to the relationship between the
child and the court.
Standards for all lawyers acting for children
Currently there are no detailed standards for representation of children in family law or care and protection matters although the
scope and functions of the child's representative have been considered by the Family Court. The Commissions found a real need for
standards. The practice guidelines developed by the Conference on Ethical Issues on the Legal Representation of Children
and the American Bar Association's 1996
Standards of Practice of Lawyers Who Represent Children in Abuse and Neglect Cases
provide a valuable starting point for the development of standards for Australian representatives:
... these standards reject the concept that any disability must be globally determined. Rather, disability is contextual, incremental,
and may be intermittent. ... [A] child may be able to determine some positions in the case but not others. Similarly, a child may
be able to direct a lawyer with respect to a particular issue at one time but not at another.
Draft recommendation 7.4.
Clear standards for the representation of children in all family law and care and protection proceedings should be developed. These
standards should require that representatives conduct children's matters in a manner that facilitates the appropriate participation
of children.
In all cases where a representative is appointed and the child is able and willing to express views or provide instructions, the
representative should allow the child to direct the representation as an adult client would. The criterion to be applied in determining
the basis of representation is the child's willingness and ability to participate rather than any assessment of the 'good judgement'
or level of maturity of the child.
There should be a general duty to the court that requires representatives to act fairly. In cases where a representative has serious
concerns about the safety or well-being of a child, the representative should notify the Court of those concerns.
Sufficient time should be devoted to each child client to ensure that the child understands the nature of the proceedings and that
the representative has established the child's instructions or wishes.
Where a child is not able or not willing to provide instructions to the representative, the representative should ensure that the
court is aware of the fact and has determined that the basis for the representation should be the best interests of the child.
Where a representative considers he or she is unable to proceed on the direct instructions model as directed by the court or, contrary
to court order for the best interests model, where the child has indicated a desire to directly instruct, the representative should
approach the court for direction. The representative should, under no circumstances, proceed if he or she is uncertain of the basis
of representation the child. The best interests of a child should only be used as the basis for representation where the court has
sanctioned that approach.
Where a child client withdraws instructions from a representative after having provided some initial instructions, the representative
should attempt to establish with the child whether the child wishes to withdraw instructions entirely or merely to offer no instructions
on one or more points.
In all cases the representative should meet with a verbal child and keep the child informed of the progress of the litigation.
No substantive step in litigation should be taken by the representative without, as far as possible, meeting with the child.
Preference should be given to face to face communication with the child over communication by telephone or in writing.
Implementation.
The Family Court, children's courts, Legal Aid Commissions and OFC should convene a working group to develop appropriate standards,
in consultation with young people and relevant youth agencies.
Draft recommendation 7.5.
Research should be conducted to establish the most appropriate mechanisms by which the instructions of a young but verbal child may
be obtained. This research should inform the development of the standards for representatives proposed at draft recommendation 7.4
and should be used in training for representatives.
Implementation.
OFC should commission and publish such research and provide the research findings to the working group proposed at draft recommendation
Draft recommendation 7.6.
Research should be conducted to establish suitable criteria for the determination, by a representative, of the best interests of
the child in both care and protection and family law matters. These should be used to inform the development of standards for representatives
proposed at draft recommendation 7.4 and should be used in training for representatives.
Implementation.
OFC should commission and publish such research and provide the research findings to the working group proposed at draft recommendation
Representation in family law
Appointment of the representative
The Commissions agree with the circumstances identified by the Family Court for providing representation for children in
The criteria identified in that case should continue to apply and the appointment should be made as early in the proceedings as possible
so that children's opinions may be heard in the negotiation phase.
At present, family reports provide information to the Court about the best interests of the child and primary dispute resolution
processes appropriately involve children who do not wish to participate directly in formal proceedings.
The draft recommendations in this section require not only the maintenance but also the development of these processes for providing
information to the Court about the best interests of the child and allowing children to participate. In particular, the family reporting
process should allow more extensive investigation of the child's best interests and family reports should provide this best interests
information to the court. Greater use should also be made of assessors to assist the Court to determine the best interests of the
The child's representative may supplement, but should no longer be relied upon as the main source of, information about the best
interests of the child.
Draft recommendation 7.7.
The appointment of a representative for a child under
Family Law Act
should be made as early as possible. In all cases, if the representation is not to be on the instructions of the child, this should
be clearly stated at the time the appointment is made.
Implementation.
Appointment of a representative should preferably be made at the first directions hearing by the registrar in consideration of an
assessment by the court counsellor as to whether the child is able or willing to participate in proceedings.
Draft recommendation 7.8.
Where it appears to the representative that the child is unwilling or unable to express a view as to the outcome to the litigation
where the representative considers that the best interests of the child do not require that evidence be tested or adduced or
where the representative otherwise has nothing to add to the submissions and evidence of the parties
the representative should apply, as early in the proceedings as possible, to be discharged.
Implementation.
Inclusion of a rule to this effect in O 23 of the Family Law Rules may assist.
Draft recommendation 7.9.
The current role of the Family Court counsellor in providing family reports should be expanded and enhanced in appropriate cases,
particularly where a child is unwilling or unable to instruct a representative. A more detailed investigation and assessment of the
best interests of the child, along with the presentation to the Court of the evidence upon which that assessment is based, should
be conducted in preparing family reports. This investigation should encompass many of the functions currently performed by the child's
representative including interviewing relevant people such as family members, school teachers and professionals involved with the
child. Where a child would have been provided with a representative but for the fact that he or she is unwilling to express a view,
the court counsellor should be responsible, where appropriate, for keeping the child informed about the progress of the litigation.
Implementation.
The Family Court should draft an amendment to O 25 of the Family Law Rules to this effect.
Draft recommendation 7.10.
Wherever appropriate, children should be invited and encouraged to participate in primary dispute resolution processes, such as counselling
or mediation.
Implementation.
The Court should amend the Family Law Rules and/or Case Management Guidelines to provide mechanisms for encouraging children's participation
in primary dispute resolution processes.
Draft recommendation 7.11.
Children who have been provided with a representative, under
Family Law Act
, should be able to withdraw instructions from that representative and may request a second solicitor be engaged. This should require
the leave of the Court. Leave should generally be given if the child can show that the representative has failed to consult or, unless
the representation has been expressed to be on the basis of the child's best interests, to follow instructions.
Implementation.
Inclusion of a rule to this effect in O 23 of the Family Law Rules may assist.
Draft recommendation 7.12.
Family Law Act
should be amended to ensure that legal professional privilege applies to communications between the representative and the child
even where the child is not a party to proceedings. This privilege should be subject to the obligation of the representative to notify
to the Court formally of relevant matters where the safety or well-being of the child may be at risk.
Implementation
The Family Court should amend O 23 of the Family Law Rules accordingly.
Draft recommendation 7.13.
Consideration should be given to adjusting the order in which evidence is adduced at trial so that evidence relating to financial
matters is heard after evidence concerning children's issues to enable the child's representative to be excused at the completion
of the hearing of relevant evidence.
Implementation.
The Court should amend the Family Law Rules and/or Case Management Guidelines, as appropriate, to this effect.
Representation in care and protection
The model of children's representation in care and protection proceedings should be the same as in family law proceedings. However,
the requirements of children in the two jurisdictions differ. In particular, the legal representative in care and protection matters
should have a continuing relationship with a child client in care,
which is generally not required of representatives for children in Family Court matters. Every child involved in care and protection
litigation should be provided with a legal representative. For those children who are too young or are unwilling to express a view
to a lawyer, the representative should proceed on the basis of an assessment of the best interests of the child.
A lawyer in care and protection proceedings may apply to be discharged if it appears that the child neither needs nor wants the assistance
of a representative.
Generally care and protection jurisdictions have limited provision of independent advice from social scientists to assist the court
and the representatives in the assessment and determination of the best interests of a child. A Children's Clinic attached to the
Melbourne Children's Court employs social scientists to provide the Court with assessments of the families and children who are the
subject of care and protection applications. Evidence to the Commissions indicated that the Clinic is well regarded and functions
efficiently.
Draft recommendation 7.14.
All children who are the subject of a care and protection application in the States and Territories should be provided with a lawyer
who represents the child on the basis of the guidelines at draft recommendation 7.4. Where it appears to the representative that
the child neither needs nor wants his or her assistance, the lawyer should apply to the court to be discharged. The child should
also be able to approach the court for approval for discharge of a representative and may also seek the appointment of another lawyer
Implementation.
The national care and protection standards proposed at draft recommendation 9.3 should include provisions to this effect.
Draft recommendation 7.15.
Clinics similar to the Melbourne Children's Court Clinic should be resourced and attached to children's courts to provide the court
and legal representatives with expert advice on the best interests of the child.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General, through SCAG, should seek the agreement of the States and Territories to the introduction of such clinics.
Funding and training issues
The Commissions recognise that there are resource constraints on Legal Aid Commissions but consider it vital that children continue
to be provided with adequate representation, particularly in family law, care and protection and juvenile justice matters. An option
for addressing some of the funding difficulties in the family law jurisdiction may be to allow orders to be made for costs of a child's
representative to be paid, where appropriate, by the parties.
We also consider it to be vital that representatives for children be adequately trained. The Law Council of Australia, National Legal
Aid and the College of Law developed and implemented during 1996 a training program for child representatives in the Family Court.
The Commissions consider the initiative to be commendable but that in addition the representation of children should be an area of
specialisation.
Draft recommendation 7.16.
The Commonwealth and the States and Territories should make separate appropriations of funds for the representation of children in
care and protection, family law and juvenile justice proceedings. These funds should be administered by State and Territory Legal
Aid Commissions.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should negotiate with the States and Territories for separate appropriations of funds.
Draft recommendation 7.17.
A child applicant for legal aid should not be subjected to a parental means test in family law, care and protection or criminal law
matters to determine his or her eligibility for aid.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek the agreement of the States and Territories through SCAG that State and Territory Legal Aid Commissions
will reflect these conclusions in relevant assessment guidelines.
Draft recommendation 7.18.
Guidelines for children's legal aid funding should require that a grant of aid to a child should not be terminated because costs
have reached a capped funding limit.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek the agreement of the States and Territories through SCAG to the introduction of a legal aid guideline
to this effect.
Draft recommendation 7.19.
The Family Court should have a discretion in appropriate cases to order the recovery of costs for representation of a child pursuant
Family Law Act
from the either or both of the parties. Such orders should only be made where the parties are able to meet those costs and where
it is appropriate to do so. Such an order should be restricted to the Court's own motion and should not be available at the application
of the parties. Children who are full parties to family law proceedings that involve a parent should be subject to an individual
means test independent of their parents.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should amend
Family Law Act
to this effect.
Draft recommendation 7.20.
Specialist children's units should be established within the Legal Aid Commission of each State and Territory that are free to work
in federal, State and Territory jurisdictions. The units should provide representation for children in family law, care and protection
and juvenile justice matters, before tribunals and in relation to the lodgement and carriage of complaint matters by the child.
These units should be staffed by lawyers experienced in representing children and skilled in working and communicating with children.
Staff should also include social workers trained and experienced in working with children.
All legal and social work staff in the units should receive regular training on the law and social science practice in relation to
children, child development and cognition, interviewing and communicating with children and cross-cultural awareness.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should negotiate with the States and Territories concerning the establishment, operation, staffing, training
and funding of these units.
Draft recommendation 7.21.
Multi-disciplinary training for lawyers and social scientists working in the area of children and the law should be developed. This
training should form part of tertiary studies in law and of professional development by existing continuing professional education
and specialist accreditation processes.
Implementation.
The Commonwealth should make grants available for suitable training programs through DEETYA to support the development of such training.
Draft recommendation 7.22.
The practice of children's law in the Family Court and State and Territory children's courts should be developed as an area of specialisation.
Children's representatives in all jurisdictions should receive appropriate training in children's development and cognition and in
interviewing children. Legal aid grants should be restricted to accredited lawyers.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek agreement of the States and Territories through SCAG to the development of specialist accreditation
programs in children's law for practice in children's courts or the Family Court and to the introduction of appropriate legal aid
guidelines.
Australian Civil Procedure
4th ed LBC Information Services Sydney 1996, 350.
See High Court Rules O 16 r 18 and Federal Court Rules O 43 r 1, which are in very similar terms. See also B Cairns
Australian Civil Procedure
4th ed LBC Information Services Sydney 1996, 350. This discussion excludes reference to family law litigation which is discussed
in the next sections.
eg Law Reform Committee of Judges
Submission 64
; Australian Association of Social Workers
Submission 207
; Queensland Law Society
Submission 190
At present, common law rules state that if proceedings are instituted without the use of a next friend, the solicitor acting for the
minor may become personally liable for any costs awarded against the minor:
Cooper v Dummett
(1939) WN 248.
Proceedings without the next friend or guardian ad
are irregular only and may proceed if there is no objection:
Mewburn v Mewburn
(1934) 51 WN (NSW) 170
Spellson v George
(1987) 11 NSWLR 300.
O 23 r 3(1).
But see, eg,
Pagliarella and Pagliarella
(1993) FLC 92–400. In Britain, the Family Proceedings Rules 1991 allow a child to be independently represented if the court
is satisfied that the child is mature enough to provide instructions: r 9.2A.
Amendments to the
Family Law Act
in 1995 refer to the representative for a child in this model of representation as a 'child's representative':
Prior to these amendments, the term used was 'separate representative'.
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
The proposed Tasmanian care and protection legislation, the Children, Young Persons and Their Families Bill, provides that a child
the subject of a care and protection application should be represented unless he or she has made an informed decision not to be represented.
The representative is to take instructions from the child and act on those instructions unless the representative believes the child
is unable or unwilling to give instructions. In those cases, the representative will represent the child's best interests which are
to be assessed by a social scientist: Tasmanian Government
Submission 210
In SA, the representative acts on the instructions of the child unless the child is too young to instruct, in which case the representation
should be on the basis of the child's best interests:
Children's Protection Act 1993
Victorian legislation similarly requires representatives to act on the instructions of the child, but children who are not considered
competent are not represented at all:
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
(Vic) s 87(1). Generally a child is considered sufficiently mature to provide instructions after the age of seven, but the emphasis
is placed on maturity rather than the age of the child: Victorian Government
Submission 213
In NSW, representation of children is arranged in all cases and is provided pursuant to the
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
s 66(2). The role and functions of the representative have not been defined in the legislation, but in practice, the representative
functions in a similar manner to the child's representative in the Family Court representing the child's best interests: NSW Dept
of Community Services Legislation Review Unit
Review of the
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
Discussion Paper 1: Law and Policy in Child Protection
NSW Dept of Community Services Sydney 1996, 70.
In Qld, children are rarely represented in care and protection matters: Queensland Law Society
Submission 190
arts 9(2), 12(2).
J Cashmore & K Bussey 'Perceptions of children and lawyers in care and protection proceedings' (1994) 8
International Journal of Law and the Family,
eg T Brown et al
Submission 47
; Children's Interest Bureau
Submission 156
; Family Services Council
Submission 122
; Law Society of NSW
Submission 209
Submission 214
; Geelong Rape Crisis Centre
Submission 151
; Australian Psychological Society
Submission 131
; SA Department of Family & Community Services
Submission 110
; Parents Without Rights
Submission 32;
Australian Association of Social Workers
Submission 207
. See also F Castiglione 'Present difficulties of role conflict and accountability of the separate legal representative'
Fifth National Family Law Conference 8–12 September 1992
Business Law Education Centre Melbourne 1992, 287.
The Family Law Council has recommended that the role of the child's representative be undertaken by a team comprising a solicitor
and a social worker:
Representation of Children in Family Law Proceedings
AGPS Canberra 1989. For a similar recommendation, see T L Muhlhauser & D D Knowlton 'The "best interest team": Exploring
the concept of a guardian
North Dakota Law Review
More recently, the Family Law Council proposed the introduction of a co-ordinator, perhaps in addition to a child's representative
in family law proceedings:
Involving and Representing Children in Family Law
Family Law Council Canberra 1996, 32–34.
The ALRC has recommended that the Family Court trial both a case team and a co-ordinator approach and consider the effectiveness of
each after the trial period: Report 73
For the Sake of the Kids: Complex contact cases and the Family Court
ALRC Sydney 1995, 51.
The Family Court recently recommended that closer ties be forged between the child's representative and the Family Court counselling
service to the extent that the counsellor should discuss some issues arising from confidential counselling with the child's representative:
Representing the Child's Interests in the Family Court: Report to the Chief Justice of the Family Court of Australia
Family Court of Australia Brisbane 1996, 27–29. It did not go so far as to recommend that the separate representative and the
counsellor work as a team as this may fetter the independence of the separate representative: see 31.
See, eg, D Levine 'To assert children's rights or promote children's needs: How to attain both goals'
Fordham Law Review
Fordham Law Review
American Bar Association 1996, B–3.
(1994) FLC 92–461.
See also para 8.7, 8.17. At present, a family report is prepared in relation to approximately 60% of children's matters that proceed
to hearing in the Family Court: D Smith 'The right of the child to be heard — The Family Court's response' Paper presented at
The Competitive Edge:
29th Australian Legal Convention
Law Council of Australia 28–29 September 1995, 293.
Family Law Act
and Family Law Rules O 30B. See also draft rec 8.5.
See draft rec 9.16.
In which case, draft rec 7.15 applies.
Such a scheme was recommended in ALRC Report 75
Costs shifting — who pays for litigation
ALRC Sydney 1995, 81. The Family Law Council also suggested a similar scheme in its report
Involving and Representing Children in Family Law
Family Law Council Canberra 1996, 46. In New Zealand the parties are advised at the time of the appointment of the representative
for the child that they may be called upon to reimburse some of the cost of the representation for the child.
The Commissions note that there is a program established at the School of Law at Flinders University in SA concerning representation
of children: Action for Children
Submission 189
. A proposal has been made to Monash University for the development of a similar course: T Brown et al Monash University
Submission 47
8. Children's involvement in family law proceedings
Introduction
The best interests principle
Pre-hearing processes
Family Court practice and procedure
The rules of evidence
Simplified procedures
Parenting plans
The right of the child to be heard in family law proceedings
Vulnerable groups and the Family Court
Indigenous children
Children of non-English speaking background
Children in rural and remote areas
Young people with intellectual disabilities
Training issues
Introduction
Many Australian children grow up in families where the parents divorce.
The experience and process of family breakdown and family disputes can be a disruptive and destructive time for families and children.
While all matters relating to the breakdown of parents' relationships affect children, they are particularly affected by disputes
over parental responsibility. For many children, family law proceedings are the first contact they have with courts and the legal
The traditional adversarial model has been modified somewhat in the Family Court in relation to matters involving children, in particular
by the requirement that the best interests of the child be the paramount consideration in dealing with those matters.
The Family Court has also developed substantial primary dispute resolution processes such as counselling and mediation. There has
been recognition recently of the need for the wishes of children to be heard in family law proceedings.
There is growing recognition that the adverse effects of these proceedings on children can be reduced by giving them the opportunity
to participate appropriately in decision making. However, the focus of the Court remains on the parental contest and it would be
fair to say that the processes of family law litigation do not always serve the needs or interests of children or allow their effective
participation.
This marginalisation of children is also a feature of State and Territory magistrates courts empowered to deal with family law matters.
These magistrates generally have little specialist training and varying levels of interest in the jurisdiction. They have limited
access to the facilitative and non-adversarial dispute resolution processes of the Family Court such as counselling and mediation
and little access to expert assistance from court counsellors.
This chapter is directed at
enhancing the expertise of those judicial officers and professionals dealing with family law in understanding and communicating with
formulating better arrangements to promote children's appropriate participation in the resolution of litigated family disputes.
The best interests principle
Family Law Act
requires the Family Court to have regard to the need to protect the rights of children and to promote their welfare in any matter
with which it deals under the Act. It is only when making parenting, adoption
or location and recovery orders or considering the general welfare of a child that the legislation specifically requires the Court
to regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
Family Law Act
lists the factors that the court must consider in determining a child's best interests, beginning with any wishes expressed by the
The best interests principle is to apply to orders such as children's location and recovery, adoption and general welfare. However
the wording of the factors clearly indicates that they were intended only for those situations where the Court is considering issues
related to parenting orders. The Commissions consider that the list of factors should be broadened to be relevant to all types of
proceedings in which the best interests of the child are the paramount consideration.
Draft recommendation 8.1.
In all actions taken by the Family Court concerning children, apart from maintenance matters, the best interests of the child should
be a primary consideration.
Implementation.
Family Law Act
should be amended to reflect the provisions of article 3(1) of CROC.
Draft recommendation 8.2.
Family Law Act
should include considerations relevant to all areas of decision making to which the best interests principle applies, in particular
location and recovery of children, general welfare and adoption of children.
Implementation.
Section 68F(2) of the
Family Law Act
should be redrafted accordingly.
Pre-hearing processes
In any proceedings involving children under the
Family Law Act
, a party or a child's representative can apply for court counselling assistance. The Court can also order the parties to attend counselling
with a family and child counsellor or welfare officer. The parties (with or without the child) are then interviewed by a family and
child counsellor or welfare officer to discuss the welfare of the child and to try to resolve any differences.
Statistics are not kept with respect to the numbers of children actually participating in this counselling process. Following the
introduction of the
Family Law Reform Act 1995
(Cth), there is increasing recognition that children may benefit from involvement in mediation and conciliation processes as well
as counselling.
Draft recommendation 8.3.
The Family Court should collect statistics on children's participation in counselling, mediation and conciliation processes including
the collection of statistics concerning the origin of applications in which children's involvement is requested, the number of matters
in which children are involved, and the results of those matters in which children participate in counselling or mediation as opposed
to those where they do not. Subject to the findings of this research, opportunities for children's voluntary involvement in these
primary dispute resolution processes should be enhanced.
Implementation.
The Family Court should undertake and/or facilitate this research.
Draft recommendation 8.4.
Counselling and mediation services should be available to all courts exercising federal family law jurisdiction including State and
Territory magistrates' courts. These services could be supplied in part by extending telephone counselling services and counselling
circuits and making use of video links and other new technologies in appropriate cases.
Implementation.
The Family Court should consider appropriate mechanisms in this regard and should be suitably resourced to implement these mechanisms.
Family Court practice and procedure
The rules of evidence
Family Law Act
does not prohibit children from giving evidence but the Act states that leave of the Court must be obtained before a child may be
called as a witness, remain in the courtroom or swear an affidavit for the purposes of the proceedings. A corollary of this preference
that children not give evidence is the relaxation of the rule against hearsay.
There have been few instances of a judge allowing a child to give evidence in a Family Court matter.
The Family Court may be the only forum where some child abuse allegations are aired.
This is particularly so where the child is too young to give oral evidence in other proceedings, where the abuse does not constitute
a criminal offence or where the relevant welfare department chooses not to become involved. Treatment of child abuse cases in the
Family Court is somewhat different from other matters. For example, a Family Court Practice Direction requires parties to explain
to the Court the manner in which proposed consent orders attempt to deal with allegations of abuse before orders will be made.
Family Court judges are given more latitude than those in other courts to ascertain the best interests of the child by asking questions
of witnesses on their own motion. They are not limited to the material produced by the parties but can suggest that the parties call
additional evidence or follow a particular line of questioning.
The Family Law Rules state that the Family Court may, of its own motion, call any person before it as a witness.
In addition,
Family Law Act
provides for the appointment of an assessor to assist the court in hearing and determining proceedings or particular parts of proceedings.
These mechanisms ought to be further developed and their use encouraged.
Draft recommendation 8.5.
The use of the alternative procedures in the
Family Law Act
by which children's matters can be managed by the Court should be encouraged.
Implementation.
The Family Court should consider making more use of these mechanisms and preparing suitable case management guidelines.
Simplified procedures
In January 1996 the Family Court introduced simplified procedures to encourage an expectation by applicants that their disputes will
be resolved by agreement rather than hearing and to reduce the complexity and cost of proceedings.
The procedures require that initiating applications contain only minimal information such as the necessary details about the parties
and the orders sought. This means that it can be difficult to determine what issues are in dispute even at the directions hearing.
This can be problematic if issues of child abuse may be relevant but are not disclosed to the registrar at the directions hearing
or if there is a question of whether a legal representative should otherwise be appointed for the child.
Draft recommendation 8.6.
Research should be conducted to determine how the need to appoint a legal representative for the child can be better identified at
the first directions hearing.
Implementation.
The Family Court committee monitoring the simplified procedures should conduct such an investigation.
Parenting plans
Parenting plans are written agreements between parents on matters concerning their children. They are intended to encourage co-operation
between the parties in preference to litigation. They may deal with residence, contact, maintenance or any other aspect of parental
responsibility for a child and ought to, but need not necessarily, reflect the best interests of the child.
There is no provision in the
Family Law Act
for the involvement of children in the development of a parenting plan.
A parenting plan may be registered in the Family Court if the Court considers registration appropriate having regard to the best
interests of the child. In deciding whether to register a parenting plan, the Court need not determine the child's best interests
in accordance with the specific statutory principles set out in s 68F. To be registered in Court, parenting plans must have been
developed after consultation with a family and child counsellor or following independent legal advice as to the meaning and effect
of the plan. Once a plan is registered, the provisions operate as though they are orders of the Court.
Registration of parenting plans may be unilateral. Registration may affect their flexibility and ability to adapt to changing family
circumstances.
Draft recommendation 8.7.
The Family Court should monitor the operation of parenting plans over the next 12 months and assess
whether and to what extent registration prevents or inhibits flexible parenting arrangements
whether registered parenting plans are based on appropriate and careful assessments of the best interests of the children by parents
whether the Court, in registering parenting plans, in fact considers any or all of the relevant principles of s 68F(2) of the
Family Law Act
In light of this research, the Family Court should review the provisions allowing registration of parenting plans.
If the research indicates that registration of parenting plans prevents flexible approaches to parenting, the
Family Law Act
should be amended to remove the registration provisions.
If parenting plans continue to be registerable, rules specifying the information that must be filed along with the plan should require
sufficient detail to allow the Court to scrutinise the plan closely and ensure that the long term best interests of the child are
Implementation.
The Family Court should undertake and/or facilitate this research and take appropriate action as a result of the research.
Draft recommendation 8.8.
Parents should be encouraged to involve their children in the preparation of parenting plans to the extent appropriate to the child's
age and maturity.
Implementation.
Section 63B
Family Law Act
should be amended to this effect.
Draft recommendation 8.9.
Where parenting plans are developed with the assistance of family or child counsellors, counsellors should involve children who are
the subject of the plan in its formulation to the extent appropriate to the child's age and maturity and should generally speak to
verbal children to ensure they understand the arrangements proposed.
Implementation.
A provision should be inserted into the
Family Law Act
to this effect.
The right of the child to be heard in family law proceedings
It is generally assumed that children would be unduly traumatised by giving direct evidence in litigation concerning the breakdown
of their parents' relationship, that they may be manipulated into giving evidence favourable to one parent or may even manipulate
parents to achieve their own ends. These remain factors for concern.
However, there is a difference between asking a child to give evidence in relation to disputes of fact (which should generally be
avoided) and allowing a child the opportunity to express his or her wishes as to the outcome of a matter. Children should not be
required or pressured to do so but it may be appropriate for mature children to give evidence of their wishes where they freely indicate
a desire to do so. In those cases, the voluntary involvement of children in the family decision making process can be of real benefit
to children, to the Court and to the ultimate decision.
If the care, welfare and development of a child is relevant to proceedings under the
Family Law Act
, the Court may direct a family and child counsellor or welfare officer to prepare a family report on such matters as the court thinks
Family reports are generally prepared 12 to 18 months after proceedings have begun,
although earlier reports could assist the settlement process and the determination of interim orders. For many children, family reports
provide a suitable vehicle for the expression of their wishes and opinions without burdening them with decision making responsibility
or the need to give direct evidence. However, for children who desire greater participation in proceedings, family reports may not
provide them with an adequate say in matters that affect them.
An additional or alternative method by which the Court may hear evidence of the views of children is contained in the Family Law
Rules which allow the Court to appoint experts, either alone or in conference, to inquire into and report on any issue of fact or
Their evidence could be of benefit to the parties and the Family Court so long as it became an alternative to expert evidence obtained
by the parties, rather than an addition to such evidence. One of the main problems in cases where abuse is alleged is the number
of occasions on which a child may be examined or interviewed. In addition, although prior leave of the Court must be obtained in
order to present evidence obtained through further examinations of a child by an expert,
and although the
Family Law Act
sets out a number of factors the Court must consider in deciding whether to grant leave to have the child further examined, these
factors do not specifically include the opinion or wishes of the child in this regard.
The Family Law Rules provide that a judge, judicial registrar or magistrate may interview a child in chambers or elsewhere.
It is rare for a judicial officer to interview a child in this way. Evidence of anything said during this interview is inadmissible
in Court, although the judge may take the discussion into account in the decision making process. Thus, the judicial interview is
another mechanism by which children may be heard in family law proceedings.
Finally, children may be heard in family law proceedings by initiating proceedings on their own behalf.
The Commissions agree that it is inappropriate to encourage young children to institute proceedings. Nevertheless children of appropriate
age and maturity should be informed of their right to institute proceedings, to instruct legal representatives on their own behalf
or to join applications.
Draft recommendation 8.10.
The Family Court practice that children generally not be called to give evidence should be retained where the evidence proposed to
be given by a child relates to disputes of fact between the parties. However, where the child is of sufficient maturity and is anxious
to give evidence concerning his or her wishes about a parenting order the practice should be relaxed.
Implementation.
Case management guidelines should be drafted to this effect.
Draft recommendation 8.11.
The Family Court should review the timing of the ordering of family reports to ensure that the report can be used to promote settlement
while avoiding unnecessary procedures for children and families.
Implementation.
The Family Court should conduct a review and ensure practice is amended in accordance with its findings.
Draft recommendation 8.12.
The Family Court should collect and maintain statistics concerning the number of times experts, including Family Court counsellors,
interview each child in each litigated matter in the Family Court. These statistics should be used to conduct a regular assessment
of whether children are over-interviewed during family law proceedings.
Implementation.
The Family Court should establish a database, collect these statistics and publish them in its Annual Report.
Draft recommendation 8.13.
In deciding whether to grant an application that a child be interviewed or examined by an expert, the Court should consider any wishes
expressed by the child as well as the other specified considerations.
Implementation.
Section 102A(3)
Family Law Act
should be amended to this effect.
Draft recommendation 8.14.
Greater and more effective use should be made of the power under O 30A of the Family Law Rules to appoint experts to assist the Court
by inquiring into and reporting on issues concerning children.
Implementation.
The Family Court should give consideration to making greater use of these rules including by drafting a relevant case management
Draft recommendation 8.15.
The option of a judge speaking to a child in chambers should remain available but be employed only where the best interests of the
child justify a judicial interview.
Implementation.
Case management guidelines should be drafted to this effect.
Draft recommendation 8.16.
Children should be provided with information about their options for participation in family law proceedings. The information should
relate to the availability of counselling and the options for children's more direct participation in family law proceedings including
their rights to seek legal advice or initiate proceedings. Brochures should be produced to provide this information and to appeal
to at least two developmental and literacy levels of children. The brochures should be provided to both the applicant and the respondent
at the early stages of the proceedings to be passed along to the children concerned.
Implementation.
The Family Court should prepare brochures that provide this information.
Vulnerable groups and the Family Court
Indigenous children
Family Law Act
explicitly requires the Court to take into account 'any need to maintain a connection with the lifestyle, culture and traditions
of Aboriginal peoples or Torres Strait Islanders' in assessing a child's best interests. The Family Court is also taking administrative
steps to facilitate the participation of Indigenous people in family law processes. It has established the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Awareness Committee to consider the extent to which Indigenous people use the Court, to increase the awareness of
officers of the Court of problems confronting Indigenous people and to make the services of the Court more relevant to Indigenous
These developments are relatively recent and progress is currently affected by funding constraints. Their impact is yet to be fully
realised. Statistics kept by the Family Court do not record the Aboriginality of parties or children who are the subject of proceedings
which makes monitoring the effects of the initiatives almost impossible. The relevance of the Court to Indigenous families and children
will be affected by the extent to which the Family Court is able to take account of the involvement of extended families in dispute
resolution and of the prevalence of family violence in family breakdown among Indigenous communities.
Draft recommendation 8.17.
The Family Court should continue to promote the access of Indigenous families and children to the Court and continue its work in
liaising with Indigenous communities.
The Court should continue research to ensure that its processes are adapted to take account of the dynamics of dispute resolution
among Indigenous communities, particularly in relation to the involvement of extended families and family violence.
Implementation.
The Family Court should undertake research in consultation with relevant community organisations and maintain programs to ensure
appropriate access of Indigenous children and families to the Court.
Draft recommendation 8.18.
The Family Court should take urgent action to collect and publish comprehensive statistics in relation to the number of applications
made to the Court involving Indigenous parties or children. Statistics should be collected and maintained regarding the passage of
those applications through the Court and their outcomes.
Implementation.
The Family Court should establish a database, collect these statistics and publish them in its Annual Report.
Children of non-English speaking background
Many people of non-English speaking background have difficulty accessing Family Court services. This may be due to language or cultural
barriers. To address these issues, the Family Court has introduced a number of strategies designed to make it less intimidating for
people, such as producing information audiotapes and pamphlets in community languages. None of the initiatives are aimed specifically
at children.
Draft recommendation 8.19.
The Family Court should develop an access and equity plan to assist it in eliminating barriers which people of non-English speaking
background, including children, experience in accessing its services.
Implementation.
The Family Court should develop this strategy.
Children in rural and remote areas
The Family Court must make itself accessible to rural Australian families and children by maintaining services to rural registries.
Judicial and counselling circuits to rural areas should be maintained at an acceptable standard. The Court should give consideration
to introducing processes such as the use of remote technology and video links or telephone services, that enable the Court to provide
a suitable service to rural areas. The Inquiry is aware that one registry has a toll free number. The Commissions consider that this
service should be either expanded or promoted and resourced on a national scale.
Draft recommendation 8.20.
Closure of Family Court registries should be treated as a least favoured option for dealing with funding constraints in the Family
Court. The continuation of circuits of the counselling service to rural and remote areas is considered to be particularly important.
The Family Court should attempt to expand or promote on a national scale toll free telephone access to the Court. It should consider
making greater use of its ability to take evidence by video link or telephone, particularly from parties living in rural or remote
communities.
Implementation.
The Family Court should investigate the use of communication technologies for providing greater access to Family Court services for
rural families and children.
Young people with intellectual disabilities
The Family Court has power to authorise special medical procedures for children pursuant to its statutory welfare power.
This includes the ability to authorise sterilisation of young women.
Children with intellectual disabilities should not be sterilised without court approval but evidence indicates that many unauthorised
operations are performed.
Concerns have been raised about the child's right to participate and be heard in sterilisation application proceedings and the standard
of advocacy provided to them.
The child may, and generally would, be appointed a next friend or child's representative for the hearing.
States also retain the right to determine such matters. A comparison of the approaches of the Family Court and the Guardianship Board
of NSW indicated that since January 1994 the NSW Board approved only 1 out of 7 such applications brought before it while the Family
Court approved the procedure or refused to exercise jurisdiction in 7 of the 8 reported cases it has dealt with.
The Family Court has developed co-operative arrangements with other relevant agencies in Victoria and Queensland in regard to sterilisation
applications
and the Family Law Council has recommended that appropriate guidelines be developed in this area.
Family Law Rules require affidavits to be filed indicating that the procedure is necessary and there is no appropriate alternative.
The degree of participation of children who are the subject of the application should depend on individual capacity — clearly
a sixteen year old with a mental age of seven is still capable of expressing an opinion. The child's representative should ensure
that this view comes before the court. This raises a training issue for representatives.
Draft recommendation 8.21.
An awareness campaign should be conducted to provide medical practitioners with information about the legal requirements for approval
for the conduct of sterilisation operations on young people with an intellectual disability.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should co-ordinate and conduct this campaign.
Draft recommendation 8.22.
Research should be conducted to establish whether the discrepancy between the levels of approval of sterilisation applications between
the Family Court and the Guardianship Board of NSW is reflected in the number of approvals in other jurisdictions. This research
should investigate the reasons for the discrepancy to ensure that Family Court procedures allow for appropriate exploration of alternatives
to the sterilisation application.
Implementation.
The Family Court should conduct such research in co-operation with State and Territory agencies.
Draft recommendation 8.23.
Guidelines should be developed to regulate the pre-hearing processes for sterilisation applications in the Family Court welfare jurisdiction.
These guidelines should ensure that the procedures are used only where strictly necessary in the best interests of the child. The
guidelines should include the requirement that parties be provided with information about all alternatives to sterilisation, that
all such options have been explored prior to the hearing, that suitable counselling has been undertaken and that the child has been
consulted as appropriate.
Implementation.
The Family Court should consider developing such guidelines for inclusion in O 23B of the Family Law Rules or in case management
guidelines as appropriate.
Training issues
All judicial officers who hear family law matters should receive specialised training in children's issues. At present, State and
Territory magistrates receive limited training in this area.
Although the Family Court has been active in ensuring that its judges receive training in several areas, particularly in gender issues
and cross-cultural awareness, the Family Court has not introduced a course specifically on children's issues.
Training is equally important for counselling, mediation and report writing staff and indeed for all staff dealing with family law
matters who are likely to have contact with children. Issues of training for legal representatives in family law are addressed at
draft recommendations 9.20–22.
Draft recommendation 8.24.
Judicial officers, particularly State and Territory magistrates, exercising federal family jurisdiction should receive training in
children's matters. Training for State and Territory magistrates could be provided by members and staff of the Family Court during
annual training conferences. Training should include material on
child development
communication skills and appropriate language for communicating with children
family dynamics
issues surrounding disclosure of and family dynamics concerning child abuse
cross-cultural awareness.
Implementation.
AIJA, in conjunction with other judicial education bodies, should develop a national core syllabus for such training.
Draft recommendation 8.25.
Family and children's counsellors and mediators who do not already have expertise in the area should receive training in children's
matters. Training should include material on legal issues for children in the family law system, child development and communication
and, particularly, issues surrounding disclosure of, family dynamics concerning and best practice for dealing with allegations of
child abuse.
Implementation.
The Family Court should develop appropriate training and ensure that all counselling and mediation staff who do not have expertise
in working with children receive such training.
In 1993, 48 055 children were involved in a divorce of their parents: D De Vaus & I Wolcott
Australian Family Profiles: Social and Demographic Patterns
Australian Institute of Family Studies Melbourne 1997, 32. It has been estimated that about 1% of children can expect to experience
the divorce of their parents for each year of life. That is, about 5% of five year olds, 10% of ten year olds and 15% of 15 year
olds: P McDonald
Families in Australia: A socio-demographic perspective
Australian Institute of Family Studies Melbourne 1995.
It was intended, when the Family Court was first established, that it avoid the problems associated with the traditional adversarial
system but the adversarial model was quickly re-established: see
In the Marriage of Wood
(1976) 11 ALR 657
, 661. See also
Watson ex parte Armstrong
[1976] HCA 39
(1976) 136 CLR 248.
eg the ratification of CROC and the introduction of the
Family Law Reform Act 1995
See para 6.10–12 for a discussion of the role of magistrates in family law.
In remote areas there is no access to such assistance at all while metropolitan courts may be able to access some Family Court resources.
Family Law Act
s 609 confers limited jurisdiction on the Family Court in relation to adoption. Adoption remains a matter of State and Territory
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
s 62C, 62F.
Dianne Smith
Submission on the terms of reference
J Pryor & F Seymour 'Making decisions about children after parental separation' (1996) 8
Child and Family Law Quarterly
3, 240. See also D Bagshaw 'Children of divorce in Britain and the United States: Current issues in relation to child custody and
access' (1992) 6
Australian Journal of Family Law
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) applies to the Family Court wherever the
Family Law Act
is silent on evidentiary matters:
Evidence Act 1995
s 100A of the
Family Law Act
suspends the operation of the hearsay rule in relation to proceedings which deal with children's matters. See chap 5 for a discussion
of general rules of evidence.
Children and the Law: The Family Court experience and the criminal law experience
NSW Bar Association Seminar Papers 9 September 1996, 1. In the early case of
Foley and Foley
(1978) FLC 90–511, 77 680 the Family Court listed factors to consider in determining whether a child should give evidence
including whether the evidence is reasonably available from an alternative source and the maturity of the child.
Child abuse in the context of care and protection is discussed in chap 9, and the jurisdictional arrangements for children between
the care and protection and family law jurisdictions are discussed in chap 6.
Practice Direction 1/91 27 June 1991. In addition, the
Family Law Act
requires Court personnel to bring any allegations of child abuse or neglect to the attention of the relevant State or Territory child
welfare authorities: s 70BB. This duty overrides any other statutory or professional obligation of confidentiality: s 70BC. In most
States and Territories a protocol is in place between the Family Court and the relevant care and protection agency which regulates
the treatment of Family Court cases in which an allegation of abuse has been made.
In the Marriage of Lonard
(1976) 2 Fam LR 11
O 30 r 5(1).
See also Family Law Rules O 30B. Assessors have not been widely used and certainly there are no reported cases reviewing their use.
The procedures are complemented by a case management system. Cases are assigned to a particular 'track' according to their degree
of complexity. Complex cases are referred to a judge manager while more straightforward matters are referred to trial as soon as
possible: Case Management Guidelines 8 January 1996 ch 6.
s 63B, 63C(2).
Except where they involve a child and a third party ie other than a biological parent:
Family Law Act
, (2). See also
The Family Court Case Management Guidelines provide that family reports should not be ordered at the first directions hearing except
in exceptional circumstances or where child abuse has been alleged: 8 January 1996, para 2.12.
See para 7.4–9 for a discussion of legal representation for children in family law matters.
O 30A r 3(1).
After the initial interview of the child, where a child is examined without leave of the court, the evidence resulting from the examination
which relates to the abuse of, or the risk of abuse of, the child is not admissible in proceedings under the Act:
Family Law Act
The Court is, however, able to consider '... any other matter that the court thinks is relevant':
Family Law Act
s 102A(3)(e).
O 23 r 5. Generally, interviews in chambers are conducted in the presence of a counsellor from the Family Court Counselling Service:
J Treyvaud 'Consideration of the child witness in the Family Court — A Victorian perspective' in J Vernon (ed)
Children as Witnesses
Australian Institute of Criminology Canberra 1988, 196.
Family Law Act
specifically states that children may institute proceedings for parenting orders
, maintenance orders
and any other order under the Act unless a contrary intention appears (s 69C(2)).
A Nicholson 'Family Court initiatives with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities'
(1995) 3(76)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
To this end, judicial officers and court staff have been or are to be provided with cross-cultural awareness training and a component
of the child representative training course concerns representation of Indigenous children:
National Training Program for the Separate Representatives of Children Appointed under the
Family Law Act
in the Family Court of Australia
College of Law, Law Council of Australia & Legal Aid Commission 1993. In addition, several Aboriginal Family consultants have
been appointed in the NT and in North Qld: Family Court of Australia
Annual Report 1994–95
Family Court of Australia Sydney 1995, 7.
Family Law Rules O 23B r 1;
Secretary, Dept of Health & Community Services v JMB & SMB
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 15 Fam LR 392
Marion's case
[1994] HCA 20
(1994) 17 Fam LR 457.
As a result of constitutional limitations, the Court can only exercise this power in relation young women who are the children of
a marriage or ex-nuptial young women resident in the Territories.
H Carter 'Disabled girls "illegally sterilised"'
The Advertiser
Adelaide 15 April 1997; M Sweet 'Court warns doctors on illegal sterilisation'
Sydney Morning Herald
Sydney 16 April 1997.
See, eg, S Brady 'Invasive and irreversible: The sterilisation of intellectually disabled children'
Alternative Law Journal
, 162. See also S Brady
Family Law Rules O 23B r 7.
J Ford 'The sterilisation of young women with an intellectual disability: A comparison between the Family Court of Australia and the
Guardianship Board of NSW' (1996) 10
Australian Journal of Family Law
S Brady 'Invasive and irreversible: The sterilisation of intellectually disabled children'
Alternative Law Journal
Family Law Council
Sterilisation and Other Medical Procedures on Children
AGPS Canberra 1994, 62.
This is dealt with in recs 9.20–22.
eg in NSW magistrates receive two days pre-bench induction and a one week residential training course in their first year on the bench.
There are also five days of continuing judicial training for all magistrates each year: Chief Magistrate I Pike
Minutes of Meeting
Sydney 5 December 1995.
9. Children's involvement in the care and protection system
Introduction
A guarantee for children in care
Federal responsibilities
Primary and secondary prevention of abuse and neglect
Reporting and investigation
Pre-order processes: alternatives to court
Court processes
Children under care and protection orders
Children remaining at home
Children in care
Special responsibilities for particular children
Indigenous children
Children and cultural and ethnic background
Children with disabilities
Adolescents, family disputes and the care system
Introduction
The children who enter the formal care and protection system are among the most vulnerable children in Australia. They are victims
of abuse, neglect or family breakdowns, may not have support from their extended family and are often educationally and socially
disadvantaged. The Commissions have received considerable evidence indicating that the support offered to children in care is grossly
inadequate and too often fails to address their disadvantage. In fact, contact with the care and protection system becomes yet another
disadvantage suffered by many of these children.
A guarantee for children in care
The States and Territories are responsible for the care and protection of children who have been abused or neglected. The Commonwealth
has funding and oversight responsibilities in directly related child protection areas
and constitutional responsibility for Indigenous children who form a sizeable proportion of children in care.
In ratifying CROC Australia made a number of commitments in relation to the care and protection jurisdiction, including a commitment
to recognise, and assist in the realisation of, the right of every child '... to a standard of living adequate for the child's physical,
mental, spiritual, moral and social development' and to protect children from violence and mistreatment.
Australia is failing to meet these commitments in relation to those children for whom the state is directly responsible. Given the
nature of Commonwealth/State service provision, these commitments should be guaranteed by federal, State and Territory governments.
Draft recommendation 9.1.
A Charter for Children in Care should be created. The Charter should create a fiduciary duty in the relevant governments to assure
all children in care that they will be provided with
safe, suitable accommodation
suitable education, employment and training opportunities or assistance in finding appropriate employment when they reach working
age while in care
an appropriate amount of spending money
counselling, psychiatric treatment or special education where necessary
appropriate support in the transition from care
a mentor from whom the child can obtain confidential advice and assistance
regular reviews of their circumstances in care
the right to be consulted and have their views and wishes given due weight (in accordance with age and maturity) in the decision
making process, and particularly when decisions are made about residence, family contact, schooling and health.
Implementation.
OFC should develop the Charter for Children in Care in conjunction the Department of Health and Family Services and the relevant
State and Territory welfare agencies, and in consultation with non-government service providers and children's advocacy groups. This
Charter should be enacted in legislation at federal, State and Territory levels.
Draft recommendation 9.2.
The Charter for Children in Care should be in plain language that children can understand. It should be given in writing to each
child on entry into care or to the carer on the child's behalf if the child is too young to understand the nature of the Charter.
Federal responsibilities
The Commonwealth collects information from all jurisdictions on care and protection referrals, investigations and orders,
and promotes the adoption of common definitions relating to care and protection. Through the Standing Committee of Community Services
and Income Security Administrators, it has also developed the
Baseline Out-of-Home Care Standards
Even so, real differences remain between the States and Territories in their definitions of child abuse and neglect, the focus of
their protective services, their arrangements for securing orders, the range and types of care and protection orders made by courts
and the monitoring and review of placement and in-care decisions for the children for whom they are responsible.
The Commissions heard consistent, nation-wide criticism of the care and protection systems in Australia. It is manifestly clear that
appropriate standards should be set in the arrangement and delivery of care and protection services and that these systems should
be nationally co-ordinated. Consumers and other key stakeholders in the care and protection system are currently developing a proposal
to hold a forum between government agencies and consumers to establish benchmarks for care and protection and to review the progress
of the implementation of the
Baseline Out-of-Home Care Standards
The Commissions consider that this effort requires Commonwealth leadership.
Draft recommendation 9.3.
National standards for legislation and practice in care and protection systems should be developed. These national care and protection
standards should, where necessary, provide a clear allocation of responsibility for their implementation.
Implementation.
These standards should be developed by OFC in consultation with the relevant government authorities, non-government organisations,
community groups, families, foster carers and, particularly, children and young people who are or have been involved in care and
protection systems. OFC should monitor and evaluate the national standards on a regular basis.
Draft recommendation 9.4.
Biennial conferences should be convened for the discussion and evaluation of national and international initiatives in care and protection
and as a focus for maintaining appropriate consistency between the jurisdictions. These conferences should seek to involve all relevant
government authorities, non-government organisations, community groups and consumers of child protection services such as children,
families and foster carers.
Implementation.
OFC should convene these conferences.
Draft recommendation 9.5.
The federal government should support continuing research into care and protection systems, including the collection of data on the
circumstances of children in care, and in particular on their level of education, health and cultural and socio-economic backgrounds.
Further, the research should focus on the outcomes for children in care, and in particular their contact with juvenile justice agencies
including police, their school retention rates and levels of education attained while in care, and their access, or lack of access,
to government services.
Implementation.
This research could be co-ordinated by OFC, the Australian Institute of Family Studies and/or the Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare.
Primary and secondary prevention of abuse and neglect
The federal government is responsible for many of the services which aid in the prevention of child abuse and neglect and provide
assistance to vulnerable families. Such services include income support, child care, housing and medical services. The Australian
Institute of Family Studies 1994 report
The Commonwealth's Role in Preventing Child Abuse
found that while the Commonwealth funds and plans services, policies and programs aimed at children and families, the division of
responsibility for child and family protection is less than clear among different levels of government and the co-ordination of policy,
research and planning service delivery is less than ideal.
The report made eight recommendations for the better support of child prevention policies and strategies at the Commonwealth level,
including recommendations that the Commonwealth instruct a responsible body to produce an annual report on policies and programs
for children and families with children. It was recommended that such a body would eventually take on the responsibility for policy
and program co-ordination at the Commonwealth level and that it would undertake a national program of research into child abuse prevention
strategies across all portfolios and evaluate current child abuse prevention programs. The Commissions consider that OFC could fulfil
Draft recommendation 9.6.
Research should be conducted and data collected on child prevention strategies across portfolios. This research should focus not
only on those policies and programs that are specifically directed at child abuse prevention, but also on policies and programs directed
at children and families with children that have implications for child abuse prevention, such as income support, child care, housing
and medical services. It should provide an indication of those areas in which the federal government could facilitate co-operative
arrangements with and between States and Territories for the effective provision of such services and should form the basis for OFC's
advice to the federal government on the co-ordination necessary for the provision of primary and secondary prevention services by
federal agencies.
Implementation.
OFC should support this research and co-ordinate data collection to these ends. It should publish its findings in its annual reports
to Parliament on the status of children in Australia as proposed at draft recommendation 12.1 and provide the required advice.
Draft recommendation 9.7.
The National Child Protection Council should be revived, and its membership expanded to include representatives of State, Territory
and federal Attorneys-General as well as academic and other policy representatives and consumers of services such as families, foster
carers and children. Links should be developed and maintained with OFC.
Implementation.
The Department of Health and Human Services should take appropriate steps in this regard.
Reporting and investigation
In 1995–96, approximately 91 800 cases of child abuse or neglect were reported throughout Australia. Around 29 800 cases were
substantiated.
The number of children subject to reports and substantiations varied from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. For example, the number of
children subject to reports of suspected abuse or neglect varied from 7 reports per 1 000 children in WA to 22 reports per 1 000
children in Victoria, and the number of children subject to substantiated reports varied from 2 per 1 000 children in WA and Tasmania
to 8 per 1 000 children in NSW.
These wide differences in reporting and substantiation rates between the States and Territories could indicate systemic problems
in reporting requirements, investigations and/or the criteria for substantiation in some jurisdictions.
Draft recommendation 9.8.
Detailed cross-jurisdictional research should be conducted into the effect and effectiveness of mandatory reporting of child abuse
with the following aims.
To document the impact of mandatory reporting of suspected child abuse on delivery of welfare services in Australia. In particular,
it should investigate whether the introduction of such a reporting scheme creates a transfer of welfare resources from prevention
of child abuse and support for its victims to the investigatory and legal side of child abuse.
To identify the conditions required for optimum effectiveness of mandatory reporting schemes, particularly focusing on the appropriate
allocation of resources to welfare departments for investigation, litigation and support for children and families.
To establish the reasons why there are wide differences in substantiation rates in the different jurisdictions.
Implementation.
OFC should co-ordinate this research on the basis of information provided by State and Territory welfare departments.
Draft recommendation 9.9.
The national care and protection standards should specify time limits for preliminary investigations.
Pre-order processes: alternatives to court
Most Australian jurisdictions currently promote out of court solutions to care and protection matters, such as pre-application family
group conferencing and pre-hearing conferences.
These conferencing models take different forms in different jurisdictions but essentially the goal is to help the family and the
welfare department come to a solution that avoids full court involvement. However, these conferencing models may 'mask the inequality
of the parties by a veneer of participation'
and overlook the best interests of the child in coming to a solution acceptable to the parents and professionals involved. Most jurisdictions
already require that the best interests of the child be promoted in court proceedings. The conferencing models should also reflect
this principle.
Draft recommendation 9.10.
Research should be conducted into the practice of family group conferencing and pre-hearing conference schemes, to encourage the
adoption in all jurisdictions of effective conferencing models with the following aims.
To evaluate the variety of case conferencing arrangements used in Australian jurisdictions, including procedures, outcomes, and levels
of satisfaction or dissatisfaction by the participating parties with the arrangements.
To identify the types of cases most amenable to case conferencing solutions, the stage of the proceedings when such conferences are
most effective, whether the conference works best in the shadow of or outside court confines and whether the participation of legal
representatives assists or retards such proceedings.
To focus on children's levels of participation in and satisfaction with these processes and the assistance they require to participate
effectively in conferences.
Implementation.
OFC should co-ordinate this research on the basis of information provided by State and Territory welfare departments.
Draft recommendation 9.11.
The procedures associated with conferencing schemes should be set down in legislation based on the evaluation proposed in draft recommendation
9.10. The legislation dealing with procedures for conferencing models in care and protection jurisdictions should require the following.
Decisions made in family group and pre-hearing conferences should ensure the best interests of the children involved.
Family members and children should have access to independent legal advice before participating in any conference.
Children who are too young to participate or who wish to have additional support during the conference should be represented by their
lawyer or an advocate of their choice in these conferences.
Convenors of any family or pre-hearing conferences should have knowledge of and training in care and protection law, as well as family
dynamics and child development issues, so that convenors are aware of power imbalances between the participants at the conferences
and able to work to overcome these imbalances in order to arrive at a resolution in the best interests of the child.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek SCAG agreement to the enactment of similar legislation in all jurisdictions. The national care and
protection standards should specify the minimum training and experience requirements for convenors of conferences.
Court processes
In all Australian jurisdictions, care and protection applications are heard at first instance in State and Territory children's courts,
which may be magistrates' or District courts.
It was suggested to the Commissions that care and protection matters should be dealt with by a tribunal or expert panel rather than
by a court. However, there may be constitutional difficulties in modifying care and protection proceedings in this manner.
Moreover, judicial decision making is important for the determination of contested matters, as it provides more of an assurance to
parties that due process is being and will be observed, and reflects the gravity of the decision being made.
Courts deciding care and protection matters should be supported by careful case management processes. They should also have flexibility
in decision making and in managing evidence so as to tailor the case management to the circumstances surrounding an individual child's
case. Magistrates and judges should have an active and continuing role in the case. However, relaxation of strict rules of evidence
should not mean a lack of rigour in the presentation and evaluation of evidence. Specialist training for all children's court judicial
officers is essential.
Draft recommendation 9.12.
All magistrates and judges who hear care and protection matters should be trained in children's issues. Training should include observation
in court and feedback on the use of appropriate language and ability to communicate with children and parties.
Implementation.
AIJA, in conjunction with other judicial education bodies, should establish minimum training requirements for the children's court
magistracy and judiciary and set guidelines for such training programs to be implemented in each jurisdiction.
Draft recommendation 9.13.
The national care and protection standards should specify the following.
Children's court magistrates and judges should be active and managerial in their approach to care and protection cases with the same
magistrate or judge managing a case from first listing on an individual case management or single docket model.
Direct evidence by a witness should be preferred, except when the witness is the subject child. Hearsay evidence of statements by
the subject child should as far as possible be presented in the child's own words.
Children's court magistrates and judges should not be restricted to making orders applied for by the parties but rather should have
a mandate to make whatever orders are appropriate from a range available under the legislation.
Non-permanent orders that do not transfer guardianship of a child to a welfare department or other person should operate for no more
than 1 year, after which applications to the court should be required for extensions of the order.
The child, with the assistance of his or her legal representative, should always have the right to apply for variation of care and
protection orders.
Legislation in all jurisdictions should provide for consistent or similar orders that allow for a range of formal interventions suitable
to the different circumstances of individual families.
Children under care and protection orders
Children remaining at home
Some orders in care and protection proceedings require that children remain at home with their families under the supervision of
the relevant welfare department. Evidence to the Inquiry indicated that insufficient resources are provided to ensure appropriate
supervision of these orders.
Draft recommendation 9.14.
The national care and protection standards should indicate the resource levels necessary to ensure that welfare departments are able
to supervise adequately and provide services to families with children under orders living at home.
Children in care
Children in care can suffer serious disadvantage. Care and protection systems often exacerbate, rather than ameliorate, existing
problems faced by children in care. Evidence to the Inquiry indicated that care and protection systems can contribute to some children
in care drifting into the juvenile justice system, becoming homeless or developing serious psychological or social problems.
To minimise systems abuse,
case plans should be formulated in consultation with the child, to define alternative care, supervision or other support arrangements,
co-ordinate services and address the guarantees in the Charter for Children in Care. The case plan should be subject to annual review
to reflect the changing circumstances of children in care. Proper staff training is also essential.
Draft recommendation 9.15.
The national care and protection standards should make the following stipulations in relation to case plans.
Each child in care should have a detailed case plan within 6 weeks of entry into care.
The case plan should describe the ultimate goals for the child (for example, return to parent, adoption or independent living) and
designate the appropriate day to day services and co-ordination necessary both to help the child reach those goals and to provide
the child with the basic guarantees in the Charter for Children in Care.
The educational needs, recreation opportunities, and behavioral and/or medical intervention requirements of each child, and the responsibilities,
time-frames and strategies necessary to achieve the identified goals should be addressed in the case plan.
The case plan should be developed in consultation with the child. The child's views and wishes should be given due weight in accordance
with his or her level of maturity.
The case plan for children leaving care should be re-evaluated at least 6 months prior to the child's 18th birthday or planned exit
from care. A transitional case plan should be developed at that time that is directed towards assisting the child in the transition
to independence or family reunification and that designates the support necessary prior to leaving care as well as the on-going support
required by the child after leaving care.
Draft recommendation 9.16.
Review processes should be established in each jurisdiction whereby all case plans are subject to annual review. Reviews should occur
within the relevant welfare department and, for those case plans that may be contested or controversial, also be conducted by an
independent body.
Both the internal and external review processes should include participation by the child, along with the child's legal representative
if the child or the child's best interests require representation.
The independent body, perhaps modelled on the ACT Community Advocate or the NSW Community Services Commission, should be provided
with the welfare department's proposed case plan prior to each review, have access to the original court and department files and
be able to conduct a full case plan review at the request of the welfare department, parent, foster carer or child or on it's own
initiative in order to ensure that the child's best interests are paramount in the formulation of case plans. This external review
should be more than a simple file review, and should provide objectivity and accountability in the formulation of appropriate case
Implementation.
Appropriate bodies should be established or given responsibility for independent reviews in each jurisdiction. This should be included
as a legislative requirement in the national care and protection standards.
Draft recommendation 9.17.
Research should be conducted into causes of and ways of preventing the drift of children in care into the juvenile justice system.
Implementation.
OFC should co-ordinate this research on the basis of information provided by the State and Territory welfare and juvenile justice
departments.
Draft recommendation 9.18.
The national care and protection standards should require that caseworkers, particularly staff in residential care settings, have
specialist training in identifying children and young people at risk of juvenile justice contact and implementing early intervention
and prevention strategies. In particular, children between the ages of 11 to 15 with behavioral or learning disorders, such as Attention
Deficit Disorder, psychological problems or drug and alcohol dependencies should have access to intensive support, therapeutic and
rehabilitation programs before they reach the peak offending periods.
Special responsibilities for particular children
Indigenous children
There is widespread acceptance, and in some cases legislative recognition, of the Aboriginal Placement Principle.
There are now numerous Aboriginal and Islander Child Care Agencies that assist in the placement of Indigenous children. Evidence
to the Inquiry suggests continuing concern regarding the placement of Indigenous children in care, particularly with respect to racist
attitudes among welfare department workers, a lack of consultation with the communities concerned and insufficient account of Indigenous
communities' child rearing practices.
Draft recommendation 9.19.
The national care and protection standards should require that
the Aboriginal Placement Principle and the essential role of Aboriginal and Islander Child Care Agencies be enshrined in legislation
in all States and Territories
all welfare department workers receive appropriate information and training in cross-cultural awareness, including information and
training on the differing child rearing practices of Indigenous communities.
Draft recommendation 9.20.
The Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs should prepare and release regular reports on
the current policies and practices of, as well as best practice guidelines for, State and Territory welfare departments concerning
investigation, assessment and case management of referrals for Indigenous children
the operation of Aboriginal and Islander Child Care Agencies, including the funding levels required for their effective operation
prevention programs aimed at Indigenous communities.
Implementation.
Such reports could be prepared in consultation with OFC.
Children and cultural and ethnic background
Accepted notions of what constitutes abuse or neglect may vary markedly between different cultural and ethnic communities, particularly
in relation to acceptable standards of discipline. Education and awareness campaigns concerning child abuse and neglect appropriately
directed towards the major ethnic and cultural communities in Australia are essential. Welfare department workers must be well trained
in cross-cultural issues and the various methods of child rearing accepted among relevant communities.
Draft recommendation 9.21.
National education and awareness campaigns about child abuse and neglect should be developed and directed towards the major ethnic
and cultural communities around Australia.
Implementation.
The Department of Health and Family Services and DIMA should conduct these campaigns in consultation with OFC.
Draft recommendation 9.22.
The national care and protection standards should require that all welfare department officers making assessments or conducting investigations
receive appropriate training in cross-cultural awareness, including issues relating to differing child rearing practices in various
communities.
Children with disabilities
There have been criticisms concerning the handling of abuse allegations regarding children with disabilities, who may have greater
difficulties in communicating and participating in decisions that affect them. In addition, their disability may make them particularly
vulnerable to further abuse or to systems abuse and they may have difficulties in obtaining proper support or services.
Draft recommendation 9.23.
National education and awareness campaigns should be conducted about particular issues concerning abuse and neglect for children
with disabilities around Australia.
Implementation.
The Department of Health and Family Services should conduct these campaigns in consultation with OFC and the relevant State and Territory
Draft recommendation 9.24.
The national care and protection standards should require that all welfare departments workers receive appropriate training in issues
relating to abuse of children with disabilities.
Adolescents, family disputes and the care system
Care and protection legislation in some jurisdictions restricts courts from making certain orders regarding young people aged 16
or 17 even where there may be evidence of abuse or neglect. Evidence to the Inquiry indicated that young people may become homeless
or suffer other disadvantages as a result of the inability of care and protection systems to intervene. Welfare departments should
respond to the needs of adolescents who are homeless or who have been physically, emotionally or sexually abused.
Some jurisdictions have procedures by which parents and/or children can apply to the courts, on the grounds of irretrievable breakdown
or irreconcilable differences, for orders for provision of services or placement of a young person away from their families. Many
of these jurisdictions mandate mediation or conciliation conferences before the court may hear an application on these grounds.
Draft recommendation 9.25.
The national care and protection standards should include the following requirements.
A child for the purposes of care and protection jurisdictions should be defined as a person under the age of 18 and a court should
be able to make orders for a young person aged 16 to 18 if it is found, after taking into consideration the wishes of the child,
that the child is in need of care and protection.
All welfare department workers should receive appropriate training in issues relating to abuse and neglect of adolescents, as well
as reasons for family/adolescent breakdown.
Adolescent and family therapy and mediation programs should be available to all young people in dispute with their families.
Adolescent and family therapy and mediation programs should develop models of best practice in meeting the needs of adolescents and
their families in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander, non-English speaking background, isolated and/or rural communities.
Welfare agencies and police should have an integrated and co-ordinated response to adolescents in situations where police officers
do not have reasonable suspicion that a crime has been or is about to be committed but believe that the young person may have welfare
issues that should be addressed.
Draft recommendation 9.26.
Co-ordination of housing, income support and care and protection services for homeless young people is required in order to refine
service delivery and make services more relevant and more effective for homeless youth.
Implementation.
The Department of Social Security and the Department of Health and Family Services should, in consultation with the relevant State
and Territory welfare departments, undertake a review of current care and housing options for young people.
Draft recommendation 9.27.
Research should be conducted into the appropriate mechanisms and forums for dealing with adolescent/family breakdown, including the
involvement of welfare departments, conferencing models and court processes. This research should
focus on the reasons for such breakdowns and the appropriateness of the care and protection system in alleviating the problems
monitor the appropriateness of the national care and protection standards with respect to adolescents with family disputes.
Implementation.
OFC should commission this research.
See para 1.13.
eg income support, education, child care and health care.
As at 30 June 1996, Indigenous children made up 19% of all children in formal substitute care placements despite making up approximately
3 % of the child population: Steering Committee for the Review of Commonwealth/State Service Provision
Report on Government Service Provision 1997
Industry Commission Melbourne 1997, 547.
See arts 3, 12, 19(1), (2), 20.
Through the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Canberra. For a history of attempts to develop nationally consistent data
see P Zabar & G Angus
Child Abuse and Neglect: Reporting and Investigation Procedures in Australia 1994
Child Welfare Series No 8 Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 1995, 63–4.
Standing Committee of Community Services and Income Security Administrators Canberra December 1995.
The proposal for the forum, to be called
Face to Face
, is being developed by the Australian Association of Young People in Care.
The Commonwealth's Role in Preventing Child Abuse
Australian Institute of Family Studies Melbourne 1994 (unpublished).
Steering Committee for the Review of Commonwealth/State Service Provision
Report on Government Service Provision 1997
Industry Commission Melbourne 1997, 535–536.
There are indications that the introduction of mandatory reporting may direct resources to investigation procedures from prevention
programs and support for families and children: P Mendes 'The historical and political context of mandatory reporting and its impact
on child protection practice in Victoria' (1996) 49
Australian Social Work
4. See also A Broadbent & R Bentley
Child Abuse and Neglect Australia 1995–96
Child Welfare Series No 17 Australian Institute of Health and Welfare Canberra 1997, 28.
eg in Vic family group conferencing has recently been established following a successful pilot program. Family group conferences may
be convened where there are protective concerns but before an application is made to the Children's Court. The scheme is not based
in legislation. Vic has also introduced a system of pre-trial conferences to encourage settlement, reduce delays and promote the
involvement of the family in decision making. Only the parents and the child may be represented at the pre-hearing conference. The
evaluation of the program in Vic suggested that it was successful in promoting resolution of matters in the majority of cases. See
P A Swain 'Letting the family decide' Family Group Conferences and Pre-Hearing Conferences in Victoria's child protection system'
Alternative Dispute Resolution Journal
During the course of this Inquiry, the Commissions received a good deal of commentary on whether the care and protection jurisdiction
is appropriately placed in State and Territory children's courts or whether it should be integrated with the Family Court. This issue
is discussed at ch 6.
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions for NSW
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 138 ALR 577
, the High Court left open the question of whether State and Territory courts are bound by the strictures of ch III of the
Constitution
See para 1.13.
Systems abuse occurs when preventable harm is done to children in the context of policies or programs designed to provide care or
protection. The child's welfare, development or security are undermined by actions of individuals or by the lack of suitable policies,
practices or procedures within systems or institutions: J Cashmore, J Dolby & D Brennan
Systems abuse: Problems and solutions
NSW Child Protection Council Sydney 1994, 11.
This principle requires that Indigenous children who cannot be cared for by their parents should be placed within their extended family
or community, or at least with an Indigenous family.
10. Children's involvement in criminal processes
Introduction
Federal responsibilities
Ages of criminal responsibility and majority
Interaction with police
Public spaces and powers of apprehension
Police interviews and investigative procedures
Police accountability
Legal advice
Bail and remand
Courts and the magistracy
Introduction
The States and Territories have varying approaches to juvenile justice. In some jurisdictions, considerable rhetoric has advanced
a 'law and order' approach to juvenile crime. Regional variations may justify some differences in approach between jurisdictions.
However, evidence to the Commissions stressed the need for a national approach to juvenile justice based on agreed standards of best
Involvement in the juvenile justice system can have serious social and developmental effects on children, particularly those who
have repeated contact with the system. The Commissions' consultations have made it clear that there are particular problems in juvenile
justice processes for Indigenous young people and those living in rural and remote areas. In addition, poor police/youth relations
are endemic in Australia.
Young people's involvement with the juvenile justice system includes initial contact with police, investigation of alleged offences,
trial, sentencing and detention. Sentencing and detention are dealt with in the next chapter.
Federal responsibilities
The Commonwealth has direct responsibility for young federal offenders who are generally dealt with by State or Territory police
and courts in accordance with procedures laid down under the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) (Crimes Act).
Only a small minority of young people who come into conflict with the criminal law are federal offenders.
As well as its specific responsibility for young federal offenders, the Commonwealth has assumed certain responsibilities relevant
to juvenile justice processes under international instruments, particularly CROC and the Beijing Rules.
Draft recommendation 10.1.
National standards for juvenile justice that reflect Australia's international commitments in this area and that ensure a proper
balance between rehabilitation, punishment and due process should be developed.
Implementation.
The standards should be developed by OFC in consultation with the relevant State and Territory authorities, community groups and
young people.
Draft recommendation 10.2.
Compliance by the Commonwealth, States and Territories with the national standards for juvenile justice should be monitored. As part
of this process, each State and Territory should be required to provide a detailed profile of juvenile justice laws and programs
annually, including information on performance measures and outcomes. To complement the monitoring process, the community sector
should be consulted regularly.
Implementation.
This monitoring and consultation role should be performed by OFC which should report annually on the results.
Ages of criminal responsibility and majority
Children are not held criminally responsible for their actions until they have reached a certain age threshold.
The age of criminal responsibility is 10 under federal law
and in all jurisdictions except Tasmania and the ACT where the threshold is 7 and 8 respectively.
In addition, there is a rebuttable presumption, known as the principle of
doli incapax
, that a child aged under 14 (or 15 in some jurisdictions) does not know that his or her criminal conduct was wrong.
In the Northern Territory, Victoria, Tasmania and Queensland, young offenders are dealt with in the adult system once they turn 17.
In all other States and Territories and under federal criminal law, young people are dealt with in the juvenile justice system until
they turn 18.
Evidence to the Commissions argued for national consistency on when a young person is dealt with in the juvenile justice or adult
criminal system.
Draft recommendation 10.3.
The minimum age of criminal responsibility in all Australian jurisdictions should be 10 years. The principle of
doli incapax
should be established by legislation in all jurisdictions in regard to children under 14. The age at which a child reaches adulthood
for the purposes of the criminal law should be 18 years in all Australian jurisdictions.
Implementation.
The national standards for juvenile justice should provide for these age thresholds. Through SCAG, the Attorney-General should seek
the agreement of all States and Territories to the passage of legislation reflecting these thresholds, where such legislation is
not already in place.
Police have traditionally exercised a discretion to divert young people from the formal juvenile justice system by warning or cautioning
While discretion is a vital part of police work it must be properly exercised. The Inquiry has received evidence that some children
do not receive the benefit of cautioning at the same rate as the general youth population.
National guidelines on cautioning should reduce the scope for differential treatment of certain groups of young people and in so
doing provide a valuable educative tool for police officers.
Family group conferences are used increasingly in the States and Territories either to divert young offenders from the courts or
as a sentencing option. Conferences are seen as a type of restorative justice — a means for the offender to make amends to the
Different models of family group conferencing are used in different jurisdictions throughout Australia. All of them have been the
subject of some criticism directed at such matters as the extent of police involvement, the child's lack of access to legal advice,
the severity of penalties imposed and a perceived net-widening effect.
The Commissions consider that conferencing is not an appropriate method for dealing with matters that should currently be dealt with
by way of a caution: conferencing models must supplement not supplant the less intrusive option of effective cautioning. As a result
of constitutional limitations, young federal offenders cannot be dealt with by a diversionary scheme once they have been charged.
Draft recommendation 10.4.
The national standards for juvenile justice should provide best practice guidelines for cautioning and a best practice model for
family group conferencing, having particular attention to the needs of Indigenous children, children from non-English speaking backgrounds
and children living in rural and remote communities. They should require that conferences be conducted by suitably qualified and
trained persons who are independent of the police. The standards should also require States and Territories to ensure that young
federal offenders have access to diversionary schemes.
Interaction with police
Public spaces and powers of apprehension
Police/youth relations were consistently described to the Commissions in negative terms. Participants in our focus groups and respondents
to our survey, drawn from a variety of cultural and socio-economic backgrounds, stated overwhelmingly that police are generally hostile
and aggressive towards young people and stereotype them as troublemakers.
The often difficult relationship between police and young people is particularly apparent from their interaction in public spaces,
where children are highly visible and tend to socialise in groups. These problems are also manifest in shopping and entertainment
complexes where private security guards 'police' young people.
In a number of jurisdictions police have statutory power to remove children from public places in circumstances where they are not
suspected of illegal activity but are considered 'at risk' of offending.
This type of legislation allows police to monitor youth behaviour that is not criminal. It sanctions preventative apprehension but
provides little or no accountability for police actions or judicial supervision of it. The legislation allows police to act on stereotypes
In some jurisdictions legislation or police instructions place restrictions on the circumstances in which children may be arrested.
The Commissions consider that children should only be arrested, rather than summonsed, for an offence for reasons of public safety.
Arrest can be a traumatic and disturbing experience, particularly for children, and may be unnecessarily stigmatising. In practice,
arrest may limit a child's access to legal advice and place him or her at a greater relative disadvantage with regard to the police
than would proceeding by way of a summons or a court attendance notice. The fact of the arrest may also influence later police and
court decisions and result in a more severe outcome for the child.
In developing the national standards for juvenile justice in relation to police, regard should be had to the model clauses developed
by the Australian Youth Foundation.
Draft recommendation 10.5.
The national standards for juvenile justice should provide as follows.
A child suspect should only be arrested for an alleged offence where it is necessary to do so in the interests of public safety.
Arrest should not be a bar to the subsequent issuing of a summons or court attendance notice.
Each police department should ensure that there is at least one officer trained in children's issues in each patrol. Each major station
should have a dedicated youth officer. Training for youth officers should include information on
the rights of young people
young people's recreational use of public space
the skills needed to deal effectively and fairly with young people
the specific laws, rules and policies for the policing of young people
desired outcomes in the policing of young people
the role of the other agencies in the juvenile justice system.
Each police service should develop mechanisms to redress over-policing or inappropriate policing of Indigenous and ethnic young people
in consultation with the relevant community groups.
Draft recommendation 10.6.
should be amended to provide that a child suspect may only be arrested for a suspected federal offence where it is necessary to do
so in the interests of public safety.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should develop legislation to this effect.
Draft recommendation 10.7.
Guidelines should be developed for security companies on dealing with young people in privately owned spaces used for public purposes.
Implementation.
OFC should convene a working party of relevant government, community and industry bodies, including the Business Council and retail
traders' associations, and young people to develop these guidelines.
Draft recommendation 10.8.
Laws that permit preventative apprehension of young people should be repealed.
Implementation.
States and Territories that have such laws should arrange for their immediate repeal.
Police interviews and investigative procedures
Federal, State and Territory legislation provides safeguards to ensure that the rights of juvenile suspects are protected during
police interviews, such as the requirement that an independent third person be present.
In practice many children are not made sufficiently aware of their rights by federal, State or Territory police during questioning.
The Commissions consider that some existing legislative protections need modification and that additional protections should be introduced.
The following is a list of draft recommendations aimed at setting certain minimum standards for treatment of young suspects during
police interview and investigation. Some recommended measures are already in place in certain States and Territories; others will
require legislative reform in all jurisdictions.
Draft recommendation 10.9.
The national standards for juvenile justice should include the following.
Admissions by child suspects should only be admissible as evidence if they have been electronically recorded.
An independent adult (an interview friend) must be present during police questioning of a child suspect and have an opportunity to
confer in private with the child prior to questioning. A child suspect should have the right to choose his or her own interview friend
if he or she wishes provided that person is not suspected of involvement in the alleged offence.
A register of individuals who are willing to act as interview friends for child suspects should be maintained in all major regions.
Potential interview friends should be selected and trained by police in co-operation with an appropriate external agency that has
expertise in juvenile justice matters.
The function, responsibilities and powers of the interview friend should be defined by statute. The definition should encompass the
interview friend's role in providing comfort, support and protection for the young person as well as ensuring the young person is
aware of his or her legal rights. The interview friend should not be a substitute for legal advice or representation.
Where the interview friend is a relative or friend of the young person or has not received training in the role, a senior police
officer should be required to explain it to him or her prior to any interview.
Where it is apparent that a child suspect has a disability that reduces his or her ability to communicate, an interview friend with
specialised training in the relevant field should be appointed.
The requirement in
that people under 18 not be detained by police for more than two hours (excluding 'dead time') before being released, on bail or
otherwise, or brought before a magistrate should be mirrored in State and Territory legislation.
Police should inform a child of his or her rights prior to interview in language appropriate to the age and understanding of the
Indigenous young people should be assisted to understand their rights during police questioning through processes developed in conjunction
with Aboriginal Legal Services and other relevant Indigenous organisations.
Police should avoid detaining intoxicated young suspects in police cells. Police departments in each State and Territory should liaise
with the relevant health authorities to find suitable alternatives in each region where appropriate places are not already proclaimed
or gazetted.
Police should ordinarily inform a young suspect's carers of his or her whereabouts as soon as possible after he or she is detained.
Before doing so, police should consult young suspects to determine whether they have any objections to this course of action. Where
it appears that a child's safety may be compromised by contacting his or her carers in this situation, the relevant welfare department
should be contacted instead.
Fingerprints, handprints, toeprints and footprints may be taken from a child suspect provided the child and one of his or her carers
consents. Where consent is refused or a carer cannot be located, the procedure may only be conducted in accordance with a court order.
Forensic procedures may only be carried out on a child suspect in accordance with a court order. For these purposes, the definition
of forensic procedures in the
Crimes Amendment (Forensic Procedures) Bill 1997
(Cth) should be adopted. Forensic procedures should be conducted in private by an appropriately qualified person of the same sex
as the suspect.
A child may only be strip searched pursuant to a court order. Strip searches should only be conducted in private by an officer of
the same sex as the suspect.
Wherever a court order is required to obtain fingerprints, handprints, toeprints or footprints, carry out forensic procedures on
or search a child suspect, the child should have the right to oppose the application for such an order and should be legally represented
in the proceedings.
Draft recommendation 10.10.
A child suspect should have the right to choose his or her own interview friend during police interviews concerning federal offences
so long as that person is not suspected of involvement in the offence.
Implementation.
Section 23K(3)
should be amended to this effect.
Draft recommendation 10.11.
Fingerprints, handprints, toeprints and footprints should only be taken from a child suspected of a federal offence provided the
child and one of his or her carer's consents. Where consent is refused or the carer cannot be located, the procedure should only
be conducted in accordance with a court order. The child should have the right to oppose applications for such orders and should
be legally represented at the proceedings.
Implementation.
Section 3ZJ
should be amended to this effect.
Draft recommendation 10.12.
A child suspected of committing a federal offence should only be strip searched pursuant to a court order. The child should have
the right to oppose applications for such orders and should be legally represented at the proceedings. Strip searches should be conducted
in private by an officer of the same sex as the suspect.
Implementation.
Section 3ZI
should be amended to this effect.
Police accountability
Limitations on police conduct during interviews are effective only if police are accountable for their treatment of young people
before and after the formal interview and as long as there is an effective complaints mechanism. For many breaches of procedural
requirements, the courts provide an effective accountability mechanism.
A number of young people who participated in focus groups alleged that they had been threatened or assaulted by police while being
arrested or while in custody.
Generally little or no independent evidence of allegations of police misconduct is available for the period before the arrival of
the interview friend. While admissions made outside the formal interview, for example during preliminary enquiries, are usually not
admissible in court, coercive or intimidatory tactics are likely to have a significant effect on the child's state of mind when the
interview takes place or if he or she appears in court.
Many young people are aware that there are avenues available for making complaints about police to more senior officers. However,
they often feel that their complaints are unlikely to result in positive outcomes and, indeed, that they are likely to attract adverse
police attention in future.
The ALRC report on complaints against the Australian Federal Police (AFP) and the National Crime Authority (NCA) recommended that
a National Integrity and Investigations Commission (NIIC) be established to investigate or supervise the investigation of complaints
against the AFP and NCA.
The Commissions endorse this recommendation and consider that the NIIC should include investigatory officers with specialised training
in dealing with complaints made by young people. Similar expert officers should also be included in each State and Territory police
complaints system.
Community visitor schemes established in police stations in a number of jurisdictions seem to be an effective supplementary means
of improving police accountability for the treatment of juvenile suspects.
Such schemes should be introduced nationally.
Draft recommendation 10.13.
Failure to comply with the national standards for juvenile justice should be the basis for the exercise of a discretion by judicial
officers to exclude evidence as improperly or unfairly obtained.
Draft recommendation 10.14.
The national standards for juvenile justice should require that the AFP and all State and Territory police lodge copies of all complaints
made by young people with the appropriate complaints handling body (see para 12.15, 12.17) and that community visitor schemes be
established in all major police stations. The standards should include specific guidelines for the handling of complaints against
police by children. In particular, these should include standards regarding time limits for hearing complaints and the desirability
of dealing personally, rather than in writing, with the child.
Legal advice
There is significant power imbalance between police and young suspects particularly when a young person is being detained or questioned
at a police station. Most State and Territory legislation acknowledges this inequality by requiring an independent adult (an interview
friend) to be present during interview if the evidence is to be admitted in court proceedings. Evidence to the Commissions suggests
this is not enough. Legislation is also required to ensure that young people are assisted to obtain legal advice if they wish to
prior to any formal interview, before making a decision to admit an offence, prior to any diversion from court and well before the
first court date for an alleged offence.
Duty solicitors often do not have the opportunity to take adequate instructions from children generally because the first time they
have contact with a child is on the morning of the hearing. There are several reasons for this. The first is that many young people
do not realise that they are entitled to seek legal advice prior to a court appearance and would be well advised to do so. In addition,
duty solicitors generally do not have the resources to seek out children before the hearing.
Draft recommendation 10.15.
The national standards for juvenile justice should provide that children who have been arrested may not be interviewed by police
until they have had the opportunity to access legal advice.
Draft recommendation 10.16.
Confidential legal advice (with the capacity for trained interpreter assistance) should be available to young people 24 hours a day
through a toll free telephone number. This service should be staffed by practitioners with specific training and experience in dealing
with children's matters.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek the agreement through SCAG of all States and Territory to the immediate establishment of such a
Bail and remand
The bail conditions applicable to a young person who has been charged with a federal offence are those of the State or Territory
in which the charge was laid.
The Commissions are concerned that young people are not always bailed when they should be and spend time incarcerated for offences
that are either not subsequently proven or for which a non-custodial sentence is imposed. We are also concerned that inappropriate
bail conditions are sometimes imposed. Bail and remand are particularly problematic for children from rural or remote communities.
For example, children are often transported long distances to an appropriate detention facility pending a bail hearing. If the bail
application is successful the released child often has no way of returning home.
Children living in rural or remote areas who are refused bail are often remanded to a detention centre hundreds of kilometres from
their home, disrupting their schooling and family relations. These problems impact disproportionately on Indigenous children who
are the most likely to live in remote communities.
Draft recommendation 10.17.
The national standards for juvenile justice should provide as follows.
There should be a presumption in favour of bail for all young suspects. The absence of a traditional family network should not negate
this presumption.
If young people are detained in police custody, they should be separated from adult detainees and young women should be separated
from male detainees.
Children should be legally represented at bail application proceedings.
Monetary and other unrealistic bail criteria should not be imposed on young people.
Children should not be subject to bail conditions, such as 24 hour curfews, that have the effect of forcing contact with their families
or that impose policing roles on carers.
Where a child is released on bail, police should have a statutory duty of care for ensuring that the child is able to return to his
carers promptly or is provided with alternative accommodation.
Lack of accommodation is not sufficient reason to refuse bail to a young person. No inference as to the child's likelihood of appearing
in court or committing further offences should be drawn from the fact that the he or she lacks accommodation.
Bail hostels should be used for young people on bail without alternative accommodation.
Police stations should not be proclaimed or gazetted as detention centres for the purposes of remanding young offenders.
Courts and the magistracy
Every State has a specialised children's court that hears matters involving federal and other juvenile offenders.
In non-metropolitan and remote areas and in the ACT and the Northern Territory, juvenile crime matters are generally heard by the
generalist magistracy sitting as a children's court because of a shortage of resources. There was a great deal of support in submissions
to the Inquiry for the development of a specialised magistracy to hear juvenile justice matters.
Draft recommendation 6.3 proposes a specialised family and children's magistracy to hear family law, care and protection and juvenile
justice matters. Under the proposal, this magistracy would work on circuit in rural and remote areas.
Whether or not a specialised children's magistracy is introduced in all jurisdictions, there should be a core training program for
magistrates hearing juvenile justice matters covering matters such as communications skills, child development, Indigenous culture,
juvenile justice procedure and the structural causes of offending.
The physical environment of adult court rooms can be intimidating for child defendants. While the Commissions understand that there
is a certain symbolic and deterrent value in an imposing court environment, it should not be so threatening or overwhelming as to
prevent children from participating in or even understanding proceedings. Ideally, children's criminal matters should be heard in
specifically designed court rooms.
Draft recommendation 10.18.
Juvenile justice data provided to OFC by the States and Territories in accordance with draft recommendation 10.2 should provide a
breakdown as to whether a decision was made by a specialist children's magistrate or by a generalist magistrate and be matched with
the type of order made in each case.
Draft recommendation 10.19.
In addition to training already provided, all magistrates who hear juvenile justice matters should receive specialised training.
In particular, they should be trained to avoid the use of legal jargon and acronyms and to ensure effective communication by asking
young people to explain what has happened in court back to them.
Implementation.
AIJA should develop a core national syllabus for training magistrates who hear juvenile justice matters in conjunction with other
judicial education bodies.
Draft recommendation 10.20.
Guidelines for juvenile court design, to be used when new courts are established and existing facilities are modified, should be
developed. These guidelines should ensure that courtrooms and waiting areas are designed and modified with the needs of child witnesses
and defendants in mind. In particular, attention should be given to providing sufficient private interview rooms and ensuring that
court rooms are small enough for communication at normal conversational level.
Implementation.
OFC should develop these guidelines in conjunction with relevant State and Territory authorities.
s 20C provides that a child who is charged with or convicted of a federal offence in a State or Territory court may be 'tried, punished
or otherwise dealt with' as if the offence were against a law of the State or Territory.
arts 37, 40 of CROC set down principles for the treatment of juvenile suspects and offenders and require States Parties to promote
a separate juvenile justice system. The
UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice
1985 (the Beijing Rules) and the
UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty
1990 set out detailed principles regarding the treatment of juveniles in detention. The
Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency
(the Riyadh Guidelines), adopted by the UN in 1990, advocate the development of social policies aimed at diverting young people from
the juvenile justice system.
art 40(3)(a) of CROC requires states to establish a minimum age below which children shall be presumed not to have the capacity to
infringe the criminal law but does not provide what an appropriate age would be.
Crimes Amendment Act 1995
This provision was introduced in 1995 to overcome the anomaly of children being liable for prosecution for federal offences at different
ages in different jurisdictions:
(H of R) 1 March 1995, 1336. See also
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) Sch Pt 2.3, 7.1. 10 is the age recommended in the Model Criminal Code: Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee
of Attorneys-General
Final Report: Chapter 2 General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
AGPS 1993, 35.
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 18(1);
Children's Services Act 1986
The Tasmanian government has announced its intention to raise the age of criminal responsibility to 10 as part of the reforms in
the Youth Justice Bill 1996 cl 3.
This presumption also applies in all States and Territories:
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 18(2);
Criminal Code
Criminal Code Act
(Qld) s 54;
Children Services Act 1986
(ACT) s 27(2);
Criminal Code
(NT) s 38(2). In NSW, SA and Vic the presumption is embodied in the common law: eg
IPH v Chief Constable of New South Wales
[1987] Crim LR 42.
Juvenile Justice Act 1983
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
(Vic) s 3(1);
Child Welfare Act 1960
(Tas) s 3(1);
Juvenile Justice Act 1992
The Tasmanian Government proposes raising the age to 18: Youth Justice Bill 1996 cl 3.
This is consistent with art 1 of CROC which provides that 'child' means every person under 18 years of age.
In some jurisdictions, informal cautions are governed by police instructions to a limited extent, eg, NSW Police Instructions provide
that officers should issue warnings to children who are detected committing trivial offences rather than taking formal action: 75.02.
In others, legislation regulates cautioning: eg
Juvenile Justice Act 1992
Young Offenders Act 1994
Young Offenders Act 1993
The Tasmanian Government proposes to give informal cautions a legislative basis: Youth Justice Bill 1996 cl 8.
eg recent Victorian figures show that in 1994–95, only 11.3% of Aboriginal alleged juvenile offenders received formal cautions
compared with 35.65% of non-Aboriginal juveniles: M Mackay
Victorian Criminal Justice System Fails Youth: Discussion Paper
Monash University Koorie Research Centre Melbourne 1996, 9.
See K Hazlehurst
Crime and Justice: An Australian Textbook in Criminology
LBC Information Services Sydney 1996, 137–141.
eg Youth Advocacy Centre
Submission 120
; Townsville Community Legal Service
Submission 181
As a result of
matters relating to young federal offenders can, on the face of it, be disposed of in the same way as those relating to young people
who transgress State and Territory laws. However, under the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth), jurisdiction to deal with and dispose of federal matters may only be exercised by magistrates and other judicial officers:
(2), (3). This means that only State or Territory judicial officers have jurisdiction to deal with young federal suspects once they
have been charged. Many diversionary schemes are administered by people who are not judicial officers. Thus young federal offenders
do not properly have access to these schemes. There has been at least one recent case in which a young defendant was denied access
to such a scheme:
Newman v A (a child)
(1992) 9 WAR 14.
See Attorney-General's Dept
Submission 178
Adelaide Focus Group 29 April 1996; Canberra Focus Group 6 May 1996; Rockhampton Focus Group 2 August 1996. This view is supported
by others, eg, Central Australian Aboriginal Child Care Service
Public Hearing Submission
18 July 1996.
Police in WA have the power to apprehend a child who is away from his or her place of residence, not under the immediate supervision
of a responsible person and who is 'in physical or moral danger, misbehaving or truanting from school' and escort the child home
or to school:
Child Welfare Act 1947
In NSW, Pt 3 of the
Children (Parental Responsibility) Act 1994
(NSW) gives police in certain regions similar powers to 'prevent' juvenile offending. The NSW government has recently announced plans
to extend the scope of this legislation.
eg in Victoria and NSW proceedings against children must generally be by way of summons:
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
(Vic) s 128;
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
A similar provision appears in AFP General Instruction 13.
H Blagg & M Wilkie
Young People and Police Powers
Australian Youth Foundation Sydney 1995, 191–207.
Crimes Act 1958
Summary Offences Act 1953
Juvenile Justice Act
Children's Service Act 1986
(ACT) s 30;
Juvenile Justice Act 1992
eg K Wright
Public Hearing Submission
Alice Springs 18 July 1996.
See para 10.21.
Under s 23D the investigation period can be extended once for a period of up to eight hours if the young person is under arrest for
a serious offence.
Perth Focus Group 1 July 1996; Rockhampton Focus Group 2 August 1996; Adelaide Focus Group 29 April 1996; Canberra Focus Group 6 May
1996; Hobart Focus Group 30 May 1996.
Canberra Focus Group 6 May 1996; Perth Focus Group 1 July 1996; Hobart Focus Group 30 May 1996; Brisbane Focus Group 29 July 1996;
Rockhampton Focus Group 2 August 1996.
ALRC Report 82
Integrity: but not by trust alone — AFP & NCA complaints and disciplinary systems
ALRC Sydney 1996 rec 6.
Under such schemes, community volunteers visit police stations unannounced to monitor police practices and give young people an opportunity
to make complaints to an independent third party.
Judiciary Act 1903
In most States and Territories there are special procedures regarding bail for children:
Child Welfare Act 1960
(Tas) s 19(1);
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
(Vic) s 129(2);
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
Juvenile Justice Act 1983
Juvenile Justice Act 1992
Bail Act 1982
Young Offenders Act 1994
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
(Vic) s 129(7).
Wagga Wagga Practitioners' Forum 9 May 1996.
Children's Court Act 1987
Children's Court of Western Australia Act 1988
Children's Court Act 1992
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
Child Welfare Act 1960
Youth Court Act 1993
eg J Saunders
Submission 21
; Catholic Education Office
Submission 38
; Association of Heads of Independent Schools
Submission 55
; Children's Protection Society
Submission 108
; Youth Advocacy Centre
Submission 120
; Fitzroy Legal Service
Submission 126
; Barwon Adolescent Taskforce
Submission 188
; Church Network for Youth Justice
Submission 212
11. Sentencing and detention
A long standing assumption of the juvenile justice sentencing system is that young offenders can and should be rehabilitated. This
assumption is reflected in domestic and international legal provisions that make rehabilitation the primary objective of juvenile
The major issues of concern about sentencing and detention expressed to the Commissions during this Inquiry included the following.
The discriminatory impact of sentencing policies on young people from rural and remote communities who have access to few rehabilitative
options and who are detained far from their families and communities.
The lack of rehabilitative arrangements for young people and, in particular, the limited availability of drug counselling and rehabilitation
for young offenders.
The limited range of sentencing options in particular jurisdictions.
Legislation in Western Australian and the Northern Territory which sets mandatory minimum sentences for certain offences and which
consequently does not permit all relevant factors affecting the particular child to be taken into consideration when sentencing the
The shift to more punitive sentencing regimes for young offenders, justified by reference to a juvenile crime wave, notwithstanding
that there has been no significant increase in juvenile crime in Australia over the past decade.
Over-representation in detention of young people from certain cultural groups, in particular young Indigenous people.
There is wide variation between different jurisdictions in their approach to sentencing young offenders. The general provisions governing
sentencing federal young offenders are contained in the
Deficiencies in sentencing processes have a particularly severe impact on certain children such as Indigenous children, children
from non-English speaking backgrounds and children from rural and remote areas who are over-represented in the juvenile justice system.
The development of national standards for juvenile justice, based on the principles in CROC and other relevant international instruments,
should assist to alleviate inequities and deficiencies in sentencing offenders.
The sentencing options contained in relevant Commonwealth, State and Territory legislation applicable to young offenders range from
payment of fines through to imprisonment with or without hard labour. Other options include reprimands, good behaviour bonds, payment
of compensation, probation orders, community service orders and detention in youth training facilities. The number and type of options
available and the names given to them differ among the jurisdictions. The reliance placed on each sentencing option also varies.
Detention is a very costly sentencing option.
In most jurisdictions detention is prescribed in legislation as a sentence of last resort. However, not all jurisdictions subscribe
to this approach — for example, Western Australia and the Northern Territory both have provision in their juvenile justice legislation
for mandatory detention of young offenders in certain circumstances.
Over the past ten years the detention rate for children has decreased although there have been fluctuations within that period as
well as substantial differences between the States and Territories in the rates of detention of children. At the completion of their
detention young people are paroled and supervised by juvenile justice officers in the community.
Community service orders developed as a direct alternative to detention. Detention and community services orders, along with probation,
are the sentencing options that prolong a child's involvement with the juvenile justice system. Community service orders aim to
discourage young offenders from further offending
reduce the population of offenders in detention centres
punish young offenders through imposing appropriate restrictions on their liberty
provide young offenders with an opportunity to make amends for the offences committed.
They offer significant benefits for young offenders in terms of rehabilitation and reintegration into society.
Draft recommendation 11.1.
The national standards for juvenile justice should include principles for sentencing of juvenile offenders. These principles should
also be reflected in relevant Commonwealth, State and Territory legislation. They should include
the need for proportionality of the sentence with the seriousness of the offence
the importance of rehabilitating juvenile offenders
the need to maintain and strengthen family relationships wherever possible
the importance of the welfare and development of the child
the need for decisions to be made in a time frame appropriate to the child's sense of time
the desirability of imposing the least restrictive sanctions consistent with the legitimate aim of protecting victims and the community
the importance of young offenders accepting responsibility for their actions and being able to develop in responsible, beneficial
and socially acceptable ways
the need to take into account the special circumstances of particular groups of juvenile offenders, especially Indigenous children.
Draft recommendation 11.2.
A wide range of sentencing options, with clearer and more appropriate hierarchies based on minimum appropriate intervention by the
formal justice system and a rehabilitative focus should be stipulated in the national standards for juvenile justice. Sentencing
options should take into account the special health and other requirements of children and young people. This should include the
provision of appropriate drug treatment facilities incorporating both detoxification programs and treatment or referral services.
It should also include counselling and other practical programs to assist these young people and their families. These could be run
by voluntary, community or church based agencies, by non-profit concerns or by government agencies.
Draft recommendation 11.3.
The national standards for juvenile justice should make the following provisions in relation to sentencing.
Completion of community service orders should be formally acknowledged by the court or relevant agency.
There should be suitable mechanisms for recognising outstanding achievement by young people in these programs.
Court support schemes should be established to ensure that children are given timely and appropriate advice on matters relating to
sentencing and are assisted to express their views during the sentencing process.
Background reports should be provided in all cases where a detention order for a child offender is being considered.
Young offenders should be clearly advised by the magistrate ordering a background report, and by the officer preparing the report,
of the purpose of the report and of the need for the child's involvement by way of interview in the preparation of the report. The
young offender must be advised that the interview will not be confidential and that anything said during the interview may be reported.
Sentencing decisions should take into account the special needs of particular children including boys, girls, Indigenous children,
children from non-English speaking backgrounds, children with disabilities, gay and lesbian young people, children in care and children
from rural or remote communities.
Magistrates and judges considering sentences for young people with a mental illness or severe emotional or behavioural disturbance
should obtain and give appropriate consideration to specialist psychiatric reports prior to determination of sentences.
Criminal convictions of young offenders should be expunged after a period of two years, or when the young person attains the age
of eighteen years, whichever is earlier, except where further convictions have been recorded.
Police records of young offenders should be retained for five years then automatically destroyed where no further offence has occurred.
Draft recommendation 11.4.
Research should be conducted into the success of alternative non-custodial sentencing options to assist the development and promote
the use of a greater range of alternatives to detention. These alternatives should be included in the relevant national standard
for juvenile justice.
Implementation.
OFC should commission research into the success of alternative non-custodial sentencing options and develop a standard in conjunction
with the relevant State and Territory authorities, community groups and young people.
Draft recommendation 11.5.
The training for judicial officers proposed at draft recommendation 10.19 should include material on the availability and effectiveness
of sentencing options for young offenders in each jurisdiction.
Draft recommendation 11.6.
The following action should be taken to address the special needs of Indigenous children in relation to sentencing.
Obtaining information from Indigenous communities about local community approaches and practices in relation to juvenile offending.
Encouraging implementation of the recommendations of the ALRC Sentencing Research Paper 11
Sentencing of Young Offenders
(ALRC Sydney 1988), ALRC Report 31
Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(AGPS Canberra 1986) and the
Report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
(AGPS Canberra 1991).
Developing, in conjunction with relevant State and Territory authorities, a national strategy to enhance the participation of Indigenous
people in the administration of juvenile justice, addressing matters such as training programs to increase employment opportunities
for Indigenous people in relevant government and non-government agencies, and appointment of Indigenous judges and magistrates.
Monitoring diversionary sentencing schemes in discrete or remote Indigenous communities with a view to ongoing funding to ensure
the continuation or expansion of those that prove most effective.
Implementation.
The OFC should co-ordinate the above initiatives.
Children who are convicted of federal offences and given a detention order continue to be dealt with in the State or Territory in
which they were convicted. They serve their detention orders in a State or Territory detention centre. State and Territory provisions
for children in detention are set out in various pieces of legislation, regulations and departmental guidelines.
There is a lack of uniformity between States and Territories with regard to the standard of practices and procedures in detention
centres. Grievance procedures for detainees, for example, are well developed in some jurisdictions and not in others.
Departmental guidelines and policies in a number of jurisdictions make specific provision for case managed rehabilitation. There
is little information on how well case managed rehabilitation in detention centres operates in practice. Areas of concern include
limited staff training, 'burnout' of case workers, and limited transitional programs for young people leaving detention.
Children sometimes commit further offences or breaches of discipline while in detention. Internal disciplinary measures include cautions,
restrictions on participation in sport and leisure activities and the imposition of additional duties. There is little formal regulation
of the disposal of disciplinary cases within centres and no access to legal representation for a child in any formal internal disciplinary
A particular concern with discipline and punishment processes concerns discretions given to officers for dealing with offences, whether
criminal or disciplinary, committed by children in detention. The regulation of disciplinary processes may be by management reviews,
lay visitors' schemes, independent oversight and complaints authorities or quasi-judicial oversight of decisions.
Some children experience particular problems in detention. Young people from rural or remote areas who are sentenced to a period
of detention are likely to be placed in a centre far from their family and community and as a result may suffer a greater degree
of dislocation than children from urban areas. Indigenous children are over-represented in detention in all States and Territories.
In September 1993 an Indigenous juvenile was 17 times more likely to be held in custody in Australia than a non-Indigenous juvenile,
but by June 1996 the likelihood of such detention was 21 times greater.
Children from some ethnic backgrounds are also over-represented in detention. Their special needs include access to culturally relevant
counselling, education and family reconciliation services.
Boys comprise the overwhelming majority of children in detention throughout Australia. There are few programs that address aggressive
or dominant behaviour of boys in detention. There are also few programs for boys in detention who have suffered abuse. By the same
token, the small number of girls in detention means that they can easily become marginalised in the system. Girls in detention often
have particular needs in areas such as sexual assault counselling, health programs and self-esteem and confidence building.
Juvenile detention facilities do not always provide the necessary assessment and treatment programs required by detainees who are
affected by mental illness.
Draft recommendation 11.7.
The national standards for juvenile justice should provide standards for detention based on relevant principles in CROC, the Beijing
UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty
and other relevant international treaties and guidelines. Matters covered in the standards should include
the detainee's right to natural justice and due process
discipline, punishment and complaint mechanisms
access to legal aid and advocacy in detention
regulation of discretion for dealing with offences, whether criminal or disciplinary, committed by children in detention
access to information for detainees about their rights and responsibilities
detainees' right to privacy
inspections and Official Visitors' schemes
case management and rehabilitation
food and clothing
standard of accommodation
educational and vocational programs
health and counselling services, including drug and alcohol programs
transitional programs and post-release services to enable successful reintegration into the community
programs and services to address the needs of particular groups of juveniles in detention including children from non-English speaking
backgrounds, Indigenous children and children from rural and remote areas.
Draft recommendation 11.8.
The following particular requirements should be included in the national standards for juvenile justice.
In all jurisdictions, legislation and policy should state that the aim of detention should be rehabilitation of the young offenders.
A detailed case plan for each detainee should be devised by a detention centre caseworker in conjunction with the young person, within
7 days of entry into detention.
Case plans should address the specific needs of particular groups of children including boys, girls, Indigenous children, children
from non-English speaking backgrounds, young people in care, gay and lesbian young people and children from rural and remote areas.
Case plans for detainees and for other matters such as medical regimes, disciplinary procedures, segregation, leave, visiting arrangements
and parole should be reviewed on a regular basis as well as being subject to review upon application by the detainee, the detainee's
family or the manager of the detention centre.
Relationships between detainees and their families and communities should be supported through the appointment of family and community
liaison officers.
All young detainees should be afforded due process in all disciplinary procedures, including the right to be informed of the behaviour
which led to the disciplinary measures, to be heard in the decision making process and to have the assistance of an advocate in formal
disciplinary procedures.
Complaint handling procedures and disciplinary arrangements, including behaviour that constitutes an offence, should be clearly explained
to each young detainee on arrival at a detention centre.
Staff in detention centres should be provided with adequate training in behaviour management options to ensure they are used correctly
and effectively.
Official Visitors should be given training on the national standards for juvenile justice and be made aware of the procedural requirements
in detention and of the advocacy needs of detainees.
Detainees should be invited to participate in decision making about the most appropriate arrangements for family and community contact
and for specific needs in relation to education and training
Appropriate psychiatric assessment, continuing treatment and regular psychiatric reviews for detainees affected by mental illness
should be available, including specialist psychiatric assessments for detainees before being brought before courts.
Draft recommendation 11.9.
All public employees working with young people in detention should be trained in the application of the national standards for juvenile
Implementation.
Appropriate training programs should be developed by relevant State and Territory authorities in consultation with the OFC.
Draft recommendation 11.10.
To assist in the formulation of national standards for children in detention research should be undertaken into juvenile detention
centres throughout Australia, to complement the research already undertaken by the NSW Ombudsman in its Inquiry into Juvenile Detention
Centres. This research should be used to inform the development of the relevant national standards for juvenile justice.
Implementation.
Through SCAG, the Attorney-General should encourage State and Territory governments to commission research into juvenile detention
centres and provide the results of the research to OFC.
Draft recommendation 11.11.
A national study should be undertaken to ascertain the best features of existing pre-release and post-release support schemes for
young detainees, with a view to ensuring their expansion and widespread application. The study should include appropriate consultation
with relevant Indigenous organisations.
Implementation.
OFC should commission this study in consultation with relevant State and Territory agencies.
Draft recommendation 11.12.
Information about recidivism rates for detainees should be collected and analysed on a national basis.
Implementation.
States and Territories should collect this data through the most appropriate agency in each jurisdiction. The data should be provided
to OFC for national analysis and scrutiny in conjunction with the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS).
Draft recommendation 11.13.
Action should be taken to progress the implementation of recommendations relevant to young people in detention from previous inquiries
including the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody and the NSW Ombudsman's Inquiry into Juvenile Detention Centres.
Implementation.
Through SCAG, the Attorney-General should encourage State and Territory governments to implement these recommendations as appropriate.
Draft recommendation 11.14.
A national young offender employment scheme should be funded to enable intensive and supervised job placement and employment support
for young offenders. Assistance should be provided while the young person is in detention and continue after his or her release.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should seek agreement through SCAG for the joint funding of this scheme by the States and Territories.
Draft recommendation 11.15.
The role of Ombudsman's Offices in monitoring detention centres should be strengthened by more regular visits, provision of specifically
designed information material to detainees and the appointment, where appropriate, of an Indigenous Investigation Officer for Detention
Centres in view of the high proportion of young Indigenous people in detention.
Implementation.
Through SCAG, the Attorney-General should encourage States and Territories to adopt these measures.
Draft recommendation 11.16.
A visiting solicitors scheme similar to that recently piloted in NSW should be established to service juvenile detention centres.
The scheme should involve a solicitor visiting each detention centre regularly and at least once a month. These visits should be
publicised in advance and made known to all detainees. Legal advice and advocacy should be provided to detainees for bail applications
and appeals, complaints, reviews, disciplinary procedures and broader legal and advocacy needs.
Implementation.
Through SCAG, the Attorney-General should seek the agreement of the States and Territories for the joint funding of this scheme.
The scheme should be co-ordinated by the relevant Legal Aid Commission.
Draft recommendation 11.17.
Information about numbers of young people from specified groups who enter detention should be collected and subjected to national
analysis and scrutiny. That data should note the numbers of boys, girls, children from rural and remote areas, Indigenous children,
the ethnic and socio-economic backgrounds of children, children who have been in the care and protection system, and any other groups
of children who experience particular problems or have special needs within the detention system. The data should also include information
to all children and each group of children.
Implementation.
This data should be collected by States and Territories through the most appropriate agency in each jurisdiction. The data should
be provided to OFC for national analysis in conjunction with ABS and incorporation into the national standards for juvenile justice,
policy and program development.
C Cunneen & R White
Juvenile Justice: An Australian Perspective
Oxford University Press Melbourne 1995, 101–102.
See draft rec 10.1.
C Cunneen & R White
Juvenile Justice: An Australian Perspective
Oxford University Press Melbourne 1995, 236.
Children (Detention Centres) Act 1987
(NSW); Children (Detention Centres) Regulations 1988 (NSW);
Juvenile Justice Act 1983
(NT); Juvenile
Justice Regulations 1993
Corrective Services Act 1980
(Qld); Detention Centres Procedures Manual
(Qld); Children (Detention Centres) Regulations 1988
Young Offenders Act 1993
(SA); Juvenile Justice Policy and Procedure Manual
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
Young Offenders Act 1994
(WA); Young Offenders Regulations 1994 (WA); Child Welfare (Detention Centres) Regulations (WA); Director-General's Rules 1990 (WA)
Youth Detention Centres: Policy and Legislation, Comparative Research
National Children's & Youth Law Centre Sydney 1994, 3 .
L Atkinson 'Detaining Aboriginal juveniles as a last resort: Variations from the theme' (1996) 64
Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
12. Advocacy, accountability and co-ordination
Introduction
Current programs for broad based children's advocacy
The Commissions' proposals
Introduction
Federal agencies
State and Territory agencies
A network of individual advocates
Effects on federal administration
Introduction
The clear evidence to the Commissions during the Inquiry was that children in the legal process are failed by governments. Generally,
there is limited government focus on children's issues and many policies directed at children are in fact designed to benefit adults
whether as working parents or taxpayers. In addition, approaches that have been adopted at different times can be seen today as
or even contradictory. Services that should benefit children are often poorly co-ordinated and resourced. Professionals in direct
unable to direct the system and services to assist children.
Ensuring children's interests are served in and by the legal system requires more than adapting litigation processes or providing
more effective legal representation for children before courts, although these are important. In the Commissions' view, broad based
advocacy and mechanisms to provide co-ordination and accountability are also required.
Without central and informed co-ordination of policy and practice for children's issues, the draft recommendations in this paper
will have little effect on children's ability to participate appropriately in legal processes that affect them. Children will continue
to suffer from duplications or omissions in services and programs. Issues concerning children need significant national co-ordination.
In addition to co-ordination, children's policy needs to be accorded sufficient priority to place it at the centre of government
policy making and activities. This requires the development of vigorous mechanisms to ensure accountability of government and effective
monitoring of policy and practice. It also requires strong advocacy of the interests of all children.
Co-ordination and accountability mechanisms should be supplemented by the provision, for individual children, of advocates or supporters
in their dealings with government agencies and in a broad range of administrative processes. This advocacy should provide support
for children on a range of problems and should not be limited to traditional legal representation in courts and tribunals.
Current programs for broad based children's advocacy
Some of these advocacy, accountability and co-ordination functions may be undertaken by a single entity. Some are more appropriately
placed at different levels of, or positions within, government. In the Commissions' view, each of these functions is important and
a number of them are already carried out.
HREOC's statutory responsibility for promoting CROC in Australia provides it with a broad based advocacy function for children. It
has an educative and advisory role, investigates complaints about practices of the Commonwealth that may be inconsistent with CROC,
prepares guidelines for the avoidance of acts or practices that may be inconsistent with CROC and examines existing and proposed
laws to ascertain their consistency with CROC.
The Commonwealth and each of the States and Territories have an Ombudsman whose role includes investigating children's complaints
policy advice to government, conducting education and awareness campaigns, researching children's issues and providing advocacy and
support to individual children.
In addition to such broad based advocacy, advocacy for children includes intervention on behalf of individual children in a range
of processes and decisions. The previous federal government's 1995
Justice Statement
included a proposal for four specific children's advocates to provide such assistance.
Peer advocacy— young people advocating for and on behalf of each other — is also an important example of individual advocacy
for children.
The Australian Association of Young People in Care is a peer advocacy organisation.
The Commissions consider that, while a substantial array of these roles is already established in Australia, a rationalisation is
required to ensure effective advocacy of children's interests, co-ordination of policy and practice and accountability of government.
Effective leadership by the Commonwealth is required to initiate and carry through such a rationalisation because of the Commonwealth's
central role and in recognition of the national priority required for children's issues.
There are a number of options for reform at a national level that could assist in providing some of these advocacy, accountability
and co-ordination functions for children. These options include a Children's Commissioner, a Children's Ombudsman, a National Office
for Children or a Ministry for Children. Each of these would form a new part of the government structure and have varying degrees
of independence. There is also the possibility of government and non-government organisations acting in partnership or of non-government
organisations alone filling the role.
Various countries have established national children's advocacy bodies to investigate individual complaints, provide advice and information,
monitor children's rights, lobby governments and contribute to legislation, policies and programs affecting children.
From the Commissions' point of view, no international jurisdiction provides a model which entirely suits Australia's conditions and
particular federal arrangements, although useful elements may be drawn from many.
The Commissions' proposals
Introduction
The Commissions consider that the first priority for children should be the creation within government of an agency with particular
responsibility for children. Such an agency is crucial in providing policy advice on, and priority to, children's issues across portfolios
and in co-ordinating programs and initiatives between and within levels of government. Children also need complaint mechanisms and
individual advocates who will prevent violations of their rights. While acknowledging that complaint investigation is important in
informing advocacy and policy development on systemic issues, the Commissions consider that at the federal level such functions,
which necessarily involve investigation into and criticism of government activity, are more appropriately located within independent
statutory bodies such as HREOC and the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
Federal agencies
The Commissions strongly advocate the establishment of an Office for Children (OFC) within the federal government, and in particular
within the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, to co-ordinate and develop policy and improve service delivery and practice
for children. The location of OFC within government, as distinct from establishing it as a separate statutory body, is dictated by
the need for close involvement in day to day policy development. OFC must be assured of the ability to participate vigorously in
all stages of policy development, to have its views appropriately reflected in government legislation, policy and programs affecting
children and to be effectively resourced to discharge its functions. The positioning of a policy body with a specific focus on children
within the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet is not new. Between 1984 and 1987, an Office of Youth Affairs was located within
that department, albeit with a somewhat different role.
It is vital that OFC develop close links with federal complaint handling bodies, in particular HREOC and the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
The Commissions envisage that the establishment by HREOC of links with an active OFC may well raise the need for a specific, statutory-based
Commissioner for Children within HREOC. For the moment, however, the Commissions see the absolute priority being the establishment
of an office of Commissioner for Children as secondary to the establishment of OFC. HREOC should receive sufficient current funding
to enable it to give appropriate attention to children's matters. The Commonwealth Ombudsman and OFC should also develop close links
to ensure information about complaints informs the work of OFC and that, correspondingly, the Commonwealth Ombudsman is able to draw
on the expertise of OFC in dealing with child complainants and determining complaints by and on behalf of children.
Draft recommendation 12.1.
An Office for Children (OFC), should be established within the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, to be the responsibility
of a Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister. This agency should
provide an annual report to Parliament on the status of children in Australia
monitor international obligations, particularly CROC, and provide advice and information on the preparation of reports under article
44 of CROC to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child
provide leadership and co-ordination in the preparation and implementation of national standards in areas of law recommended in this
Paper, in consultation with the States and Territories
monitor new legislation, programs and initiatives for compliance with CROC and national standards
encourage and assist federal departments to articulate the principles of CROC into their practice
co-ordinate the development of models of best practice for dealing with child consumers of government services or programs, including
best practice guidelines for grievance and complaints handling procedures for young people
advise governments on the most effective use of funds appropriated by Parliament for expenditure in relation to children
provide advocacy of the interests of children from a national perspective
undertake research, in conjunction with State and Territory agencies and the ABS, on children's involvement in legal and administrative
processes and the effects of those processes on children
liaise with federal complaint handling bodies relevant to children, particularly HREOC and the Commonwealth Ombudsman
liaise with State and Territory children's advocacy and complaints bodies throughout Australia
provide reports on its own initiative to federal Ministers, Ministerial Councils and Parliament dealing with State or Territory matters
of concern for children as and when they arise
assist in the development of a network of grassroots advocates for children by accrediting, training and providing information to
encourage and facilitate public debate and community awareness on matters relating to children
consult with relevant interest and community groups and with children and young people to determine the most appropriate strategies
for improving conditions for children.
Implementation.
The Prime Minister should take the necessary steps to establish such an agency within the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Draft recommendation 12.2.
OFC should be supported by an Advisory Committee of representatives of key organisations and sectors relevant to children including
education and community groups.
Implementation.
OFC should take steps to nominate suitably qualified people for membership of the Committee.
Draft recommendation 12.3.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman should ensure complaints processes are suitably adapted for children. The Ombudsman and OFC should develop
links to ensure the co-operative exchange of information to promote best practice for administrative processes in relation to children.
Implementation.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman should provide information to OFC in relation to any systemic problems for children that become apparent.
Information should be collected and provided to OFC on a regular basis concerning the numbers of child complainants, types of complaints
and results. OFC should consult regularly with, and provide information and advice about research and systemic issues to, the Commonwealth
State and Territory agencies
The above proposals do not address all of the areas requiring advocacy for children and greater accountability and co-ordination
mechanisms. As the States and Territories are responsible for law and policy in significant areas of children's lives, OFC must be
complemented by State and Territory bodies with greater proximity to children's issues at regional and local levels. The Commissions
consider that States and Territories are best placed to provide many complaints handling and broad systemic advocacy functions for
All jurisdictions already have one or more agencies that deal with complaints by or on behalf of children (generally along with other
members of the public) about State and Territory services and authorities. The Commonwealth, through OFC, should assist States and
Territories in the development of appropriate processes and best practice for the handling of complaints by children.
There is also a priority need in each State and Territory for a body to provide policy advocacy for children to complement the systems
advocacy role of OFC at the federal level.
While the Commissions do not wish to be prescriptive, there may be policy problems in having the complaint handling and systems advocacy
roles located within the one body. Proper co-ordination in States and Territories is needed where there are a number of different
bodies that have roles in providing developing policy, providing advocacy and handling complaints for children.
The clear focus of State and Territory advocacy bodies should be on assisting children with particular needs including children in
care, children in, or at risk of entering, detention and children who have been excluded from school or are at risk of exclusion.
Draft recommendation 12.4.
Each State and Territory should ensure that there are appropriate mechanisms, vested in either newly established or existing bodies,
handle complaints by or on behalf of children concerning the conduct of that State's or Territory's authorities including conduct
of employees and omissions or failures to act by authorities
advocate children's, or particular groups of children's, interests at a policy level within government
plan and co-ordinate children's policies and initiatives at State and Territory level
liaise with OFC, HREOC, the Commonwealth Ombudsman and individual advocates for children
provide OFC with an annual report on outcome indicators of programs and initiatives for children that receive federal funding
provide OFC with information on systemic matters of concern for children as necessary.
Implementation.
States and Territories should be encouraged through COAG to establish such bodies or units. The relevant bodies should establish
links with other similar bodies.
Draft recommendation 12.5.
State and Territory children's advocacy and complaints bodies should operate on the basis of principles of best practice for dealing
with children proposed at draft recommendation 4.1.
Draft recommendation 12.6.
These bodies should undertake access and awareness campaigns targeted at young people, particularly those young people who are most
likely to require assistance including children who have English language or literacy difficulties, who are outside the education
system or who are in the juvenile justice or care and protection systems.
A network of individual advocates
Individual children require advocates to assist them with problems or difficulties they may have with legal or administrative processes.
Generally, the best advocates for children are parents and families, but for children most in need of advocates, parental support
is very often either inappropriate or unavailable and additional or alternative advocacy assistance may be needed. Advocates should
be accessible to all children, particularly those in rural areas for whom distance may provide an initial barrier in accessing services
or obtaining redress.
These advocates should be the people to whom children relate and who are accessible to children: youth workers, school welfare officers
and so on. The Commissions consider that many of the advocates are already in place, in non-government organisations, community centres
or legal centres. These advocates may need additional appropriate training, particularly in legal issues and social sciences. They
need information about services and programs for children and co-ordination to form a network for information sharing, referral and
mutual support. Perhaps most important is the need for recognition of their advocacy role. The Commissions envisage that interested
individuals would apply for accreditation and membership of the child advocacy network which should confer appropriate recognition
as an advocate or contact person for a child dealing with legal or administrative processes. The Commissions consider that the network
should be national and co-ordinated by the Commonwealth through OFC. Membership of the network should not affect the current employment
arrangements of the advocates with federal, State or community agencies.
Draft recommendation 12.7.
A network of grassroots advocates for children, drawn from existing informal advocates in all cities and major regional centres of
Australia, should be established and a system of accreditation developed by OFC. OFC should ensure that lines of communication and
liaison are maintained within this network by way of annual conferences of advocates at either national or State and Territory level.
OFC should co-ordinate training programs for these advocates on legal issues, communication with children and negotiation skills.
OFC should provide all advocates with information on the network and regularly updated regional contact lists.
Implementation.
OFC should co-ordinate the development of this network, initially by inviting applications for accreditation as an advocate and developing
training programs and information.
Draft recommendation 12.8.
There should be ongoing publicity about the existence and role of the network of advocates particularly to those who are most likely
to need the assistance of an advocate, including children who have English language or literacy difficulties, who are outside the
education system or who are in the juvenile justice or care and protection systems.
Implementation.
OFC should co-ordinate this publicity.
Draft recommendation 12.9.
A national toll-free telephone advice line for children should be provided. This may involve utilisation of existing telephone advice
services for children. It may best be established as a national network with offices in each capital city. The advice line should
form an integral part of the advocacy network and provide suitable referrals to the network wherever it appears the child is in need
of such advocacy.
Implementation.
OFC should commission the establishment of such an advice line to be funded by the Department of Health and Family Services.
Draft recommendation 12.10.
In addition to the grassroots network of advocates and the specialist children's units within Legal Aid Commissions proposed at draft
recommendation 7.20, recurrent funding should be provided for a number of positions for legal advocates for children within either
specialist children's legal centres or established general community legal centres. Initially, one such legal advocate position should
be established in each State and Territory in addition to existing positions established under the
Justice Statement
. These advocates should form part of the advocacy network proposed at draft ecommendation 12.7 and should be able to work on cases
for individual children as well as matters of public interest and test cases. They should provide legal advice, information and assistance
to children and their families.
Implementation.
The Attorney-General should take the necessary steps to fund these legal advocate positions.
Effects on federal administration
The recommendations in this paper are not expected to have significant additional resource implications for the Commonwealth —
Australian governments are presently funding a substantial proportion of the work. The recommendations are intended to rationalise
and develop existing functions within a coherent framework. In addition, the development of expertise within OFC and the proposed
advocacy network as well as co-ordination of the work of federal, State and Territory agencies in general would, in the Commissions'
view, provide considerable efficiency and contribute to a significant improvement of the position of children in the legal process.
The following are the areas in which draft recommendations propose that additional attention or resources need to be provided by
the Commonwealth. Work that the Commissions consider should be able to be undertaken within existing budgets is not included.
The establishment and appropriate resourcing of OFC as a small policy, co-ordination and research body by the Prime Minister.
Liaison with OFC by federal courts and tribunals and all federal government departments and agencies that deal or are concerned with
children, in particular the Attorney-General's Department, DEETYA, DSS, DIMA, the Department of Health and Family Services, the Department
of Communications, the Bureau of Consumer Affairs and the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
The implementation by government departments and agencies of national standards or guidelines developed by OFC. Federal agencies
and departments particularly referred to include the Commonwealth Ombudsman, DEETYA, DIMA, DSS and the Family Court.
The conduct of research to improve practice and service delivery and the collection and publication of relevant statistics concerning
children. Federal Ministers, agencies and departments particularly referred to include the Minister for Small Business and Consumer
Affairs, the Minister for Social Security, the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs, the Minister for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, ABS, DEETYA, DIMA, DSS, the Department of Communications, the Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs,
the Family Court and the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
The negotiation with and encouragement of States and Territories to implement reforms proposed by this Inquiry by relevant Ministers
or departments through COAG, SCAG, MCEETYA, the Ministerial Council on Consumer Affairs and the Standing Committee of Community Service
and Income Security Administrators.
The development of access and awareness strategies for children by departments and agencies that deal with children, in particular
by DEETYA, DIMA, the Department of Health and Family Services, the Federal Bureau of Consumer Affairs and federal courts and tribunals
including the proposed ART.
The provision of training for staff, members and judicial officers of federal courts and tribunals, the DPP and for all staff that
deal with children in federal government departments.
The expansion of the report writing role of Family Court counsellors.
The establishment of a federal Family Court magistracy and the development, in conjunction with the States and Territories, of a
State and Territory based specialist family and children's magistracy to exercise both State and federal jurisdictions.
The establishment and appropriate resourcing of a toll-free national telephone advice service for children through the Department
of Health and Family Services
The establishment by the Attorney-General in conjunction with the States and Territories of a legal advice line for children, particularly
for those in police custody.
The separate appropriation of funds for legal aid grants for children in family law, care and protection and juvenile justice matters.
The establishment of specialist children's units within the Legal Aid Commissions of the States and Territories.
The recurrent funding of a number of legal advocate positions specifically to assist children, initially one advocacy position in
each State and Territory.
The joint funding, with States and Territories, of a visiting solicitors' schemes in detention centres.
The provision of funds through DEETYA for training of children's legal representatives.
The development and implementation by DEETYA of programs to support at-risk children and young people.
The development by DEETYA of a students' and teachers' handbook concerning children's participation in school decision making.
The joint funding, with States and Territories, of a national young offender employment scheme.
eg the SA Children's Interest Bureau, the Community Advocate of the ACT, the Qld Children's Commissioner, the NSW Community Services
Commission, and the National Children's and Youth Law Centre. The Qld Youth Advocacy Centre has a particular focus on individual
Attorney-General's Dept Canberra 1995.
See Standing Committee on Social Issues Report 10
Inquiry into Children's Advocacy
Parliament of NSW Sydney 1996, 19.
eg Sweden's Office of the Children's Ombudsman, Norway's Commissioner for Children, Denmark's Children's Council, New Zealand's Commissioner
for Children, Germany's Parliamentary Commission on Children's Affairs , Costa Rica's 'El Defensia de la Infancia' and Austria's
'Kinder und Jugenwaldt'. Advocacy bodies in Canada include the Deputy Ombudsman for Children and Youth (British Columbia), the Child
Advocate (Alberta) and the Office of Children and Family (Ontario). The UK and the USA have very few formal mechanisms for children's
advocacy at a national level. However, in each country, active non-government organisations provide both individual and systems advocacy
for children. The UK has the National Children's Bureau, the Children's Rights Office and the Children's Legal Centre. The USA relies
on Children's Rights Incorporated, the American Bar Association Centre on Children and the Law, the Child Welfare League of America
and the Children's Defence Fund.
Some jurisdictions have already developed such agencies: eg SA Children's Interest Bureau, Qld Commissioner for Children, NSW Office
for Children and the proposed Tas Commissioner for Children.
Participants
Deputy President
Team Leader
Law Reform Officers
Research Assistants
Legal Interns
Project Assistant
Human Rights Commissioner
Senior Adviser to the Human Rights Commissioner
Policy/Research Officer
HREOC Staff
Consultants
Young people's panel
The Division of the Commission constituted under the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
for the purposes of this reference comprises the following.
Alan Rose AO
Deputy President
Sue Tongue (to 5 October 1995)
David Edwards PSM (from 13 December 1995)
Dr Kathryn Cronin (from 2 February 1996)
Professor Bettina Cass
Justice Ian Coleman
Michael Ryland (to 29 November 1996)
Christopher Sidoti (to 11 August 1995)
Team Leader
Sally Moyle
Law Reform Officers
Sabina Lauber (from October 1995 until January 1996)
Frith Way (from January 1996)
Deborah de Fina (from February 1997)
Research Assistants
Rita Shackel (to 13 December 1996)
Katherine McFarlane (from September until November 1995)
Legal Interns
Hanne Andersen (to 29 February 1996)
Kristen Sykes (from 15 January 1996 to 9 February 1996)
Eva Dinesen (from 1 August 1996 to 1 February 1997)
Clare Kelly (from 2 July 1996 to 14 February 1997)
Rhea Knoblauch (from 2 December 1996 to 21 February 1997)
Ilan Freiman (from 4 March 1997)
Project Assistant
Jan Brennan (to 29 March 1996)
Bridie Healy (from 1 April 1996)
Joanna Longley,
Emma Joneshart,
Library Officer
(to 5 September 1996)
Yasmin Catley,
Library Officer
(from 25 September 1996)
Anna Hayduk
Human Rights Commissioner
Christopher Sidoti (from 14 August 1995)
Senior Adviser to the Human Rights Commissioner
Kieren Fitzpatrick
Policy/Research Officer
David Robinson
HREOC Staff
Consultants
Michael Antrum, National Children's and Youth Law Centre (from 12 February 1997)
Professor Rebecca Bailey-Harris, University of Bristol
Barbara Biggins, Young Media Australia
Dr Kay Bussey, Macquarie University
Brian Butler, Secretariat of National Aboriginal and Islander Child Care
Ron Cahill, Chief Magistrate (ACT)
Pam Cahir, Australian Early Childhood Association
Sally Castell-McGregor, formerly Children's Interest Bureau (SA)
Bill Clark, Smiths Snackfood Company (to 2 October 1996)
Chris Cunneen, University of Sydney
Dr Kate Funder, Australian Institute of Family Studies
Michael Hogan
Barbara Holborow, former Children's Magistrate
Hal Holley, Eastern Area Service for Youth
Justice Hal Jackson, District Court of WA
Marie Kelly (from 2 October 1996)
Robert Ludbrook
Catherine Morrison, Sydney Girls' High School
Gwenn Murray, Youth Advocacy Centre Inc
Jan Owen, Australian Association of Young People in Care
Moira Rayner, Dunhill Madden Butler
Kathy Scott, AMR Quantum Harris
Dr John Seymour, Australian National University
Young people's panel
Mohammed Abdul-Khalek
Tarik Alameddine
Angela Brown
Amelia Cormack
Sacha Delfosse
Greg Downes
Amanda Duell
Claire Hamilton
Damien House
Amie Madden
Clare Sidoti
Written submissions
Submissions on terms of reference
Submissions to the Issues Papers
Submissions on terms of reference
Submission number
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
JD Allen, Australian Federal Police
D Bagshaw, Family Services Council
AJ Barblett, Deputy Chief Justice, Family Court of Australia
R Barson, Office of Disability, Department of Human Services & Health
M Baume, Senator
M Baume, Senator
M Beer, Ethnic Communities Council of Tasmania
R Bell, Minor's Rights (Vic)
B Biggins, Young Media Australia
S Biggs, Families at Work (NSW)
G Biscoe, Child Protection Board (Tas)
G Biscoe, Office of the Secretary, Tasmanian Community & Health Services
G Black, Education Department (WA)
DS Blunn, Department of Social Security
A Bond-Hughes
D Bowen, Family Court Counselling, Family Court of Australia
P Braddy, Minister for Corrective Services, Minister for Police (Qld)
L Brereton, Minister for Industrial Relations
DF Bright J, District Court (SA)
T Brown, Monash University
C Buchanan, Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee (Qld)
C Buchanan, Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee (Qld)
G Bush, South Western Sydney Area Health Service
K Buttrum, Juvenile Justice (NSW)
K Buttrum, Juvenile Justice (NSW)
J Cavanagh, Spectrum Human Services (Vic)
Confidential
P Conran, Department of the Chief Minister (NT)
J Consedine
B Croke, Catholic Education Commission (NSW)
L Curran, Federation of Community Legal Centres (Vic)
Y Daniels, Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
P Dart, DPP (NSW)
A Davies, Civil Law Division, Attorney-General's Department
C Dawe SJ, Youth Court (SA)
H Diamond, Advertising Federation of Australia
J Douglas, Child Family & Community Support (Tas)
L Dreghorn, Queensland Law Society Inc
A Dutney, K Corcoran, Corrective Services Commission (Qld)
R Dyer, Minister for Community Services, Minister for Aged Services, Minister for Disability Services (NSW)
C Eastwood, Queensland University of Technology
C Edwards, Attorney-General (WA)
M Edwards, Commonwealth DPP
Ethnic Childcare, Family and Community Services Co-operative (NSW)
G Evans, Senator
B Firman, BoysTown (Qld)
G Fish, Tasmanian Secondary Assessment Board
R Fitzgerald, Ministry of Justice
M Fitzpatrick, Australian Sports Commission
M Friel, National Aboriginal Youth Law Centre (NT)
J Furby, Department of Correctional Services (NT)
J Gee, Mental Health Legal Centre (Vic)
Hal Ginges & Co (NSW)
N Goodsell, Court Counselling, Family Court of Australia
F Green, Centacare (ACT)
J Greig MP, Reynell Electorate Office
G Griffith, Solicitor-General of Australia
W Griffiths, Catholic Education Office (NT)
T Hamilton, Wentworth Area Health Service
PJ Hart, Australian Red Cross (NSW)
J Hartnett, Legal Services Commission of South Australia
L Harvey, Office of Multicultural Affairs, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
PAR Heffernan, Parent without Rights (Vic)
K Henley, Australian Association of National Advertisers
H Hill, Department of Education & Training (ACT)
H Hoskin, Noarlunga Regional Centre, Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service
CT Hunt, Attorney-General's Department (ACT)
M James, Australian Institute of Criminology
Y Joakimidis, Child Suppport Action Group (SA)
M John, Minister for Community Services (Vic)
L Johnson, Criminal Law Division, Attorney-General's Department
WU Johnston, Department of Justice (Vic)
M Jones, University of NSW & LA Basser Marks, LaTrobe University
R Kelso, Central Queensland University
AR Lauer, Commissioner, NSW Police Service
T Lawson, Office of Consumer and Business Affairs (SA)
G Le Duff, Independent Schools Board (SA)
G Levine SM, Children's Court (Vic)
B Liston, Women's Health Centre (Qld)
R Lifschitz, Macarthur Sexual Assault Service
F Lo Po, Mininster for Consumer Affairs, Minister for Women (NSW)
R Lucas, Minister for Education & Children's Services (SA)
C Luck, RIFT
R Ludbrook, National Children's and Youth Law Centre
N Lyall, Law Society of NSW
B Maguire, Directorate School Education (Vic)
J Maley, NT Liquor Commission
M Maneschi, NSW Ombudsman
S Mann, Curriculum Corp (Vic)
D Matthews, Pathways (ACT)
J McCarthy, Commonwealth DPP
GC McDonald, Asst Commissioner, Victoria Police
J McDougall, Youth Legal Service (WA)
R McSwan, Resolve (NT)
C Mikula, Consumer Credit Legal Centre (NSW)
L Moloney, LaTrobe University
A Morrow, Schools Council, National Board of Employment & Education and Training
MF Nelthorpe
J Neville Turner, Oz Child
DT Norton, Department of Premier and Cabinet (Tas)
L O'Donoghue, ATSIC
G Ogden, Illawarra Area Health Service
J Oswald, Minister for Housing, Urban Development & Local Government Relations (SA)
P Parkinson, University of Sydney
B Parris, Council of Single Mothers and their Children Inc (Vic)
A Patel, Immigration Advice & Rights Centre (NSW)
M Paterson, Retailing Council of Australia
CH Payne, NT Board of Studies
M Peedom, ACT Government Solicitor
J Peirce, Family Law Section, Law Institute of Victoria
C Petre, Community Services Commission (NSW)
C Petre, Community Services Commission (NSW)
K Prince, Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Housing (WA)
A Proudfoot, Public Policy Assessment Society (ACT)
N Pummeroy, Australian Language & Literary Council
V Rebikoff, Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia
TS Reeve, Northern Sydney Area Health Service
M Reid, Senator
I Ritchard, Supreme Court (Tas)
K Robertson, Victoria Legal Aid
A Robertson, Family & Community Services (SA)
M Roche, Office of Cabinet (Qld)
M Rooney SM, Cobham Children's Court (NSW)
J Roulston, Association of Independent Schools (Qld)
B Rout, Department of Education (Qld)
G Rutherford, Media Council Australia
J Ryan, Legal Aid (NSW)
D Sandor, Family Court of Australia & J Bondy, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology
M Schwarz, Victorian Community Council Against Violence
C Slattery, Family Law Reform Association Inc
R Smallwood, National Health & Medical Research Council
D Smith, Judicial Registrar, Family Court of Australia
K Smith, Department of Housing, Local Government and Planning (Qld)
P Smith, Commonwealth Ombudsman
S Spindler, Senator
JA Stubbs, Court Counselling, Family Court of Australia
M Sullivan, Department of Immigration & Ethnic Affairs
K Townsend, Office of the Status of Women
S Tregeagle, Barnardos Australia
H Twohill, Department of Family and Community Services (Qld)
J Usher, Centacare (NSW)
M Vagulans, Gay and Lesbian Rights Lobby (NSW)
J Van Gronigen, Correctional Services Commissioner, Department of Justice (Vic)
J Van Groningen, Correctional Services Commissioner, Det of Justice (Vic)
K Vassarotti, National Catholic Education Commission
D de Vaus, Australian Institute of Family Studies
D Volker, DEET
A Waite, Child Support Agency, Australian Taxation Office
GG Weller, Board of Studies (NSW)
K Were, Institute of Private Practising Psychologists Inc
D Whitchurch
B Wiese, Minister for Police, Emergency Services (WA)
J Wilkinson
R Wooding, Ministerial Council of Immigration & Multicultural Affairs
J Wyn Owen, NSW Health Department
R Young, ACT Juvenile Justice Service
V Young, Criminal Law Division, Attorney-General's Department
Submissions to the Issues Papers
Aboriginal Affairs Department (WA)
Aboriginal Justice Council (WA)
Aboriginal Legal Service of WA
Aboriginal Youth Support Service (Vic)
Action For Children (SA)
Adelaide Central Mission
Advertising Federation of Australia Ltd
Anti-Discrimination Board of NSW
Association of Heads of Independent Schools of Australia
Association of Independent Schools of WA (Inc)
Attorney-General (ACT)
Attorney-General's Department
Australian Association of National Advertisers
Australian Association of Social Workers Ltd
Australian Catholic Social Welfare Commission
Australian College of Paediatrics
Australian Family Association (WA)
Australian Federal Police
Australian Psychological Society Ltd
Autistic Association of NSW
Barnados Australia
Barwon Adolescent Taskforce (Vic)
J Benfer, E Drew & K Shepherd
Berry Street Inc (Vic)
Board of Senior Secondary School Studies (Qld)
A Bond-Hughes
Brenda House Inc (Vic)
T Brown, R Martyn & L Hewitt, Monash University
Campbelltown Health Service
S Castell-McGregor
Catholic Education Office
Central Queensland Community Legal Centre
Child & Adolescent Mental Health Service (SA)
Child Health Council (SA)
Child Support Agency
Children's Court, Melbourne
Children's Interests Bureau (SA)
Children's Protection Society Inc (Vic)
Children's Welfare Association of Victoria Inc
Church Network for Youth Justice (Qld)
COME-IN Youth Resource Centre (NSW)
Community Services Commission (NSW)
Community Services Australia
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Confidential
Copelen Child & Family Services Inc (Vic)
Council of Single Mothers & Their Children (Vic)
Darwin Community Legal Service & Top End Women's Legal Service
Defence for Children International
Disability Services Office (SA)
Department of the Chief Minister (NT)
Department of Education & the Arts (Tas)
Department for Education & Children's Services (SA)
Department of Employment, Education, Training & Youth Affairs
Department of Fair Trading (NSW)
Department of Health & Family Services
Department of Immigration & Multicultural Affairs
Department of Social Security
Intellectual Disability Services Council (SA)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
Eastern Domestic Violence Outreach Service (Vic)
Emergency Foster Care (SA)
Ethnic Communities' Council of Tasmania Inc
Families & Friends for Drug Law Reform (ACT)
Family Law Reform Association (Qld)
Family Services Council
Family Support Services Association of NSW
Federation of Community Legal Centres
Federation of Parents & Citizens Associations of NSW
Feminist Lawyers (Vic)
Fitzroy Legal Service Inc
GM Forrester
MR Forrester
M Fotheringham, K Kosky & M Sawyer, University of Adelaide
Fremantle Community Youth Service
Fremantle Hospital
Geelong Rape Crisis Centre
Guardianship Board (NSW)
L Grealy & M Shields
L Gunawan (Vic)
Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
Minister for Health (Qld)
Illawarra Disabled Persons' Trust
Immigration Advice & Rights Centre
Law Institute of Victoria — Administrative Law Section
Law Institute of Victoria — Family Law Section (Children & Youth Issues Cttee)
Law Reform Committee of Judges (Vic)
Law Society of NSW
T Lim-Bennett
Liverpool Sexual Assault Service
Lone Fathers' Association of Australia
Lutheran Community Care (SA)
L McKeon & A Brown
D Malcolm CJ (WA)
Marrickville Legal Centre
Media Council of Australia
Medical Consumers' Association NSW
Men's Rights Agency (Qld)
Mental Health Legal Centre Inc (Vic)
Ministry of Justice (WA)
Ministry of Sport & Recreation (WA)
Minors' Rights (Vic)
RG Moodie & Others
Mothers' Support Group (Vic)
Multicultural Interest Group (SA)
National Anglican Caring Organisations Network
National Children's & Youth Law Centre
National Council for the Single Mother & Her Child
MF Nelthorpe
Network of Community Activities (NSW)
New South Wales Board of Studies
New South Wales Department of Housing
New South Wales Federation of School Community Organisations
Office of Racing & Gaming (WA)
Office of the Status of Women
D O'Neil, Director of Client Services St Luke's (Vic)
Open Door Youth Foundation (NSW)
Oz Child (Children Australia Inc) (Vic)
Oz Child Legal Service (Vic)
Parents Without Rights (Vic)
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administrative Investigations (WA Ombudsman)
PLAN International Australia
The Public Policy Assessment Society Inc
Protect All Children Today (Qld)
Queensland Advocacy Inc
Queensland Law Society Inc
Queensland Police Service
Quota International of Gold Coast Inc
S Scarlett SM, Children's Court of NSW
Secretariat of the National Aboriginal & Islander Child Care
Social Security Appeals Tribunal
Society of St Vincent de Paul (NSW)
South Australia Police
South Australian Department of Family & Community Services
South Australian Foster Care Association
South Australian Multicultural & Ethnic Affairs Commission
Speech Pathology Australia (Qld)
MA Stephenson
Streetwize Comics Ltd
Tasmanian Government
The Taxi Employees' League (Vic)
Townsville Community Legal Service Inc
R & M Trembath
UNICEF Australia
Victims of Child Abuse Laws (Qld)
Victim Support Service (SA)
Victoria Police
Victorian Government
WA Grandparent Support Group Inc
Western Australia Police Service
Woden Valley Hospital, Child at Risk Assessment Unit
Women's Advisory Council (NT)
Women's Legal Service (Qld)
Youth Advocacy Centre Inc (Qld)
Youth Action Priorities & Youth Network of Tasmania
Youth Court of South Australia
The Youth Justice Coalition (NSW)
Youth & Family Service (Logan City) Inc
Youth Network of Tasmania
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children
Indigenous children
Care and Protection, Witnesses
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Administrative Review Tribunal
children's complaints units
, DR 12.4-6
Commissioner for children
Commonwealth Ombudsman
network of advocates
Office for Children
peer advocacy
Representation
Best interests principle
Care and protection
abuse and neglect
investigation of
notification and reporting
primary and secondary prevention
substantiation
adolescents in care
Charter for Children in Care
children with disabilities
children under orders
case plans and reviews
children in care
children leaving care
children remaining at home
juvenile justice system, involvement with
court proceedings
appeals from the Children's Court
prehearing and family group conferences
Children's Court Clinic
representation in
rules of evidence
federal responsibilities
Indigenous children
national care and protection standards
DR 7.5-6, DR 7.14, DR 9.9
non-English speaking background
statistics on
training for magistrates and judges
children, definition of
theories of
young people, definition of
Civil litigation
Commonwealth, role of
Commissioner for Children
advertising
awareness of remedies
consumer protection
enforcing children's contracts
financial services
media regulation
product safety
Criminal processes
ch 10, ch 11
age of criminal responsibility
age of majority
bail and remand
courts and the magistracy
court room design
specialised magistracy
judicial training
family group conferences
federal responsibilities
Indigenous children
international instruments
legal advice
national standards for juvenile justice
accountability
, DR 10.5-6
forensic procedures
identification material
DR 10.9, DR 10.11
Indigenous children
interview friends
intoxicated suspects
public spaces and powers of apprehension
strip searches
DR 10.9, DR 10.12
time limits on police detention
statistics on
Sentencing; Detention
, DR 8.1, DR 11.7, DR 12.1
case management
data collection
DR 11.12, DR 11.17
Indigenous children
international instruments
national standards for juvenile justice
non-English speaking background children
returning to the community
DR 11.11, DR 11.14
statistics on
training for detention centre staff
Disabilities, children with
, DR 9.23-24
children at risk
disciplinary measures
rights education and participation
statistics on
Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syndrome
Family Court
DR 5.5, DR 9.13
judicial warnings
tendency and coincidence evidence
videotaped evidence
Family Court
adversarial proceedings
child abuse allegations
child witnesses
children with intellectual disabilities
courts of summary jurisdiction
cross-vesting
expert evidence
family reports
Indigenous children
interviews by judges
non-English speaking background children
parens patriae jurisdiction
parenting plans
pre-hearing processes
primary dispute resolution
remote communities
right to be heard
right to institute proceedings
simplified procedures
statistics on
training of judicial officers and Court staff
wishes of the child
Best interests principle, Representation
Gay and lesbian young people
Guardian ad litem
Next friend
Immigration
citizenship
Immigration Review Tribunal
merits review
non-citizen children
Refugee Review Tribunal
Income support
statistics on
Indigenous children
, DR 10.9, DR 11.3, DR 11.6, DR 11.13
Judicial training
National standards
ch 9, ch 10, ch 11
Next friend
Non-English speaking background children
Office for Children
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Representation
Rural and remote children
, DR 8.4, DR 11.3
background reports
community service orders
criminal record
Indigenous children
, DR 11.3, DR 11.6
national standards for juvenile justice
non-English speaking background children
rural and remote children
Service delivery
United Nations Conventions on the Rights of the Child
Income support
closed circuit television and screens
credibility
cross-examination
counselling
expert witnesses
interpreters
investigations
interview teams
interviewing children
leading questions
preparation of
DR 5.14-15, DR 5.19
support persons and witness support programs
statistics on
training legal staff and judicial officers
DR 5.18, DR 5.20
victim impact statements
waiting rooms for
Young people
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter