URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/QLRCMP/2007/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:45:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
A New Approach to Confidentiality: A Guide for Families, Friends and Advocates [2007] QLRCMP 41
What is guardianship?
What information is confidential?
Reporting back to you
What did we find out?
How should the law change?
We still need your help
A new approach to confidentiality
A guide for families, friends and advocates
The Queensland Law Reform Commission has finished reviewing the role of
confidentiality in the guardianship system
We thank you for your help during this review. We now want to tell you how
we think the law should be improved.
The Commission’s full report will be tabled in Parliament. The
Queensland Government will then consider whether it wants to
Commission’s recommendations into law.
What is guardianship?
Queensland has two laws about guardianship: the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
guardianship laws apply to adults – that is, people 18 years or older
– who are unable to make some or all of their
The law calls this having ‘impaired capacity’. Someone has
impaired capacity if they cannot go through the process of
reaching their own
decision (free from inappropriate influence), having understood what that
decision will mean for them, and then
communicating that decision.
For most adults with impaired capacity, decisions are usually made informally
within the adult’s network of family and friends.
But sometimes these
arrangements don’t work so families and others might seek formal
decision-making help from the guardianship
This might mean going to the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, which
is like a court but is less formal. The Adult Guardian
might also be involved.
This is an independent official whose role is to protect the centers and
interests of adults with impaired
What information is
confidential?
The guardianship laws currently make certain personal information
confidential by:
1. Letting the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal make a
‘confidentiality order’
in some cases to stop people:
• Attending a hearing, or part of a hearing.
• Seeing a document being considered by the Tribunal.
• Knowing the Tribunal’s decision or the reasons it gives for a
2. Stopping people publishing information
Tribunal. This includes information such as who was at a hearing, what they
said, and what documents were
considered by the Tribunal.
3. Protecting the confidential information
that a person has access to
because they are involved in some way with guardianship. This covers, for
example, members of the Tribunal,
the Adult Guardian and an adult’s
administrator or guardian. But this duty of confidentiality only stops the
sharing of information
that is likely to identify a person.
Reporting back to
To help us work out what the law on confidentiality in the guardianship
system should be, the Commission consulted widely throughout
Queensland. We
received 260 submissions from 150 individuals and organisations in response to
our consultation documents. We also
invited people to share their views at ten
publicly advertised community forums held throughout the State and at fifteen
focus groups.
As a result, we heard the views of many hundreds of people. We
thank you for your contribution to the review.
We now want to tell you how we think the guardianship laws relating to
confidentiality should be improved. Our major recommendations
are summarised in
this pamphlet and also in a pamphlet for people who may need help with
decision-making. More detailed information
can also be found in two other
• A comprehensive report called
Public Justice, Private Lives: A New
Approach to Confidentiality in the Guardianship System
• A shorter paper,
Public Justice, Private Lives: A Companion to the
Confidentiality Report
, which is a guide to the longer report, but can also
be read independently of that report.
These papers can be downloaded from our website at:
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/guardianship
What did we find
We asked people how the law should balance some important concepts. On one
hand, decisions that affect people’s lives must
be transparent and
accountable. Open justice (public hearings and unrestricted reporting of them)
and procedural fairness (a center
to have your say about decisions that affect
you) are fundamental principles of our legal system.
On the other hand, people want to protect their individual privacy, and in
the guardianship system very private information is often
disclosed. There
could also be circumstances where revealing information might negatively affect
an adult’s interests.
When consulting with people, we found there was strong support for greater
openness in the guardianship system. The Commission agrees
that the system
currently leans too heavily towards confidentiality. Two key factors guide the
Commission’s view:
• The community must have confidence in the guardianship system –
greater openness will increase public confidence by
bringing more accountability
and transparency to decision-making processes. It will also increase public
awareness of the role of
the guardianship system.
• Good outcomes for the adult are put at risk by the failure to
disclose information – greater openness leads to better
decision-making
because decisions are based on complete and tested information. Open
decision-making is also more accountable.
While some of the adult’s
interests (such as privacy) may be negatively affected, the adult’s
interests as a whole will
be better served.
How should the law
The Commission thinks these principles should guide any changes to the role
of confidentiality in the guardianship system:
• There should be greater openness in the guardianship system.
• An adult is entitled to information about himself or herself.
• People greatly involved in the adult’s life have a greater
claim to information about him or her.
Tribunal proceedings
The Guardianship and Administration Tribunal should keep its power to stop
people attending hearings and to stop people looking at
documents or knowing
information being considered by the Tribunal. These powers will sometimes be
needed in an area like guardianship.
But to make the system more open, we
1. Replacing ‘confidentiality orders’ with four new types of
orders (called ‘limitation orders’) that are
more specific and
better reflect the sort of order being made:
Adult evidence orders
: to speak with an adult in the absence of others
if, for example, this is needed to obtain information that the Tribunal would
not receive.
Closure orders
: to stop people attending a hearing.
Non-publication orders
: to stop people publishing information about a
proceeding.
Confidentiality orders
: to keep information or documents confidential
from a person involved in a case.
2. Stating in the guardianship laws that people involved in a case are
allowed to have all relevant information and documents being
considered by the
Tribunal, unless a confidentiality order is made.
3. Establishing a presumption in favour of openness and also restricting when
limitation orders (except for adult evidence orders)
can be made to when they
are needed to avoid serious harm or injustice. This means these orders will be
made only in very limited
circumstances.
4. Setting up safeguards for making limitation orders to promote community
confidence in the Tribunal. The safeguards include allowing
people affected by
an order (including the media) to say why it should not be made, and to appeal
an order. The Tribunal must also
invite an independent official – the
Public Advocate – to say whether the order should be made. Finally, the
must give written reasons for making a limitation order.
Tribunal decisions and reasons
The Tribunal should not keep its power to stop people involved in a case from
knowing the Tribunal’s decision or the reasons
for the decision. It is
important that people who are affected by a decision know what the decision is
and why it was made.
But we recommend that the Tribunal have the power to
people about a decision where, for example, the disclosure of that information
would cause serious harm to a person. This
delay (of up to 14 days) allows
steps to be taken to ensure people’s safety when the decision is
Public discussion of Tribunal
proceedings
People should be able to publicly discuss Tribunal proceedings. This
includes allowing the media to report on what happens at Tribunal
This will promote accountability and transparency in decision-making. It will
also improve community understanding of
the Tribunal and its role in the
guardianship system.
But the Commission recognises the potential vulnerability of adults with
impaired capacity. We recommend that information can be
published only if it
will not identify the adult involved in the case.
We also recommend that the Tribunal have the power to change this in specific
cases. Sometimes it might be appropriate to allow the
adult’s identity to
be published. At other times, it might be appropriate to make a non-publication
order to stop publication
information about a Tribunal
proceeding.
General duty of confidentiality
The current general duty of confidentiality that applies when a person
receives information while performing a role under the guardianship
laws should
But a problem with the current law is that it seems to stop people sharing
information even when it is necessary or appropriate to
do this. This is
because the current law forbids people telling others information unless this is
allowed by an exception. To fix
this problem, we recommend that the duty be
reframed so that its focus is the
appropriate use
of information.
We also recommend that the guardianship laws include more exceptions about
when people can tell others confidential information.
For example, people
should be able to share confidential information with the police and
guardianship agencies, and when seeking
legal or financial advice.
We still need your
This is not the end of the Guardianship Review. The review has two stages.
The first, which dealt with confidentiality, is now complete.
We have started
work on the second stage, which involves reviewing the rest of the guardianship
During stage two, we will write a paper asking people what they think the law
You can contact us to register an interest in the review and we will send you
information when it is available.
Postal address:
Queensland Law Reform Commission
PO Box 13312
George Street Post Shop QLD 4003
(07) 3247 9045
(07) 3247 4544
qlrcguardianship@justice.qld.gov.au
For more information about the Commission’s Guardianship Review or
http://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/guardianship
August 2007
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (121 KB)
PDF format (82.8 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter