URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTCLRC/1991/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Guaranted Supply of Essential Services [1991] ACTCLRC 5
The Guaranted Supply of Essential Services
INTRODUCTION
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
AN ESSENTIAL SERVICES REVIEW COMMITTEE
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ESSENTIAL SERVICES (CONTINUITY OF SUPPLY) BILL 1992
TERMS OF REFERENCE
PARTICIPANTS
CONSULTATION
The Guaranted Supply of Essential Services
Report No 5 of the Community Law Reform Committee of the Australian Capital Territory.
This Report reflects the law as at December
Committee Reference: CLRC No 5.
The Community Law Reform Committee of the
Australian Capital Territory was established in June 1990. The purpose of the
is to assist the Government to identify areas in need of reform,
anticipate emerging social and legal issues and assess the practical
various proposals and laws on the people of the ACT. The Committee's Office and
Secretariat are at 3rd floor GIO Building,
City Walk, Canberra City ACT 2601
(Tel (06)2070546
This report examines whether essential services should be guaranteed in cases
of substantial financial hardship and, if so, how the
ACT might best do this.
At present, the providers of electricity, reticulated gas and telephone
services have the right to withdraw
the service for non-payment of an account.
The Community Law Reform Committee (CLRC) was provided with many examples of
substantial
hardship, health risks and heightened family stress caused by
threatened or actual disconnection of an essential service.
The mere threat of the disconnection of an essential service can cause severe
hardship. Some people unduly curtail the purchase
of other essentials such as
food and clothing to avoid disconnection. Threatened or actual disconnection
causes heightened stress
in financially disadvantaged households. Most
vulnerable are low income households (particularly sole parents, their
children, the
aged and people who are chronically ill and house-bound).
Threatened or actual disconnection of an essential service has a significant
financial impact on community organisations. The Salvation
Army and other
community agencies provide some financial assistance to households to avoid
disconnection of essential services.
The CLRC believes that the power to withdraw the supply of an essential service
to a household in the ACT should be tempered in cases
where a member of the
household is likely to suffer substantial hardship if a service provider
disconnects an essential service.
If the ACT accepts the recommendations in this report, a person suffering
substantial hardship will be able to apply to an Essential
Services Review
Committee. The Committee will have the power to halt disconnection action,
make arrangements for the payment of
the debt and waive part or all of the
debt. Safeguards will deter possible abuse of the scheme.
INTRODUCTION
1. Where a household is in serious financial difficulty, disconnection of an
essential service can cause hardship and put at risk
the health and safety of
members of the household. The lack of essential services can
disproportionately burden the very young and
the very old: people who may have
little or no control over the household budget who put their trust in another
to pay for the service.
Case examples
Upon discharge from hospital, Ms F, a young single mother caring for her
premature baby found her electricity disconnected. The
mother was unable to
pay the cost of reconnection. She was unable to use lighting, provide adequate
heating, sterilise bottles,
heat milk or wash soiled nappies.
Mrs A's husband frequently assaulted her. Her husband didn't pay the
telephone account and Telecom disconnected the service. As
a result she was
unable to call for assistance the next time she was assaulted.
Mr S, a paraplegic from birth, came home from hospital to find that service
providers had disconnected both electricity and telephone.
As a result, he
could not get help using his electrically charged wheelchair or telephone.
AGL disconnected Mr J's gas supply when he lost his job and stopped meeting
his financial commitments. The family did not have hot
water, heating or
cooking facilities for several weeks.
2. Conversely, some households may make a decision to meet an essential service
account at the expense of other necessities (such
as food, clothing or consumer
credit repayments) to avoid disconnection. In this situation many households
turn to voluntary welfare
agencies such as St. Vincent de Paul or the Salvation
Army for support. This causes a significant drain on limited community
Case example: Ms A, a single parent with 4 children rents a Government
house ($113.14 per fortnight) and is dependant on a sole parent
($565.70 per fortnight).
She was interstate when an electricity account arrived. On her return to
Canberra the due date had passed. She proceeded to pay
$100 off the $212
account and asked for an extension of two weeks; the next pension date. ACTEW
refused and said the service would
be disconnected unless she paid. This
refusal forced her to seek assistance from a welfare agency which, after some
difficulty,
negotiated an extension of time with the supplier.
3. Providers of essential services in the ACT may disconnect the service for
non-payment of an account and may do so without regard
to the hardship that the
disconnection may cause.
4. The CLRC believes that in most circumstances there is a strong argument that
an individual should not be deprived of an essential
service because of
substantial financial hardship.
5. In 1976 , the Oakes Committee, from Britain, determined that the withdrawal
of services such as gas and electricity, especially
in the winter, deprives
household of the necessities of life. It recommended that a service provider's
right to refuse supply of
essential services should be curtailed.
6. In 1987 the Australian Law Reform Commission, in its report on Debt Recovery
and Insolvency (ALRC No. 36) recommended that:
(a) the withdrawal of essential services in cases of financial hardship should
be dealt with by restricting rather than abolishing
an agency's right to
withdraw services;
(b) in cases of dishonesty, an agency should be able to withdraw essential
7. The Commonwealth did not adopt these recommendations.
Sanctioned Monopolies
8. ACT laws and agreements sanction several monopolies that provide services
essential for the maintenance of an acceptable standard
9. The ACT provides some of these services (such as police and fire protection
services) from taxes levied on the community and business.
Individual users of
the services are not required to pay directly for these services.
10. Other services, such as the courts, the health system and the provision of
low cost government housing, whilst provided by the
ACT, also impose some costs
on individual users. Sometimes these costs act as barriers to dissuade trivial
or non-essential use
of services. Sometimes they act as a signal to users of
the cost of the service. Often, service providers impose these costs at
time the service is first sought (for example, a court lodgement fee) or as
part of a structured system of regular payments (such
as concessional rent
11. Other government sanctioned monopolies cast the primary burden of paying
for services or goods directly on individual users.
Such services and goods
include electricity, gas, telephone, milk and eggs in the Territory. The
provision of milk and eggs (under
monopolies effectively sanctioned or
established by the
Milk Authority Act 1971
Industry Act 1975
) impose costs on consumers at the point of sale.
Consumers are able to make informed financial decisions about the cost of
these goods. Water, sewerage removal and waste collection services
are fixed cost services that are not withdrawn because of failure
or inability
to pay for the services. However, service providers pursue debtors through the
courts. In some cases outstanding debts
become a charge on the land.
12. However, electricity, reticulated gas and telephone services are provided
to consumers on the principle of supply first, pay
later. For each of these
services a consumer may run up high costs in a short period with little
indication of the cost incurred.
Some cost may be incurred without the
consumer being aware of it (automatic reheating of water during a cold snap or
temperature
controlled heating). Some consumers are not aware of the cost
incurred until an account arrives.
Electricity
13. The ACT Electricity and Water Authority (ACTEW) has a statutory monopoly to
supply electricity to consumers in the ACT. ACTEW
is a statutory authority
established under section 4 of the
Electricity and Water Act 1988
The law requires ACTEW to manage its business and keep its accounts in
accordance with commercial practice (ss 47-47A of the
Electricity and
Water Act 1988
and ss 82-93
Audit Act 1989
14. In the financial year 1990/1, ACTEW had almost 100,000 domestic customers
and issued almost 600,000 accounts. Many customers
pay at or immediately after
receiving a courtesy reminder. If an account remains unpaid after 7 days,
ACTEW lists the account for
disconnection. ACTEW listed the accounts of 2,156
domestic customers for disconnection in 1990/1.
15. Following the final notice, some customers are able to avoid disconnection.
In 1990/91, 440 customers negotiated 11th hour settlements
(welfare agencies
paying a visiting collection officer.
In 1990/1, 227 customers paid this
officer. A number of community submissions commented that ACTEW's negotiation
processes in situations
of need frequently lacked sufficient sensitivity and
flexibility.
16. ACTEW disconnected 1,489 domestic customers in 1990/1. ACTEW reconnected
717 customers after they settled the account and paid
a $10.00 reconnection
fee. The remaining 772 customers had left their premises.
17. In 1990/1, the average household cost for electricity in Canberra for a two
month period was $120. However, accounts listed
for disconnection were higher
than average and may have over-burdened the household budget.
18. A sample of Australians questioned in the National Social Science Survey
Exploratory Study of Economic Policy and Business
considered that electricity was an essential service (93%). Domestic customers
use electricity to power a range of appliances
that are essential to healthy
living: hot water, cooking, refrigeration, space heating and lighting.
19. Most submissions received by the CLRC argued that electricity supply to
domestic consumers is an essential service and should
not be disconnected where
that would cause substantial hardship.
20. The CLRC considers that in most circumstances electricity supplied to
domestic consumers is an essential service.
Impact of Climate on Electricity Usage
21. More than 60% of the domestic consumption of electricity in Canberra is
used to heat houses. This is the result of cold Canberra
winters typically
extending from April to October.
22. The effect of climate is visibly reflected in the amount of electricity
purchased by ACTEW (for domestic and commercial use).
Even small variations in
winter temperatures can have a dramatic unplanned impact on domestic budgets.
For example, in June 1990
ACTEW had to purchase 10% more electricity than June
1991 even though the temperature difference was only 3.4 degrees Celsius.
23. The range in seasonal temperatures adversely affects the energy needs of
Canberra households in comparison with those in other
Australian capitals.
Canberra differs from other Australian capitals in being an elevated inland
city. Canberra is more subject
to climatic differences than coastal cities
where climatic extremes are tempered by lower altitude and sea breezes. As a
domestic electricity usage is higher in Canberra than in any other
Australian capital. St. Vincent de Paul submitted
design of many existing Government homes is inefficient and costly,
exacerbating the financial circumstances of families.
24. In winter, domestic energy consumption increases significantly to provide
households with acceptable living conditions. In 1977
the National Capital
Development Commission (NCDC) undertook a study on energy usage within Canberra
households. The NCDC found
that the amount of energy consumed for heating a
house can be correlated to the coldness of climate but that house design varies
little to take account of climatic variations. The NCDC found that the major
part of domestic energy consumption in Australia is
for heating followed in
equal parts by water heating and other energy needs such as cooling and
lighting. The ratio for domestic
energy consumption in Perth for example is
approximately 33% for each of the above parts. By contrast in Canberra the
ratio for heating
is 60% with the other parts each using 20%.
25. Some consumers are not aware of the cost of a service until an account
arrives. It can be difficult to budget for accounts for
these services save
from previous experience. Because of climatic variations, experience is not a
good guide to the cost of a service
(particularly winter heating). Service
providers might mitigate these difficulties by introducing
pay as you go
better signals
of the cost of the service. For example,
Telecom has recently introduced a new scheme aimed at giving consumers more
account information.
26. Many low income families in the ACT live in government rented homes. The
ACT Housing Trust manages about 12,360 dwellings.
The Trust has implemented a
range of measures to optimise levels of thermal comfort and minimise the
consumption of energy. These
(a) in new houses
. energy saving designs and siting;
. efficient use of insulation; and
. the provision of efficient heating appliances; and
(b) in older houses
. improved ceiling insulation; and
. the replacement of inefficient heating and cooking appliances.
Submissions indicate that substantial problems still exist in the thermal
efficiency of ACT public housing stock.
and Sewerage
27. ACTEW also has a statutory monopoly to supply water and sewerage services
to consumers in the ACT. The provision of these services
are vital to the
well-being of the Canberra community.
28. ACTEW adopts a different approach in dealing with the non-payment of water
and sewerage rates. In such cases, domestic customers
can apply to ACTEW for
remission of water and sewerage charges under section 21C of the
and Land Rent (Relief) Act 1970
. This section provides that where
payment of rates, including water and sewerage rates "would cause undue
hardship" payment can
be deferred or remitted on decision of ACTEW. In its
submission, ACTEW states that it is not its practice to disconnect these
for non-payment of rates. However, ACTEW does wish to introduce the
right to restrict the flow of water as an aid to debt recovery.
No submission
was made to the CLRC critical of present practice in this area.
29. The CLRC considers that the supply of water and sewerage services to
consumers in the ACT is an essential service.
Reticulated
30. The Australian Gas Light Canberra Ltd (AGL) reticulates natural gas to
domestic consumers in the ACT under an exclusive franchise
agreement entered
into between its parent company and the Commonwealth in 1980. AGL is a
subsidiary of the Australian Gas Light
Ltd. The ACT has the capacity to make
legislation that affects AGL's operations.
31. Most submissions received by the CLRC argued that gas supplied to domestic
consumers is an essential service and should not be
disconnected where that
would cause substantial hardship.
32. AGL submitted that gas is not an essential service as there are many
alternative energy sources available most notably heating
oil, LPG and wood.
However, where gas appliances are used it is unlikely that appliances suitable
for these alternatives are installed
in the household. In its submission, AGL
notes that the ACT has not recognised gas as an essential service in other
respects. The
discussion relating to climatic factors and electricity above is
equally applicable to gas.
33. AGL has nearly 30,000 connected customers in the ACT. AGL advised the CLRC
In 1990, some 838 'Collector Calls' were made by AGL Canberra Ltd to all
classes of non-paying customers, which resulted in 223 meter
disconnections.
... The majority who are disconnected for non-payment of accounts are those
who have left the premises. A substantial
proportion of them pay once legal
action is taken. This would suggest that genuine 'hardship' cases among such
non-payers is rare.
34. AGL believes that few domestic customers use the Company's
disconnection and debt recovery procedures to get extended credit or
pay. However, the Company enters into payment plans with customers who have
difficulty in paying an account where they notify
AGL and do not have a pattern
of default. No submission was made to the CLRC critical of present practice in
35. The CLRC considers that gas supplied to domestic consumers should be
considered an essential service where a household relies
upon it as a source of
energy for a key appliance (eg, required for heating or food preparation). As
it is ACT Housing Trust policy
that future government housing will have gas as
the main energy source, many houses in Canberra will be using reticulated gas
the primary energy source in the future.
36. Telecom provides telephone services in the ACT. Telecom is a Commonwealth
Statutory Authority under the
Telecommunications Act 1991
The Act requires Telecom to ensure that:
...in view of the social importance of the service, it is reasonably
accessible to all persons in Australia on an equitable basis,
wherever they
reside or carry on business and that the performance standards of the service
reasonably meet the social, industrial
and commercial needs of the Australian
Telecommunications Act 1991
37. Because Telecom is a Commonwealth Statutory Authority, there is doubt about
the ACT's power to legislate for it. However, Telecom
relies on Territory law
and Courts for the collection of debts. The CLRC believes that Telecom may
voluntarily submit to the ACT
good corporate citizen. If it does not, it may be desirable for the ACT to
other options to enforce compliance with ACT law.
38. Telecom submitted to the CLRC that a telephone is an essential service
although it noted that it does not have 100% penetration
of the market. The
CLRC notes that the Commonwealth is removing Telecom's monopoly on
telecommunication services.
39. A sample of Australians questioned in the National Social Science Survey
Exploratory Study of Economic Policy and Business
rated the availability of a telephone service as very important (63%).
40. In 1988, the ALRC considered that in some circumstances a telephone was an
essential service but these circumstances were unusual
41. Submissions received by the CLRC about telephones supported the view that
for some people the telephone was an essential service.
42. The CLRC considers that the telephone is an essential service, particularly
for the housebound, chronically ill or elderly.
For those people the telephone
service provides a primary method of communication and a lifeline to emergency
services in times of
Abuse of debt relief schemes
43. Several submissions to the CLRC addressed the issue of possible abuse of
debt relief schemes. Abuse may take the form of a consumer
delaying or
avoiding paying an account for reasons unrelated to hardship. Abuse of debt
relief schemes generate costs to the service
provider and other consumers.
44. In his submission to the CLRC, Mr Birch referred to a particular instance
in 1983. The Commonwealth was concerned about the
plight of people using low
cost housing. It adopted a policy of not evicting a tenant in arrears in rent
payments for reasons of
financial hardship. Under this policy the Commonwealth
relied on court processes for the recovery of outstanding rent.
45. Mr Birch suggested that once this policy became commonly known, many
tenants (some not suffering financial hardship) ceased paying
rent at all.
Government revenue from public sector rental accommodation dropped sharply.
When the Commonwealth reversed its approach,
the recovery of outstanding
accounts was time-consuming and expensive.
46. The CLRC agrees that there are dangers in taking an overly simplistic
Term Options
the need for the service
47. Climatic factors are the single greatest component in the cost of energy in
the ACT. Some of these factors are unique to Canberra.
Long term solutions
need to be considered and adopted to minimise winter heating costs. The CLRC
believes that Government, community
and the service providers should focus on
long term solutions.
48. The CLRC suggests that the ACT should consider:
(a) ensuring that new housing stock are solar efficient, efficiently insulated
and provided with efficient heaters;
(b) developing a program of refitting existing government houses to ensure that
they are efficiently insulated and provided with
efficient heaters;
(c) reviewing the materials used in the construction of government houses;
(d) improving the efficiency of appliances used in the fitting out of
government houses (particularly heaters);
(e) developing a program to encourage private owners (particularly landlords)
to refit existing houses to ensure that they are efficiently
insulated and
provided with efficient heaters; and
(f) making an annual award for excellence in the siting, design and
construction of energy efficient houses.
Competition
49. The introduction of additional suppliers to provide essential services is
problematic when the industry depends on an infrastructure
of capital works.
However, some argue that competition leads to greater efficiency with resulting
cost benefits to all consumers.
50. The CLRC suggests that the ACT should carefully consider the benefits of
introducing competition, where practicable, into the
supply of essential
services. However, the CLRC does not make any specific suggestions or
recommendations relating to this issue.
Differential
51. A number of submissions to the CLRC argued that it might be possible to
reduce consumption or make costs fairer by imposing differential
rates on the
unit cost of an essential service by quantity or user. ACTEW suggested that
people might be encouraged to decrease
energy consumption through a reduction
in the charge for service for low consumption levels. In practice this would
mean that the
more electricity used, the more expensive it would become. The
CLRC notes that such a scheme would discriminate unfairly against
some families
(particularly larger or extended families). Differential rates may not be an
effective way of controlling consumption
in the absence of effective cost or
consumption signals to consumers. The Welfare Rights Centre suggested that
consideration should
be given to setting cheaper rates for the unemployed or
pensioners. The CLRC notes that there would be significant costs in setting
and administering such a scheme.
52. The CLRC suggests that the ACT carefully considers the social costs in
setting differential rates. However, the CLRC does not
make any specific
suggestions or recommendations relating to this issue.
53. Many submissions received by the CLRC dealt with short term options that
the ACT might adopt. There were two main options:
(a) the ACT introduce a voucher scheme similar to that operating in New South
(b) the ACT create an independent tribunal or committee to determine whether a
service should be disconnected.
Voucher System
54. The CLRC considered the NSW
Energy Accounts Payments Assistance Scheme
(EAPA). Under this scheme, welfare agencies are provided with a number of
vouchers. One or more vouchers, each worth $30.00, are
issued by these
agencies to people unable to pay accounts because of financial hardship. The
St. Vincent de Paul Society (Canberra)
issues NSW EAPA vouchers to people who
live in surrounding districts of NSW. It recommends that a similar scheme
should be introduced
for Canberra as vouchers are an effective method of
assisting needy households through winter.
55. ACTEW, AGL and Telecom submitted that the use of a voucher system was
appropriate as it would place the burden on the general
community. They argue
that if the scheme is funded by the supplier agencies extra costs may be passed
to only consumers of that
56. Some welfare agencies had reservations about a voucher system operating
effectively. Problems included:
(a) the possible misuse of vouchers (including double dipping, where multiple
requests for vouchers are made to welfare agencies
in relation to the same
(b) inconsistent application of hardship criteria by different welfare
(c) the need for people seeking assistance to approach welfare agencies; and
(d) the cost to agencies to administer the scheme.
57. While some of these problems can be overcome (eg, double dipping might be
reduced by recording the appropriate information on
the voucher to prevent
misuse) the voucher scheme does not resolve difficulties faced by members of
households who may not have any
knowledge of or access to the account. Such
people cannot use the voucher system to guarantee their access to essential
58. The CLRC considers that the voucher system has the disadvantage of the
passage of information and vouchers through many hands.
It is also likely that
problems of accountability would arise.
59. Analysis of the costs of establishing this type of system should recognise
the significant costs incurred by welfare agencies
in distributing the vouchers
(transaction costs).
60. A major concern of the CLRC was that community welfare agencies handling a
new voucher system may find a whole new group people
approaching them. This
would place additional strain and cost on welfare agencies and introduce a new
group of people into the cycle
of welfare dependency.
Independent Review Body
61. Other submissions received by the CLRC (particularly those from the Welfare
Rights and Legal Centre, ACTCOSS and CARE) recommended
that an independent
tribunal or committee intervene in situations where disconnection of a service
is threatened. This option gained
strong support from community groups at the
public hearing.
62. The major suppliers of essential services at the hearing did not dispute
that a role exists for such a body. Service providers
did argue that all
associated costs involved should be borne by the ACT from the welfare budget
and not by the supplier or its customers.
63. The Welfare Rights and Legal Centre argued that the withdrawal of an
essential service should not be permitted except with the
approval of a
tribunal. Under the Centre's proposal, the onus would be on the supplier
agency to satisfy the tribunal that:
(a) there was dishonesty; or
(b) disconnection of the service would not cause hardship.
64. The Centre argued that this would provide for a more socially just system
than a system that places the onus on the customer.
However, the Centre's
scheme does not address how service providers would be able to establish either
of the two suggested grounds.
The scheme might enable unscrupulous consumers
to avoid or unreasonably extend the time for paying bills.
65. The Salvation Army and CARE supported the establishment of a tribunal or
committee. These agencies submitted that any such body
should be able to
consider a range of options when considering the issue of disconnection.
66. ACTEW had concerns with over formalising the disconnection process. It
felt that a legalistic approach to debt-management could
result in high costs
and long delays. It questioned the cost-effectiveness of customers being able
to challenge the withdrawal of
an essential service.
67. ACTEW supported a system by which the evaluation of claims of "exceptional
hardship" were made within the welfare system. It
argued that the welfare
budget should meet all the costs involved in the support of persons facing
68. Most submissions received by the CLRC suggested that existing private and
public systems for determining whether a person was
suffering substantial
hardship were ad hoc and inconsistent.
69. The CLRC considers that the establishment of an independent review body, on
the basis that the onus should be on individuals
in need of relief to establish
substantial financial hardship:
(a) will lead to greater equity in the giving of relief (the review body will
be able to assess substantial hardship more consistently
than would welfare
agencies or employees of various service providers applying different service
provider's debt recovery policies);
(b) will be accessible to all people affected by disconnection (not simply the
person in whose name the account is held);
(c) will significantly reduce the possibility of abuse (discussed in Chapter
(d) is financially viable (discussed in Chapter 5); and
(e) will encourage individual service providers to improve debt recovery
70. The CLRC believes that a voucher system should not operate in the ACT.
71. In the Territory, there is no existing committee or tribunal that performs
the type of work likely to be performed by the suggested
review body and that
might be able to provide the proposed review body with secretariat support.
Consequently, because ACTEW would
engage most of the attention of the review
body, the CLRC believes that secretariat support should be located within
ACTEW. Such
a move may minimise costs as the required resources could be
partially met by existing ACTEW staff and accommodation. It would also
minimise transaction costs involved in dealing with ACTEW accounts.
72. The presence of the review body within ACTEW's administrative structure
need not be a threat to the independence of the review
process if it is
carefully structured. The ACT Housing Review Committee and the Legal Aid
Review Committees provide useful examples
of the location of review bodies
within existing administrative structures. The CLRC sees one striking
advantage in locating secretariat
support within ACTEW. It is very likely that
ACTEW would give affect to its debt recovery policy in such a way as to
forestall the
need of a consumer suffering substantial financial hardship to
approach the review body at all. The CLRC believes that this view
will commend
itself to the present management of ACTEW if the ACT adopts this report's major
recommendations.
AN ESSENTIAL SERVICES REVIEW COMMITTEE
Examples of how the proposed system would work:
Hypothetical case 1: A household receives an account. The account and
subsequent reminder clearly state that if the account cannot
be paid because of
substantial financial hardship, an application for relief can be made to the
Essential Services Review Committee
[ESRC]. A household member contacts the
ESRC and applies for relief. Action to disconnect the service stops until the
ESRC considers
the issue. The ESRC can reduce the debt or make it payable by
instalment.
Hypothetical case 2: A rogue, not suffering financial hardship, receives an
account and attempts to avoid paying it by contacting
the ESRC and applying for
relief. Action to disconnect the service stops until the ESRC considers the
issue. The ESRC can impose
a penalty charge on the rogue and let disconnection
action proceed.
Hypothetical case 3: A service is disconnected (the household members may
have been interstate or in hospital). A household member
applies for relief. The service is reconnected until the ESRC considers the
issue. The ESRC can reduce the
debt or make it payable by instalment.
73. The CLRC recommends that the ACT adopt the following scheme.
Essential Services
74. Essential services include the provision of electricity, reticulated gas,
water, sewerage, telephone and such other services
prescribed by regulation.
75. An essential service account provided to a domestic customer may state that
if the customer cannot pay the account in full because
of substantial financial
hardship he or she may apply to the ESRC for relief.
Disconnection
76. The supplier of an essential service shall not disconnect an essential
service without giving a domestic customer 7 days notice
in writing of the
intention to disconnect. If the supplier of an essential service fails to
comply with this requirement, the notice
has no legal effect and and the
service shall not be disconnected on the basis of the notice.
Applications
77. Any person who is or would be directly affected by the disconnection of an
essential service (or an unpaid agent acting on his
or her behalf) may make
application for relief to the ESRC if that person is suffering substantial
financial hardship.
78. An application for relief may be made in writing or orally to the ESRC. If
the application for relief is oral, it must be confirmed
in writing within five
working days. The ESRC may extend this period of time if the applicant has
satisfactory reasons for failing
to confirm the application in writing. If
ESRC does not extend the time, the oral application lapses. A written
application (or
written confirmation of an application) must be in a form
approved by the Chairperson of the ESRC and published in the Gazette.
of Application for relief
79. Once an application for relief has been lodged the ESRC shall immediately
notify the service provider.
80. Once notified, the service provider shall not disconnect a service until
the ESRC makes a direction about the application or
the application lapses. If
the service has been disconnected, it must be immediately reconnected and the
service provider shall
not disconnect it until the ESRC makes a direction about
the application or the application lapses.
81. Once notified, the service provider will provide to the ESRC all relevant
information about the account.
Services Review Committee
82. The ACT shall establish a statutory review body to be called the Essential
Services Review Committee (ESRC).
Composition
83. Under the legislation, the responsible Minister shall appoint a chairperson
and deputy chairperson who are not associated with
either a service provider or
a welfare agency.
84. Under the legislation, the responsible Minister shall appoint a panel of
(a) three community members; and
(b) one (or more) member from each essential service provider.
85. When an application for relief is made, the chairperson shall convene an
Essential Services Review Committee to consider the
matter comprised of the
following members:
(a) the chairperson or deputy chairperson;
(b) one community member; and
(c) a relevant service provider member.
86. Where, before the completion of a hearing, one member of the committee
ceases to be available for the purpose of the hearing,
the remaining two
members may complete the hearing.
87. The chairperson may appoint the deputy chairperson or a community member or
members to act as the chairperson in certain situations
defined by the
chairperson.
88. The chairperson, deputy chairperson or a member may resign by notice in
writing to the Minister.
89. The role of the committee, constituted by three members, is to determine
applications for relief. In doing so, the Committee
will determine whether the
domestic consumer of an essential service is suffering substantial financial
90. If an applicant establishes substantial financial hardship, the committee
(a) direct that there shall be no disconnection of the service in question for
failure to pay the account which is the subject of
the application (unless a
condition referred to below is broken by the applicant); or
(b) waiver, in part or in whole, the account which is the subject of the
application.
91. If an applicant does not establish substantial financial hardship, the
committee shall dismiss the application.
92. Where the committee makes a direction it may be expressed to be contingent
upon one or more of the following conditions:
(a) restricted supply of the service;
(b) payment of the account by instalment;
(c) referral to financial counselling;
(d) deferred payment of an account;
(e) direct payment arrangements between the applicant's financial institution
and the service provider;
(f) the account be furnished more regularly than usual; and/or
(g) any other reasonable condition.
93. The committee may not award costs (legal or otherwise) and costs should not
be payable by any party. Where a number of applications
concern the same
applicant and the same service provider, the committee may consider the
applications for relief at the same time.
94. Parties to the application are the applicant (or his or her unpaid agent)
and the relevant service provider.
95. Parties may proceed orally or in writing (or both). Hearings will be in
private at such time and place as is determined by the
committee and notified
to the parties. The committee should not be bound by the strict rules of
evidence and should resolve applications
economically, speedily and fairly.
The hearings of the committee would be informal and would proceed quickly with
no recording of
the proceedings. The committee would have access to extrinsic
material such as service provider's files when determining an application.
example, the committee may consider any accrued debt, the current account and
the previous good payment record of the applicant.
96. Decisions of the committee should be in writing and available to the
parties. Decisions may be published provided that the applicant
household are not identified.
97. Decisions of the committee should be binding.
98. The ESRC has a discretion to impose an administrative fee of $50 upon the
applicant if the committee finds the application for
relief made to the
committee (whether in writing or oral, whether lapsed or not) is entirely
without merit. At the time of application,
an applicant should be made aware
that the committee may impose an administrative fee.
99. If imposed, the administrative fee should become payable by the applicant
and collected by the service provider.
and Judicial Review
100. The committee's decision may be reviewed under the
Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1989
101. There should be no additional administrative appeal.
Financial Considerations
102. Threatened or actual disconnection of an essential service is often the
trigger (if not the underlying cause) for a catastrophic
worsening of an
individual's living conditions. The withdrawal of an essential service imposes
many emotional, social and financial
costs on households, the government,
service providers, welfare agencies and the general community. It is not
possible to quantify
all of these costs.
103. Debt management consumes considerable resources of essential service
providers most of whom have a significant (but manageable)
number of bad debts.
It also imposes a severe strain on the counselling (and financial) resources of
welfare agencies as consumers
who are disconnected from a service are often
forced to seek emergency relief. People seeking emergency assistance strain
the budgets
of welfare agencies. The Salvation Army in the ACT estimates that
it dispersed $12,000 worth of assistance to those households that
essential service withdrawn in 1990/91.
104. Through the provision of welfare and health services in the ACT, the ACT
ultimately meets some of these costs indirectly. In
particular, community
health can also be adversely affected by disconnection. People who sleep in
unheated housing or who do not
have access to hot water may cause (or
exacerbate pre-existing) health problems. The ACT Regional Advisory Committee
of the National
Safety Council of Australia submitted that this may create
greater health and community costs than would be the case if supply of
service was maintained (although the CLRC notes that if many customers took
advantage of such a policy and ceased to pay, the situation
significantly different).
Who should pay?
105. The ALRC argued in its report that any concession given to debtors should
be borne by the community at large as costs incurred
by the suppliers would be
recovered by increasing the charges for supply. It considered that this extra
cost could be justified
by considerations of public welfare and by the hardship
faced by those who at times simply cannot pay.
106. The CLRC closely considered whether the broader community should fund the
relief through ACT Consolidated Revenue or whether
consumers should meet the
cost through increased charges from service providers. The CLRC recommends
that consumers should meet
the cost because:
(a) ultimately, it is much more cost-efficient to place the proposed review
body within ACTEW (noting that although some of this
cost will eventually flow
to ACTEW's customers, other service providers such as AGL and Telecom would be
required to offset this
cost to the extent that they use the system);
(b) the actual cost to individual customers is very small (about 3-17 cents per
account per customer); and
(c) the 'tax base' is more appropriate (the measure is designed to assist the
'constituency of customers').
amounts are at issue?
107. The CLRC believes that, even in the existing difficult financial
conditions, the cost of guaranteed essential services is not
excessive. If the
ACT adopts the recommendations in this report the cost would be less than 0.15%
of the cost of the service. In
real terms, the cost of this reform is
financially insignificant.
108. Estimates of the cost of maintaining the committee vary according to the
amount of sitting time of the committee. These costs
could reduce, depending
on the success of concurrent strategies to recover in full or in part lost
revenue and support from other
agencies brought within the ambit of the scheme.
Following an examination of like committees, the CLRC believes that the annual
of the committee will be between $22,000 and $100,000. If there are 200
applications p.a., the annual operating cost will be $22,000
p.a. and the
additional cost to the consumer per account cycle is $ 0.03. If there are 1000
applications p.a., the annual operating
cost of the committee will be $100,000
p.a. and the additional cost to the consumer per account cycle is $0.17. Once
only set up
costs would add marginally to the first year's operating costs
(although it is possible that ACTEW would also be able to absorb some
109. In coming to these conclusions, the CLRC has made the following assumptions:
Assuming 200 applications pa.
Remuneration 10 hearing dates X 2 paid members X $250
Clerical Support ASO6 @ 30% $10,625
On-costs @ 60% @ 30%
ASO6 $6,375
Total $22,000
Assuming 1000 applications pa.
Remuneration 56 hearing dates X 2 paid members
Clerical Support ASO6 @100% $35,400
On-costs @ 60% ASO6 $21,240
Contingencies (15%) $15,360
Total $100,000
110. These costs do not reflect the existing cost to service providers and the
community of written-off debts. The adoption of the
CLRC's recommendations
should reduce the amount written-off in two ways:
(a) directions made by the Committee may improve the actual collection of
outstanding debts (through instalment payment processes)
and the gradual
modification of behaviour to avoid customer over-commitment; and
(b) the existence of the Committee may improve debt-recovery processes by
service providers.
111. In addition, the Committee will serve to focus the attention of welfare
agencies. It will permit agencies to redirect welfare
money to other more
pressing social needs.
112. If the ACT adopts the recommendations in this report, there will be no
direct financial consequences to the ACT Consolidated
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Milk Authority Act 1971
Egg Industry Act 1975
Electricity and Water Act 1988
Audit Act 1989
Telecommunications Act 1991
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1989
Rates and Land Rent (Relief) Act 1970
Australian Capital Territory, Department of Justice & Community Services,
Issues Paper, Withdrawal of Essential Services, Canberra
Australian Law Reform Commission, Report No 36, Debt Recovery & Insolvency
AGPS, Canberra 1987
New South Wales Department of Minerals and Energy, Annual Report 1989-1990
National Capital Development Commission, Report on Energy Usage in Canberra
Households, 1977
National Social Science Survey Report, 1989
National Capital Planning Authority, Energy Conservation in Housing, 1991
ACT Housing Trust, Public Housing Upgrade Standard, 1991
Objectives & Definitions for CSOs, prepared for the Telecom Australia
Consumers' Council by the Communications Law Centre, University
of New South
Wales, 1990
Guidelines for Electricity Councils, Energy Accounts Payments Assistance
Scheme, NSW Department of Energy and Minerals, 1989.
SERVICES (CONTINUITY OF SUPPLY) BILL 1992
A BILL FOR An Act to provide for the continuity of essential services to
persons suffering substantial financial hardship
The Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory enacts as
part i--preliminary
Short title
1. This Act may be cited as the
Essential Services (Continuity of Supply)
Commencement
2. (1) Section 1 and this section commence on the day on which this Act is
notified in the
(2) The remaining provisions commence on a day fixed by the Minister by notice
(3) If a provision referred to in subsection (2) has not commenced before the
end of the period of 6 months commencing on the day
on which this Act is
notified in the
, that provision, by force of this subsection,
commences on the first day after the end of that period.
Interpretation
3. In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears--
"account", in relation to an essential service, means a written statement of
the amount payable by a customer to the relevant service
provider in respect of
that essential service;
"application" means an application for relief under this Act;
"customer" means a person to whom an essential service is being provided for
domestic use;
"essential service" means the provision of electricity or any other prescribed
"Review Committee" means the Essential Services Review Committee established
under this Act;
"service provider" means an authority or body that provides an essential
"withdrawal", in relation to an essential service, means the discontinuance or
reduction of that service by reason only that an account
for that service has
not been paid.
Application
4. Nothing in this Act affects the operation of the
Rates and Land Rent
(Relief) Act 1970
or of section 78 of the
Electricity and Water Act
part ii--essential services review committee
Establishment
5. For the purposes of this Act, there shall be an Essential Services Review
Appointments
6. (1) The Minister shall appoint a Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson of
the Review Committee.
(2) Where the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson is, or is about to be, absent
or not available to perform the functions of his or
her office or there is a
vacancy in the office of Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson, the Minister may
appoint a person to act as
Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson while he or she is
absent or not available to perform those functions or until the filling of the
vacancy, as the case may be.
(3) The Minister shall not appoint, under subsection (1) or (2), a person who
is an employee of a service provider or a welfare
Composition
7. (1) Subject to subsection (4), the Review Committee shall, for the purpose
of considering an application, consist of--
(a) the Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson;
(b) a person chosen in accordance with subsection (2); and
(c) a person chosen in accordance with subsection (3).
(2) The member referred to in paragraph (1) (b) shall be a person chosen by
the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson from a panel of
not less than 3 persons
who have had experience in assisting or otherwise working with persons
suffering financial hardship, being
persons nominated to the panel by the
(3) The member referred to in paragraph (1) (c) shall be a representative of
the relevant service provider chosen by the Chairperson
or Deputy Chairperson
from a panel of representatives of service providers nominated by the
(4) Where, before the completion of the consideration of an application, a
member of the Committee ceases to be available, the remaining
members of the
Committee may continue to consider the application and the Committee shall be
taken to be duly constituted for that
Defect in appointment
8. An action of the Review Committee is not rendered invalid by reason only
of a defect or irregularity in the appointment of a
member of the Committee.
Removal from office
9. (1) The Minister may remove the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of the
Review Committee from office for misbehaviour or physical
incapacity.
(2) If the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson--
(a) becomes bankrupt, applies to take the benefit of any law for the relief of
bankrupt or insolvent debtors, compounds with his
or her creditors or makes an
assignment of remuneration for their benefit;
(b) becomes of unsound mind; or
(c) is convicted in Australia of an offence punishable by imprisonment for 1
year or longer;
the Minister shall remove the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson from office.
Resignation
10. The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of the Review Committee may resign
his or her office by tendering a written resignation
to the Minister.
11. The function of the Review Committee is to consider and decide
applications.
Remuneration and allowances
12. (1) The members of the Review Committee shall be paid such remuneration
and allowances as are prescribed.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a member of the Review Committee--
(a) in relation to remuneration--if there is a subsisting determination
relating to the remuneration to be paid to that member;
(b) in relation to an allowance of a particular kind--if there is a subsisting
determination relating to an allowance of that kind
to be paid to that
(3) In subsection (2)--
"determination" means a determination of the Remuneration Tribunal of the
Commonwealth.
Terms and conditions
13. The members of the Review Committee hold office on such terms and
conditions (if any) in relation to matters not provided for
by this Act as are
determined by the Minister.
part iiI--APPLICATIONS
Withdrawal of essential services
14. (1) A service provider shall not withdraw an essential service from a
customer unless--
(a) the service provider has caused a written notice in accordance with
subsection (2) to be served on the customer;
(b) a period of not less than 7 days has elapsed since that notice was served;
(c) the service provider has not been notified under section 16 of an
application in relation to the relevant account.
(2) A notice referred to in paragraph (1) (a) shall state that--
(a) the service provider intends to withdraw the essential service after the
expiration of 7 days unless the relevant account has
been paid; and
(b) if payment of the account would cause substantial financial hardship an
oral or written application may be made to the Review
Committee for relief
under this Act.
Application for relief
15. (1) A person who is, or is likely to be, directly affected by the
withdrawal of an essential service may apply in writing
or orally to the Review
Committee for relief under this Act on the ground that payment of the relevant
account would result in substantial
financial hardship.
(2) The Review Committee shall not consider an oral application unless it has
been confirmed in writing within 1 week after the
making of the oral
application, or within such further period as may be allowed by the
(3) A written application or a written confirmation of an oral application
(a) be substantially in accordance with a form approved by the Chairperson of
the Review Committee and published in the
(b) be signed by the applicant; and
(c) be lodged at the office of the Chairperson of the Committee.
Effect of application
16. (1) On receiving an application the Review Committee shall notify the
relevant service provider of the application.
(2) Where a service provider is notified of an application, it shall furnish
the Review Committee with a copy of its records concerning
the account for the
relevant essential service.
(3) Where a service provider is notified of an application, it shall--
(a) if the relevant essential service has not been withdrawn--maintain that
service; and
(b) if the relevant essential service has been withdrawn--restore and maintain
that service;
pending consideration of the application by the Review Committee.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply during any period when a failure to
maintain or to restore an essential service is not by reason
only of an account
for that service not having been paid.
part iv--procedure
17.(1) An application shall be considered in private by the Review Committee
at such time and place as the Chairperson or Deputy
Chairperson notifies in
writing to the applicant and the service provider.
(2) The notice to the applicant shall include a statement to the effect that
if the Review Committee refuses the application as
being entirely without
merit, the Committee may order the applicant to pay the sum of $50 to the
Representation
18. On the consideration of an application--
(a) the applicant may appear and be heard in person or by an agent; and
(b) the relevant service provider may appear and be heard by a duly authorised
officer, employee or agent of that body.
Presiding member
19. (1) The Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson shall preside at a meeting
of the Review Committee.
(2) In the absence of the Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson, the member
referred to in paragraph 7 (1) (b) shall preside.
Expedition and informality
20. (1) The Review Committee--
(a) shall consider an application as expeditiously as possible; and
(b) may regulate its own procedure.
(2) A meeting of the Review Committee shall be conducted informally without
minutes being kept.
(3) The Review Committee may consider together 2 or more applications where
the applications concern the same applicant and the
same service provider.
(4) Information may be given to the Review Committee orally or in writing.
(5) The Review Committee may inform itself in relation to any matter that it
considers relevant to an application.
21. The applicant and the service provider shall bear their own respective
costs arising from the application.
part v--relief
Power of Committee
22. After considering an application the Review Committee may, by instrument
in writing--
(a) if satisfied that the payment of the relevant amount would result in
substantial financial hardship--
(i) direct the service provider not to withdraw the essential service--
(A) before the expiration of a specified period; or
(B) unless the applicant fails to comply with a condition specified in the
instrument pursuant to section 23;
(ii) declare that the payment of a specified amount within a specified time
shall be taken to discharge all liability in respect
of the account; or
(iii) declare that all liability in respect of the account shall be taken to
be discharged; or
(b) if not so satisfied--refuse the application.
23. A decision on an application in accordance with sub-subparagraph 22 (a)
(i) (B) may be expressed to be subject to any of the
following conditions:
(a) the reduction of the essential service;
(b) the payment of the relevant amount by a specified date or by specified
instalments;
(c) the submission of the applicant to financial counselling;
(d) that the applicant agrees to arrangements being made for payment of the
relevant amount by a financial institution on his or
her behalf;
(e) such other conditions as the Review Committee considers appropriate to the
circumstances.
24. (1) A decision of the Review Committee shall be in writing and shall be
signed by the members of the Committee.
(2) As soon as practicable after a decision has been made, the Chairperson of
the Review Committee shall ensure that the applicant
and the relevant service
provider are provided with a copy of the decision.
(3) Where the Review Committee considers that a decision made by it ought in
the public interest to be published, it may cause the
decision to be published
in such manner as will preserve the identity of the applicant and any persons
residing with the applicant.
(4) The decision of the Review Committee in respect of an application shall be
binding as between the applicant and the relevant
service provider.
Abuse of process
25. (1) Where the Review Committee refuses an application as being entirely
without merit, the Committee may direct the applicant
to pay the sum of $50 to
the service provider on behalf of the Territory.
(2) An amount directed to be paid under subsection (1) is recoverable as a
debt to the Territory.
Effect of declaration
26. Where the Review Committee makes a declaration under subparagraph 22 (a)
(ii) or (iii), the liability in respect of the relevant
account shall be taken
to be discharged in part or in whole, as the case requires, in accordance with
the declaration.
Premature withdrawal of services
27. If a service provider fails to maintain an essential service to a
customer in circumstances that involve a contravention of
subsection 14 (1) or
16 (3) or a direction under subparagraph 22 (a) (i)--
(a) the service provider is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by
a fine not exceeding $5,000 for each day during which
the offence continues;
(b) liability in respect of the relevant account shall be taken to be wholly
discharged.
part vi--miscellaneous
Regulations
28. The Executive may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act,
prescribing--
(a) matters required or permitted by this Act to be prescribed; or
(b) matters necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or
giving effect to this Act.
OF REFERENCE
I, BERNARD COLLAERY, Attorney-General of the Australian Capital Territory,
HAVING REGARD TO -
the recommendations of the Australian Law Reform Commission, made in its
report No. 36 (debt recovery and insolvency) to the Commonwealth
Attorney-General that:
(i) the withdrawal of essential services in cases of financial hardship be
dealt with by restricting rather than abolishing the agencies
right to withdraw
(ii) in cases of dishonesty, the agencies should be able to withdraw essential
REFER the following matter to the Community Law Reform Committee as provided
Constitution
of the Committee:
TO REVIEW the laws in force in the Territory with respect to the withdrawal of
essential services as a means of debt recovery;
AND TO REPORT
(a) which, if any, of the recommendations of the abovementioned report of the
Law Reform Commission should be adopted in whole or
in part; and
(b) on any other relevant matter the Committee wishes to take into
consideration.
IN MAKING ITS REVIEW AND REPORT the Committee will have regard to any views of
business, community or government agencies on the
subject matter of this
SIGNED THIS 21ST DAY OF SEPTEMBER 1990
BERNARD COLLAERY
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
PARTICIPANTS
Chairperson
The Honourable JJA Kelly, QC
Deputy Chairpersons
Ms Jennifer Kitchin
Chief Magistrate Mr RJ Cahill
Committee Members
Ms Robin Burnett
Mr Rod Campbell
Professor Duncan Chappell
Ms Sanora Dell
Mr Rainer Frisch
Mr Ross Gengos
Ms Judy Harrison
Mr Peter Hohnen
Ms Vivienne Joice
Ms Veronica Laletin
Ms Annmarie Lumsden
Mr Graeme Lunney
Mrs Bettie McNee
Mr Nick Seddon
Mr Peter Sutherland
Professor Roman Tomasic
Sub-Committee in Charge of Reference
Ms Judith Harrison
Mr Rainer Frisch
Mr Peter Sutherland
Research Officer: Mr David Snowden
Law Reform Unit
Director: Mr Peter Quinton
Senior Legal Officers:
Ms Tracy Reid
Ms Kate Waterhouse
CONSULTATION
During 1991 the Committee widely circulated an Issues Paper
on the guaranteed supply of essential services prepared by the Committee's Secretariat.
At the same time the Committee called for
submissions. The Committee received
eleven written submissions. Those responding were:
ACT Council of Social Services
Salvation Army
Welfare Rights & Legal Centre
CARE Credit and Debt Counselling Service
Telecom Australia
AGL Gas Companies
ACT Electricity and Water Authority
St. Vincent de Paul
Mr B W Birch
Mrs D Wicks
Mr R McDonald
The Committee held a Public Hearing on 18 June 1991. The agencies which made
oral submissions were:
ACT Council of Social Services
Salvation Army
Anglican Careforce
Welfare Rights & Legal Centre
CARE Credit and Debt Counselling Service
ACT Regional Advisory Committee of the National Safety Council of Australia
ACT Electricity and Water Authority
AGL Gas Companies
Telecom Australia
In preparing this report the Committee made use of the collective experience of
its members, including those with expertise in community
welfare, law and
National Social Science Survey Report, 1989.
National Social Science Survey Report, 1989.
To the extent that the proposed legislation will provide for the discharge of
a customer's liability for rates or charges in respect
of the supply of an
essential service it might be desirable to clarify the operation of existing
legislation that provides for the
remission or rebate of water rates, sewerage
rates and electricity charges.
Appointed 28 November 1991
Resigned to take up appointment in Darwin 19 December 1991
Appointed 28 November 1991
Appointed 28 November 1991
Appointed 28 November 1991
Australian Capital Territory Department of Justice & Community Services,
Withdrawal of Essential Services, Issues Paper, Canberra
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter