URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/1993/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 - Issues Paper [1993] NSWLRCIP 9
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
1. INTRODUCTION
Scope of issues to be considered
The purpose of this Issues Paper
THE COMMISSION'S APPROACH
The conduct of the reference to date
The next steps
2. EXISTING ADOPTION LAW AND PRACTICE
WHAT IS ADOPTION?
Early developments
Adoption of Children Act 1965
Social changes since 1967
Amendments to the 1965 Act
PURPOSES OF ADOPTION
FORMS OF ADOPTION
"Traditional" adoptions
Intra-family adoptions
"Special needs" adoptions
"Special cases" adoptions
Inter-country adoptions
3. SOME FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES
IS THERE A NEED FOR ADOPTION?
THE ROLE OF THE LAW
ADOPTION AND OTHER FORMS OF CARE
INFORMATION RIGHTS AND "OPEN ADOPTION"
ADOPTIONS BY SUBTERFUGE? USE OF GUARDIANSHIP AND CUSTODY
EFFECTS OF ADOPTION ORDERS
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
The child's welfare as the paramount consideration
Protection of children's links with the birth family
Cultural continuity
Non-discrimination
Fair procedures and participation of children
Other principles?
4. JURISDICTIONAL, TECHNICAL AND PROCEDURAL ASPECTS
FEDERAL/STATE ISSUES
The Family Court of Australia
A reference of power?
REGULATION OF PRACTICE AND ROLE OF AGENCIES AND SUPPORT GROUPS
Adoptions by non-relatives
Limits of regulation
Agencies, support groups and the Department of Community Services
Responsibility of the Minister or the Director-General?
APPEALS AND REVIEW
RIGHTS TO INFORMATION
5. ELIGIBILITY TO ADOPT AND TO BE ADOPTED
WHO CAN BE ADOPTED?
Eligibility for adoption
The child's consent and participation
SELECTION OF ADOPTIVE PARENTS: THE PRESENT LAW AND PRACTICE
Present law
Requirements for eligibility in the Act
Marital status
Religion and education
Other eligibility requirements
Allocation of children to approved applicants
The Court's discretion
ISSUES RELATING TO SELECTION OF ADOPTIVE PARENTS
6. RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF BIRTH PARENTS
THE IMPLICATIONS OF "OPEN ADOPTION"
WHOSE CONSENT?
WHAT KIND OF CONSENT?
PROTECTION AGAINST DURESS
DISPENSING WITH CONSENT
7. ADOPTION WITHIN FAMILIES
GRANDPARENT ADOPTIONS
STEP-PARENT ADOPTIONS
8. REPRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY, SURROGACY AND ADOPTION LAW
INTRODUCTION
Reproduction Technology
THREE SCENARIOS
Scenario one
Scenario two
Scenario three
THE RELEVANCE OF REPRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY TO THIS REVIEW
INTRA-FAMILY OR "NON-FAMILY" ADOPTIONS?
LACK OF GENERAL LEGISLATION ON REPRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY
INFORMATION, IDENTITY AND OPENNESS
9. ABORIGINAL LAW AND RACIAL AND ETHNIC HERITAGE
INTRODUCTION
ABORIGINAL CUSTOMARY LAW
ETHNIC AND RACIAL HERITAGE
10. INTER-COUNTRY ADOPTION
INTRODUCTION
EXISTING LAW AND PRACTICE
PRINCIPLES FOR INTER-COUNTRY ADOPTION
ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ARRANGING ADOPTIONS
RECOGNITION OF OVERSEAS ADOPTIONS
FEDERAL/STATES ISSUES
HEALTH INFORMATION ABOUT THE CHILDREN
RELATIVE ADOPTIONS
FUNDING ISSUES
PROTECTION OF CHILDREN'S LINKS WITH BIRTH FAMILIES
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of Reference
Pursuant to section 10 of the
Law Reform Commission Act
1976 (NSW), the Attorney General, the Hon John P Hannaford MLC, referred, by letter received on 1 December 1992, the following matter
to the Law Reform Commission:
The Commission is to review the current scope and operation of the
Adoption of Children Act
and in particular to consider:
(i) the criteria for the selection of the adoptive parents, regulation of standards of practice and recognition of adoption agencies
and support groups;
(ii) the relationship between adoption and other forms of permanent care;
(iii) intra-family adoption;
(iv) the relevance of reproduction technology and surrogacy to adoption law;
(v) the relevance of Aboriginal customary law, and ethnic and racial heritage;
(vi) inter-country adoption and overseas orders of adoption having special regard to any international treaties or conventions to
which Australia is a party; and
(vii) any related matter.
Participants
The Law Reform Commission is constituted by the
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW). For the purpose of this reference, the Chairman, in accordance with the Act, created a Division comprising the following members
of the Commission:
The Hon Gordon J Samuels AC QC
Associate Professor Richard Chisholm
Justice John Brownie
Ms Jane Stackpool
Mr Hal Sperling QC
Professor David Weisbrot
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Research and Writing
Associate Professor Richard Chisholm
Ms Adrienne Bailey
Ms Stephanie East
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop Publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Administrative Assistance
Ms Zoya Howes
Cover Design
Ms Stephanie East
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper
. All submissions and inquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 Sydney]
Phone: (02) 252 3855
Fax: (02) 247 1054
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this on your submission.
Who can make a submission?
Anyone can make a submission or comment. If you have been affected by the Act in any way or have a particular interest in the area
of adoption, the Commission would like to hear from you. It is not necessary to have legal or any other special qualifications. The
Commission is keen to hear from all those who have something to say about adoption, whatever their experiences and whatever their
particular points of view.
What should a submission contain?
The Commission is interested in any comments on how the law is operating or how it might be improved. You may wish to address some
or all of the issues raised in this Issues Paper. You may wish to discuss other related issues that have not been raised, but which
you consider relevant. The Commission is aware that approaches to adoption law differ between Australian states and between countries.
The Commission is interested to hear comments, favourable or unfavourable, about experiences under alternative systems.
It is not necessary to make specific recommendations for reform; it would also be useful to receive submissions that point out problems,
or describe people's experiences relating to adoption. Nor is it necessary for all submission to be written specifically for this
Review. The Commission is also glad to receive copies of submissions made to other agencies inquiring into adoption-related matters.
The Commission emphasised that comments on any aspect of the legislation and its impact will be welcome and will be given careful
consideration.
What form can a submission take?
There is no special form required for submissions. You may:
Send or fax a letter to the Commission stating your views. The fax number is
(02) 247 1054.
Telephone the Commission on
(02) 252 3855
and ask to speak to a legal officer about your views.
Telephone or write to the Commission and arrange to make a submission in person.
Is there a deadline for submissions?
The Commission will do its best to benefit from submissions received prior to the completion of the Report. However, submissions will
be most useful if they are received in time to be used in the preparation of the Discussion Paper. It is requested that submissions
be received by the Commission by
1 September 1993.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
Submissions made to the Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission's process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally be
made available on request to any person or organisation. However, if you would like all or part of your submission or comment to
be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission or comments. Any request for a copy of a submission marked "confidential"
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act
In preparing the Discussion Paper and the final Report, the Commission may also find it useful to refer to and make mention of comments
submitted in response to this Issues Paper. However, if a request for confidentiality is made, it will be respected by the Commission
in relation to the publication of such submissions in a Discussion Paper or a Report.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
1.1 The New South Wales Law Reform Commission is currently conducting a review of the
Adoption of Children Act
(NSW). The terms of reference are set out above at page (iv). This
Issues Paper explains the nature of the law and the Commission's
inquiry. It also discusses some alternative legal approaches, and lists
some of the issues on which we would like to receive submissions
1.2 In 1992 the Commission reviewed the operation of the
Adoption Information Act
(NSW), and published its report:
Review of the
Adoption Information Act 1990
The 1990 Act was the subject of intense debate and lobbying, and
involved sensitive issues of information and privacy concerning
thousands of adults who had been involved with adoption. The Commission
undertook a very intensive exercise of research and
consultation in
order to understand how the Act operated and its impact on the various
people affected. The present review will complete
the Commission's
examination of adoption law in New South Wales. Both reviews were
initiated by the then Minister for Community Services,
the Honourable
John Hannaford MLC, and have been funded by the Department of Community
1.3 Much has changed since the mid-1960s, when the Act was
drafted. There has been a great decline in the number of healthy
Australian children available for adoption. Consequently, there
has been a continuing or increased interest in other kinds of adoption,
for example, the adoption of children from overseas countries, children
who are older or have specific health problems or other difficulties,
former foster children, and children related to the adopters.
1.4 Considerable evidence has become available since the 1960s
relating to people's experience with adoption. Community attitudes
laws have changed in relation to unmarried parenthood, the roles of men
and women, ex-nuptial birth, de facto relationships,
and many other
features of family and community life. Attitudes and laws relating to
access and information have changed markedly,
and a considerable part
of the review will be concerned with the implications of the new
openness in adoption law and practice. Ideas
relating to children's
rights and interests have been modified, for example, by Australia's
ratification in 1990 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
The continued development of national family laws since the introduction of the
Family Law Act
(Cth) requires a reconsideration of the scope of New South Wales
adoption legislation. Changes in adoption law in most other Australian
in the mid-1960s. Adoption practice has also changed. In other
been reviewed and changed, and these developments should
prove of great
value to the Commission.
Scope of issues to be considered
1.5 Although there have been valuable comments on aspects of the
legislation, and amendments made from time to time in relation to
particular matters, the
Adoption of Children Act
the regulations made under it have never been thoroughly reviewed. The
important changes referred to above make it appropriate
present review should involve a thorough reconsideration of adoption
law, rather than a mere tinkering with the legislation.
purpose of this Issues Paper is to indicate some of the issues that
will need to be addressed. It does not attempt to indicate
Commission's views are; these will be formed as the review proceeds,
and will be influenced by responses to this Issues
Paper. Nor is it
intended to limit the scope of submissions; people should feel free to
make suggestions on any aspect of the law,
whether or not it is
expressly raised in this Paper. Indeed, we will be particularly
grateful to people who draw our attention to
aspects, or points of
view, which we might otherwise have overlooked.
The purpose of this Issues Paper
1.6 This Issues Paper is designed to promote discussion of, and
invite submissions on, the issues that the Commission has identified
and the conceptual framework that the Commission has developed, in
order to review the
Adoption of Children Act
outlines the approach the Commission proposes to take in conducting
this review and identifies issues of concern. It does
not make specific
recommendations for reform, and is not intended to be a comprehensive
discussion of the issues or of the scope
and operation of this Act.
Throughout this Paper, the Commission has indicated areas where further
information is sought and has
listed some questions for discussion.
THE COMMISSION'S APPROACH
The conduct of the reference to date
1.7 The early phase of the work has been of a preliminary
nature: collecting materials, making contact, collecting literature,
mailing lists, studying reviews and reform of adoption laws
in other jurisdictions, and engaging in limited consultation in order
to prepare this Issues Paper. The publication of this Issues Paper
represents a general request for assistance and suggestions from
who would like to comment on the legislation or any related aspect of
adoption law or practice.
The next steps
1.8 The volume and complexity of issues to be addressed in the
course of this review will require the Commission to publish one or
more Discussion Papers. Such Papers will allow the Commission to focus
on particular issues that arise out of the submissions and
consultation and research process. The Discussion Paper format allows
the Commission to set out draft recommendations for reform
and subject
them to extensive community consultation prior to preparing its final
Report to the Attorney General.
1.9 The Commission will be taking a number of steps to inform
its inquiry in the months to come. It will hold public hearings, meet
with interested organisations and individuals, and invite written and
oral submissions. It expects to publish its Discussions Papers
October 1993, and to finish the writing of the Report in December 1993,
with a view to publication by the end of 1993 or early
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. Report 69, July 1992.
. United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Convention was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in
November 1989. Australia first signed and then ratified
the Convention
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
2. Existing Adoption Law and Practice
History of this Reference (Digest)
WHAT IS ADOPTION?
2.1 Adoption is a legal process by which a person becomes, in law, a child of the adopting parents and ceases to be a child of the
birth parents. All the legal consequences of parenthood are transferred from the birth parents to the adoptive parents. The adopted
child obtains a new birth certificate showing the adopters as the parents, and acquires rights of support and rights of inheritance
from the adopting parents. The adopting parents acquire rights to guardianship and custody of the child. Normally the child takes
the adopters’ surname. The birth parents cease to have any legal obligations towards the child and lose their rights to custody
and guardianship. Inheritance rights between the child and the birth parents also disappear. Adoption is governed by New South
Wales law, specifically the
Adoption of Children Act
(as amended). Adoption applications are determined by the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
2.2 The statements in the above paragraph are intended to summarise the main characteristics of adoption. It is not necessary here
to spell out the full details.
Some aspects of adoption law will be explained more fully in connection with particular issues.
Adoption of Children Act
(NSW), which came into force in 1967, is based on a model adoption act which was followed by all Australian jurisdictions and led
to relatively uniform adoption laws in Australia. Since the 1960s, the differences between the Australian jurisdictions have become
much greater as there have been numerous amendments, and in some cases completely new Acts. It is necessary to say something about
the earlier developments of adoption law in New South Wales before considering the 1965 Act.
Early developments
2.4 The period up to 1967 saw the gradual development of adoption law. Initially, adoption was regulated by provisions in child welfare
legislation.
Early legislation provided that adoption orders could be made by the Supreme Court, and dealt with the consequences of adoption.
Adoptions could be arranged by the parties themselves, with the assistance of intermediaries such as medical practitioners or clerics,
or by adoption agencies. The adoption of a child normally required the consent of both birth parents (only the mother where the
child was ex-nuptial). The Court could make orders without the consent of the birth parents in certain circumstances such as where
they could not be found or had abandoned the child. However, the Court was concerned to protect the rights of the birth parents,
and so was generally reluctant to make orders against their wishes.
Adoption of Children Act 1965
2.5 The 1965 Act was the first comprehensive treatment of adoption law in New South Wales, and many of its features remain in the
law today. It introduced three major changes in the law.
2.6 First, the Act included a provision that, in making orders relating to the child, the Court should regard the child’s welfare
as “the paramount consideration”.
This principle had previously been developed by the courts, and then expressed in the legislation, in the context of custody and
guardianship matters. Its inclusion in the adoption legislation is a matter of considerable importance.
2.7 A second characteristic of the 1965 Act was that it banned privately-arranged adoptions, except within the extended family. In
giving consent to adoption, the birth parents could not consent to the adoption of the child by a particular person or class of persons;
they could only give consent to the child’s adoption by any person.
In practice this meant any couple selected by an adoption agency and approved by the Court. Other rules reinforced the monopoly
given to adoption agencies. For example, it was an offence to place children privately for the purpose of adoption,
or advertise for adoptive parents
, and applications to the Court had to be made by the agency, not by the intending adopters.
This regulatory framework was relaxed in the case of adoptions by relatives and step-parents. In these cases, the parents of the
child and the step-parent or relative could arrange the placement. The parents could consent to the child being adopted by the selected
step-parent or relative and the intending adoptive parents could themselves apply to the Court for an adoption order. However, there
was still a degree of regulation. A report from the New South Wales Department of Community Services or an authorised agency on
the merits of the proposed adoption was normally required,
and the order will only be made if the Court finds that the requirements of the Act are satisfied and the adoption will promote the
child’s welfare.
2.8 A third characteristic of the 1965 Act was a tightening of provisions relating to secrecy in adoption. New provisions attempted
to ensure that members of the birth family and the adoptive family would not discover each other’s identity, and that the records
of the adoption would be kept confidential. Indeed, the new birth certificate issued for the adopted child was intended to disguise
the fact that the child had been adopted. This aspect of the legislation has been considered in detail in the Commission’s
Report on the
Adoption Information Act
Social changes since 1967
2.9 There have been many changes, both in society and in the law of adoption, since the Act commenced operation in 1967. First, the
1970s saw the beginning of a dramatic decline in the numbers of babies relinquished for adoption, and this had important implications
for adoption law and practice. While at the commencement of the 1970s adoption agencies were concerned to find enough couples willing
to adopt the available children, by the late 1970s the situation had reversed; there were many couples anxious to adopt, and a much
smaller number of Australian babies available for adoption. In 1971-72, the then Department of Child Welfare and Social Welfare
arranged 3,882 adoptions.
This can be contrasted with 154 placements by the Department of Community Services in 1991.
2.10 It is generally thought that the reasons for the sharp reduction in available children included increased financial support for
single mothers (the Supporting Mother’s Benefit was introduced in 1973), increased availability of contraception and abortion,
and a changing social climate which reduced the stigma and difficulty associated with single parenting.
2.11 There was no corresponding decline in the demand to adopt children. On the contrary, it appears to have increased. The previous
availability of adoptable babies, the successful efforts to persuade people to adopt, the relative wealth and stability of Australia,
the social emphasis on nuclear families as the accepted norm and the limitations of effective services for infertile couples may
all have contributed to the continuing demand for adoptive children. The increased desire of many infertile couples to adopt children
led to a new interest in the adoption of children other than newborn healthy “white” Australians, and there was a rise
in the numbers of other sorts of adoptions, such as adoptions of foster children, older children, children with disadvantages and,
especially, children from other countries. The former practice of allocating babies among approved adopters largely on a “first
come, first served” basis became unworkable because it came to involve applicants being on waiting lists for unreasonably lengthy
2.12 Other changes in social patterns and values had an impact on adoption law and practice. A growing appreciation of the multicultural
nature of Australian society led to a questioning of the merits of the “clean break” that was traditionally associated
with adoption, in cases where the adopters were of a different race or cultural group from the birth family. Emerging respect for
diversity and the importance of cultural inheritance suggested that the task of adoption law was somehow to give these children the
benefits of a secure family life while preserving their links with the culture or race of their parents. More specifically, publications
and films led to a new awareness of the tragic story of the removal of many Aboriginal children from their families and communities
through the operation of child welfare and adoption laws, and by the end of the 1980s there was a widespread consensus that adoption
should not be used in a way that separated Aboriginal children from their Aboriginal culture and heritage.
A growing concern with the rights of individuals to have access to personal information held by governments, and with rights to
The publication of the personal experiences of adopted people, and of criticisms of some of the practices and assumptions underlying
adoption, also exposed adoption to re-evaluation.
2.13 The stigma associated with birth outside marriage also appeared to be lessening. In the mid-1970s most states and territories
introduced legislation intended to remove the legal disabilities of illegitimacy.
Such laws and policies raised questions about aspects of adoption law, such as the position of fathers of ex-nuptial children, whose
rights had found little recognition. Finally, rising divorce rates and the consequent increase of “blended families”
meant that the model of the separate nuclear family which appeared to underlie adoption was ceasing to be regarded as essential to
the upbringing of children. Despite such changes, adoption remained for many people a symbol of total commitment to a child, and
was still valued as providing a unique degree of security for children who, for whatever reason, could not be brought up by their
birth families.
Amendments to the 1965 Act
2.14 It will be convenient here to summarise the main features of the amendments made to the 1965 Act. The Act has been amended on
seven occasions.
The more significant amendments may be summarised as follows. In 1966, the grounds on which the Court could dispense with the consent
of the birth parents to the adoption of the child were expanded to include the ground that, by dispensing with consent, the child’s
welfare would be promoted.
The 1971 Act eased the restrictions on adoptions by single parents, and adoptions of persons over twenty-one years of age.
It also provided that in the case of step-parent adoptions, the applicants, as well as the Director-General of the Department of
Community Services or an authorised agency, could apply for dispensation from the requirement for parental consent.
2.15 The 1980 Act provided for an Adoption Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction under the Act, but these provisions have never been brought
into force.
The Act also dealt with a number of other issues. The adopting parents’ lack of religious conviction was not to be taken
into account as a separate matter relevant to their suitability.
There were new provisions relating to fathers of ex-nuptial children.
These provisions, in brief, stated that the consent of such fathers was not required but, where their paternity was established,
they were entitled to notice of the proceedings, so that they could, if they wished, oppose them. Failure to respond to such notice,
however, precluded them from further involvement with the proceedings or with the child,
and the Court could dispense with notice in limited circumstances. The 1980 Act also added new grounds on which the Court could
dispense with parental consent.
Two of these grounds were intended to facilitate the adoption of children who had been placed in foster homes or residential care,
and the third enabled consent to be dispensed with where the person whose consent was required failed to respond to a notice within
fourteen days. The 1980 Acts also provided for subsidised adoptions.
2.16 The 1984 Act incorporated limited changes associated with legislation granting increased recognition to de facto relationships.
In certain circumstances it allowed de facto partners to adopt their own children, or children of one of the partners.
The 1987 Act expanded the capacity of de facto partners to adopt children; they could now adopt children who had been in their care
for at least two years,
and children with special needs.
It also included a provision for the adoption of Aboriginal children by Aboriginal people who were married according to the traditions
of an Aboriginal community. It provided that in the case of children between 15 and 18 years who had been brought up by the applicants
for adoption, the child’s consent alone is required.
It also provided that overseas adoptions would not be recognised unless the adopters had been resident in the overseas country for
at least 12 months.
PURPOSES OF ADOPTION
2.17 In Australia today adoption is often associated with the objective of providing a new family to take care of a baby or young
child. However many adoptions are not of this kind. Adoptions by former foster parents and adoptions by step-parents, for example,
do not usually involve reconsideration of the children’s placement, but alter the children’s legal relationship with
those caring for them. Occasionally, adoption may be used for a specific and limited purpose, for example to bring a person within
the terms of a family trust.
It is well known that in different societies, and at different times in history, adoption has served a variety of purposes. For
example, adopted person may become legitimate, may become entitled to inherit property or titles, may be treated differently for
taxation purposes or may acquire or lose citizenship rights. Adoption has often been chosen for such reasons and in these cases
it may have nothing to do with caring for young children. The specific purposes of adoption may vary from case to case and from
time to time. Until quite recently, for example, one of the main functions of adoption in Australia was to remove “the stigma
of illegitimacy”, but this factor probably plays a very small part in adoptions today.
What does seem universal, however, is that
adoption involves the adopted person’s transfer from membership of one family to membership of another
. It is also widely accepted, as we shall see in Chapter 3, that whatever its specific purpose may be, modern adoption should be
intended essentially to benefit the adopted child. This is reflected in the provision of the Act that the child’s welfare is
to be regarded as “the paramount consideration”.
FORMS OF ADOPTION
2.18 There are different ways of describing the various forms of adoption. The descriptions used below are the ones most commonly
used and will be convenient for discussion of the issues.
“Traditional” adoptions
2.19 In the 1960s the most important form of adoption, which we will call “traditional adoption”, involved the adoption
of children by unrelated adopters who had been selected by the Department of Community Services or by an authorised adoption agency.
The structure of the existing Act still reflects the dominance of this form of adoption which, in the 1960s, usually involved healthy
new-born Australian infants. Today, it is commonly used for the adoption of older children and children with special needs.
Intra-family adoptions
2.20 Some adoptions involve only members of a family. The most common examples are adoptions by grandparents and by step-parents.
The issues surrounding this type of adoption are dealt with in Chapter 7.
“Special needs” adoptions
2.21 “Special needs” adoptions refer to the adoption of children whose needs require special qualities in the adopting
parents. Such needs may arise from the fact that a child is older or disadvantaged by some physical or intellectual disability.
In the past many of these children would have been regarded as “unadoptable”, but in recent times adoption agencies
have been keen to use adoption to provide homes for these children, some of whom might otherwise have lived indefinitely in institutions.
In practice, these adoptions are sometimes subsidised and the selection of adoptive parents reflects the special needs of the child.
2.22 “Special needs” adoptions also include children from particular racial backgrounds. Current policy requires that,
as far as possible, the adopters should share the children’s racial background or at least be able and willing to help the
children maintain links with their racial heritage. To some extent, similar approaches are taken in relation to religious and cultural
beliefs and practices.
“Special case” adoptions
2.23 Adoptions are referred to as “special case adoptions” when the Department of Community Services or an authorised
adoption agency supports an adoption application by adoptive parents who have not been assessed in the usual way. In these cases
there has been a prior placement of a child which was made outside the regulatory scheme that applies to non-family adoptions. For
example, the child may have previously been placed with the adoptive parents as a foster child while the child was a state ward.
Alternatively, the child may have been previously placed with them informally, as can occur in surrogate parent arrangements. Usually,
the adoption application is made because the child is well settled in the care of the proposed adopters, and it is thought that adoption
is in the child’s interests. These applications raise difficult policy issues because they involve by-passing the normal procedures
which are designed to protect children, birth parents and intending adopters against ill-considered or even exploitative arrangements.
Inter-country adoptions
2.24 Inter-country adoptions usually involve an Australian couple making arrangements to adopt a child from an overseas country.
Normally, the adoptive parents are approved as suitable in Australia, then visit the overseas country and obtain a child by arrangement
with the overseas adoption authorities. They adopt the child under New South Wales law after their return. It is also possible,
though uncommon, for an Australian child to be adopted in another country. Inter-country adoptions involve questions of immigration
law and practice, and questions about the circumstances in the overseas country which led to the child becoming available for adoption.
They also involve issues of identity, and cultural continuity, and all the issues that arise when a person moves to a new country
and to a different culture and lifestyle.
DEVELOPMENTS IN OTHER AUSTRALIAN JURISDICTIONS
2.25 Since the “uniform” legislation of the mid-1960s, and especially in recent years, there has been considerable modification
of the adoption legislation in various Australian jurisdictions. In
a major and influential review published in 1983
Adoption Act
(Vic). This Act made many changes, including creating rights to information for adult adoptees, discouraging step-parent adoption,
requiring the wishes and feelings of children to be taken into account, requiring consent from fathers of ex-nuptial children in
certain circumstances, and making special provision for Aboriginal adoptions. Many of these topics have been the subject of recent
proposals or amendments in other jurisdictions, although they have been treated in different ways.
Queensland’s
Adoption of Children Act
(Qld) has been substantially amended, and now includes provisions for information rights (subject to veto) for adult adoptees and
birth parents.
South Australia
replaced its former legislation with a shorter Act, the
Adoption of Children Act
Western Australia
has just completed a major review of its legislation, the
Adoption of Children Act
. Following the review, the
Adoption Bill
1992 (WA) was produced and proceeded to the committee stage in the Legislative Assembly before the end of the Parliamentary session
has recently passed new legislation, the
Adoption Act
Australian Capital Territory
has recently reviewed its legislation and, on 2 April 1993, enacted the
Adoption Act
Northern Territory
undertook a review of its adoption legislation in 1987.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. For detailed treatments, see A Dickey
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1990) and H Finlay and R Bailey-Harris
Family Law in Australia
(4th ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1989).
Child Welfare Act
1923 (NSW), s 123-129;
Child Welfare Act
1939 (NSW), s162-173.
Mace v Murray
[1955] HCA 2
(1955) 92 CLR 370.
Adoption of Children Act
Section 27(1).
Section 51.
Section 52.
Section 18(2).
. The Court can dispense with the report:
(1A)(a) and (c).
Section 21.
New South Wales
Law Reform Commission
Review of the
Adoption Information Act 1990
(Report 69, July 1992), Chapter 2
. New South Wales, Department of Child Welfare and Social Welfare
Annual Report 1972.
. New South Wales, Department of Family and Community Services
Adoption Newsletter: October 1992
. See, for example, P Read,
The Stolen Generations: The Removal of Aboriginal Children in New South Wales, 1883-1969
, (New South Wales Ministry of Aboriginal Affairs, Sydney, c.1983), C Edwards and P Read,
The Lost Children
, (Doubleday, Moorebank NSW, 1989),
Lousy Little Sixpence
(Ronin Films, Campbell ACT, 1983).
. See generally New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Adoption Information Act 1990
(Report 69, July 1992).
. See, for example,
Children (Equality of Status) Act
1977 (NSW).
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1966 (NSW);
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1971 (NSW);
Adoption of Children (Domicile) Amendment Act
1979 (NSW);
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1980 (NSW);
Adoption of Children (Community Welfare) Amendment Act
1982 (NSW);
Adoption of Children (De Facto Relationships) Amendment Act
1984 (NSW);
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1987 (NSW).
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1966 (NSW), s 2, adding para (e) to s 32.
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1971 (NSW), s 2, amending s 19(2) and 21(1)(c)(ii)(b), in each case changing the requirement of “exceptional circumstances”
to “particular circumstances”.
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1971 (NSW), s 2(h), inserting sub-s (1A) into s 32. It also enabled the Court, in certain circumstances, to dispense with giving
notice to the persons whose consent was required: s 2(h)(iv).
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1980 (NSW), Schedule 1. Most of the other amendments were not brought into force until 1984 and later.
. This amendment effectively overruled statements made in
Re an Infant E and the
Adoption of Children Act
[1974] 1 NSWLR 739.
. See Schedule 3, amending
and inserting
. See Schedule 3, inserting
. See Schedule 3, amending
. See Schedule 3, inserting
. See especially
De Facto Relationships Act
1984 (NSW), based on New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
De Facto Relationships
(Report 36, June 1983).
Adoption of Children (De Facto Relationships) Amendment Act
1984 (NSW), Schedule 1, amending s 19 and 26.
. This requirement could be dispensed with by the Court: see s 19(1B), amended by the 1987 Act.
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
1987 (NSW), Schedule 1, amending ss 19, 21.
. Schedule 1, inserting s 26(4A) and s 33(2).
. Schedule 1, inserting s 46(2)(b) and (7).
Re K and the
Adoption of Children Act 1965
(1988) 12 Fam LR 263.
. See, for example,
Re CM and MG
(1976) 9 ALR 666.
Adoption of Children Act
. Victoria.
Report of the Adoption Legislation Review Committee
(The Adoption Legislation Review Committee, Melbourne, 1983).
. Northern Territory. Department of Health and Community Services
Northern Territory
Adoption of Children Act
(Discussion Paper, 1987).
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
3. Some Fundamental Issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
3.1 The Commission’s review will involve many detailed matters, as indicated in later chapters of this Issues Paper. The Commission
is also interested to receive comments on what might be regarded as more fundamental issues, such as whether the law should provide
for adoption, and what purposes adoption might serve. Some of these issues are raised in this Chapter.
IS THERE A NEED FOR ADOPTION?
What are the purposes of adoption today? Might these purposes be better achieved by other legal mechanisms? Should the law provide
for different categories of adoption?
3.2 We have seen in Chapter 2 that adoption has been used at different times to achieve different ends. Have some of these ends,
such as removing the stigma of illegitimacy, ceased to be important? Could it be argued that adoption is fundamentally flawed?
Critics have argued that adoption involves a form of deception; a denial of the biological facts and a pretence that the child is
the child of the adoptive parents. Some might see the use of law to promote such a deception as fundamentally wrong. Another argument
might be that adoption is based on a rigid and simplistic view of the nuclear family; the law should instead recognise the importance
of extended family members, and the fact that many Australian children experience a variety of other family forms. To restate this
argument, adoption is sometimes seen as an adult-centred and possessive institution, based on a view that children should be regarded
as property, with adoption law determining that the adoptive parents “own” the children.
3.3 Such criticisms have led to proposals for radical change in adoption law. One view is that adoption should simply be abolished.
This move could, if necessary, be accompanied by amendments to the
Family Law Act
(Cth) giving the Family Court ample powers to make laws about some or all the matters now associated with adoption, such as the issuing
of a new birth certificate and changes in support obligations and inheritance rights. The argument is that, instead of a single
inflexible order for adoption, the Court would be able to assemble a package of legal orders which would be designed to suit the
particular circumstances of each case. Critics of adoption might also argue that the traditional concept of adoption has already
been greatly compromised by developments such as “open adoption”, increased access to information and the declining numbers
of adoptions. They might conclude that abolishing adoption would in fact represent a culmination of these trends rather than a radical
3.4 No doubt many would seek to defend adoption against such criticisms. They might argue, for example, that the notion of adoption
is a familiar, well-understood and uniquely valued concept because it represents a full commitment to the child and creates a new
set of relationships with the extended family of the adopters. To abolish adoption would remove the legal expression of this family
commitment, and would destroy a legal concept that exists in all countries similar to our own. Those who take this view do not necessarily
resist all major changes in adoption law. They might consider that changes in social patterns and values can be met by appropriate
modifications in adoption law.
A recent United Kingdom review, for example, emphasised that the Court should be able to make access orders (“contact”
orders) in conjunction with adoption, and was sympathetic to the view that adoption orders should not be made when other orders,
such as guardianship or a change of name, would suffice. However, it considered that in other respects adoption should be retained
more or less in its present form.
THE ROLE OF THE LAW
What role should the law play in adoption? To what extent should decision making in adoption be guided or governed by legal rules,
as distinct from policies, or the discretion of adoption workers?
3.5 The type of adoption law we should have may depend in part on views about the role of the law. At one extreme, the law could
merely state the appropriate principles and give the courts and adoption authorities power to arrange adoptions and make adoption
orders. At the other extreme, the law could be very detailed, with the intention of reducing the exercise of discretion and, as
far as possible, ensuring that all aspects of adoption were closely regulated. It might be said that the former could ensure flexibility,
and could accommodate differences between particular cases and changes in policy and practice over time; the latter, perhaps, would
bring greater rigidity but would have greater potential to protect people’s rights.
3.6 Between these two extremes the law could take many different forms. It could provide a list of matters to which the court (or
other decision makers) should have regard.
It could establish that, either in general or in particular situations, a certain approach is to be preferred. The law could also
impose time limits on the taking of certain steps, or could require that certain services should be offered to families before attempts
are made to place children outside those families. On the other hand, such questions could be left to be determined on a case-by-case
basis. A general question, that will arise in relation to all the other issues canvassed in this Paper, is the extent to which particular
matters should be governed by specific legal provisions, as distinct from being unregulated or regulated by policy or practice guidelines.
ADOPTION AND OTHER FORMS OF CARE
What should be the relationship between adoption and other forms of long-term care for children? Who should determine what sort of
placement is most appropriate, and through what procedures? What role should the law have in specifying procedures or laying down
guidelines or rules?
3.7 Adoption is one of a number of options relating to the care of a child. In the case of new born babies, children in foster care,
and children in various types of residential care, other alternatives must be considered. They may include long-term foster placement,
situation. In some cases, as in most step-parent adoptions, the placement of the child is not in question, and the issue is whether
adoption is the most appropriate legal framework. The terms of reference call for a review of “the relationship between adoption
and other forms of permanent care”.
3.8 The choice of appropriate types of placement for children is a major issue in practice, and has been discussed at length in social
work literature. Several important policies are involved. One policy, known as “permanency planning” emphasises the
importance to children of a secure relationship with a family. Advocates of permanency planning tend to argue that placements of
children should ideally be made without undue delay, and should be relatively final. The child should not be left to “drift”
for long periods while decisions are deferred, or because decision making is limited to a short-term perspective. Support for this
approach tends to come from child development theories emphasising the importance of attachment and continuity in children’s
lives. It has been argued that adoption is an attractive option from this point of view because of its apparent finality and should
generally be preferred to indefinite foster placement.
3.9 Other policies, however, suggest more caution in making swift and final placement decisions. Some would argue that the considerations
of social justice and the rights of parents and children require that every effort should be made to help parents retain the care
of their children, and that short-term placements, during which the parents are encouraged to keep in touch with the children, are
appropriate in order to help parents overcome temporary problems associated with poverty, unemployment, or ill-health.
3.10 Another set of arguments suggesting caution about permanency planning draws attention to the practical and theoretical difficulties
involved in making predictions about the consequences, especially the long-term consequences, of decisions relating to children.
These issues arise in a particularly acute form for children who have been brought up in foster homes or other forms of residential
care, having had limited contact with their families. At what stage, if at all, is it appropriate for the authorities and the courts
(including the children’s courts) to seek a permanent placement for the child, especially where the parents do not consent?
What grounds might justify such a step? In these cases, adoption can be seen as a part of child welfare law. The choices might
include: leaving the child in the care of foster parents or under the guardianship of the welfare authority; returning the child
to the parents, perhaps under some form of supervision; or placing the child for adoption and taking proceedings to have the adoption
order made without parental consent. It might be necessary to consider the relationship between adoption law and policy and the
practice of children’s courts.
Adoption of Children Act
(NSW) has little to say about these issues, although the wide grounds on which the Court can dispense with consent might be seen
as consistent with a permanency planning emphasis.
The Commission would be interested to receive views on whether the Act should include guidelines or principles on these issues and
the content of such guidelines or principles.
INFORMATION RIGHTS AND "OPEN ADOPTION"
Should legislation reinforce, extend or ignore the increasing openness in adoption?
3.12 We saw in Chapter 2 that there have been a series of changes in adoption law and practice since the mid-1960s which are often
referred to by the term “open adoption”. These include: the practice of telling children from an early age of their
adoptive status and providing them with non-identifying information about their birth family; the making of adoption orders in situations
where there is continuing contact between the children and members of the birth family; providing adoptive parents with non-identifying
information about the birth family; providing birth parents with some non-identifying information about the adoptive family; making
access or other orders after the adoption order in favour of members of the birth family; and providing identifying information to
adult adoptees, and birth parents, about each other. The underlying purpose of these changes is to promote openness and honesty,
on the assumption that this will be for the long-term benefit of the children (and perhaps others). Some of these changes are reflected
in new legislation, notably the
Adoption Information Act
(NSW), but most derive from changing practice by judges and adoption authorities.
3.13 Are these changes desirable? If so, should the Act be amended to make them secure and explicit, or should they continue to be
developed in practice? Should the law go further, and encourage or compel a greater degree of openness than now exists? Should
the law relating to access to information, now mainly contained in the 1990 Act, be incorporated in a single adoption Act?
ADOPTIONS BY SUBTERFUGE? USE OF GUARDIANSHIP AND CUSTODY
What should the law’s attitude be to private arrangements for the transfer of custody and guardianship from parents to other
3.14 A related issue involves the use of agreements or consent orders that have the effect of transferring custody and guardianship
to people selected by the birth parents. This can happen when a mother feels that she cannot cope with the care of her child but
is unwilling to surrender the child for adoption in the usual way, perhaps because she lacks confidence in the adoption agencies,
or because she wishes to place the child with a particular person or couple. In such a case, it is possible for the birth mother
and the selected care-givers to arrange for the baby to be transferred to the care-givers immediately after the birth, and for the
placement, which is intended to be permanent, to be regularised by Family Court orders for custody and guardianship in favour of
the couple. Such an arrangement is not technically adoption as no adoption order is made, and many of the consequences of adoption,
such as the issuing of a new birth certificate, alteration of rights of succession and obligations of child support, do not occur.
The care-givers acquire custody and guardianship, but the law maintains the other parental rights and obligations of the birth parents.
In practice, it may be that after such an arrangement the couple can take over the care of the child without any legal difficulties
arising. It would seem that those involved may commit no offence, since the exercise may not involve making arrangements
for adoption
It is also possible for the child to be handed over on a permanent basis with no legal procedures at all. It may well be that the
lack of legal authority will not cause any practical problems, especially while the child is young, and if difficulties arise later
in the child’s life, the child may be so settled in the new family that no court would be willing to remove the child, even
if it disapproved of the way the situation was created. In such situations, a “special case” adoption might be used
to regularise the situation.
3.15 How should the law respond to these arrangements? Should the law forbid, regulate, tolerate, or encourage them? Should the
answer depend on whether the child is born as a result of the use of reproduction technology (see Chapter 8).
On one hand it can be argued that such arrangements, which are desired by all parties concerned, may be beneficial to the child.
On the other hand, such arrangements can be seen as circumventing the regulatory framework of adoption, and exposing the children
to risks of unwise, ill-considered, or even exploitative, placements.
EFFECTS OF ADOPTION ORDERS
Should adoption continue to make the child a child of the adopting parents’ family for virtually all purposes? Should there
by any change in the form of birth certificates of adopted people, or in the legal requirements for the issuing of a new birth certificate?
Should it be possible for the Court to vary the consequences of adoption? When, if ever, should it be possible to discharge an
adoption order?
3.16 It can be argued that the present legal notion of adoption is too rigid and simplistic to cope with the complex and varying situations
that currently lead to applications for adoption. Perhaps different forms of adoption are appropriate for the adoption of newborn
babies and older children, or adoptions by grandparents or step-parents. It might be arguable that some consequences, such as changed
inheritance rights, make more sense in some situations than in others, and the law should be flexible enough to accommodate these
differences, either by having different categories of adoption or by allowing adoption orders to be tailored to particular cases.
Would it be desirable for the law to provide for more than one form of adoption, or to give the Court power to vary some of the
consequences of adoption, either at the time of making the order or on a later application? Would such changes lead to confusion
or undue legal complexity?
3.17 One consequence of adoption, the issuing of a new birth certificate, may require reconsideration, especially in the light of
experiences under the
Adoption Information Act
(NSW). Under the present law, adoption involves the issuing of a new birth certificate, which represents the situation as if the
child had been born to the adoptive parents. This approach is understandable in the light of the history of adoption and what has
been called the “clean break” theory. But is it still appropriate? If the present practice is not to conceal the fact
of adoption, should not the birth certificate be faithful to the facts and state that the child was adopted? Can it be said that
the stigma associated with illegitimacy and adoption is now so weak that the law should disclose the true situation? Should any
other modifications be considered in this area? Is it necessary in all cases to issue a new birth certificate?
3.18 A related issue concerns the circumstances, if any, in which it should be possible to terminate (“discharge”) adoption
orders. When an adoption order is discharged, all its legal consequences end. For example, parental rights and responsibilities
are restored to the birth parents or to anyone else who had these rights when the adoption order was originally made. However, the
Court may make other orders, such as giving custody to some other person. The present law provides that adoption orders can be discharged
only for an “exceptional reason”, and only on application to the Court by the Attorney-General or the Director-General.
Is this the most appropriate approach? Should the law make it easier, or more difficult, to discharge adoption orders? Should
it be possible for a court, rather than discharging an adoption order, to modify its effects in some way?
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Are there general principles, derived for example from the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, that should guide the Commission in its Review?
3.19 In this section we raise the issue of whether there are general principles that should influence or guide the development of
adoption law. One existing document requires special consideration, namely the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
. It is too lengthy to quote in full, but it may be helpful to mention a number of principles stated in the document.
The child’s welfare as the paramount consideration
3.20 Article 21 of the Convention provides that, in relation to adoption, ratifying countries “shall ensure that the best interests
of the child shall be the paramount consideration”. A similar statement can be found in the
Adoption of Children Act
This principle is well established, and applies in many areas of children’s law, including custody and guardianship under
Family Law Act
The application of this familiar principle, however, is not without difficulty. Does it apply to all aspects of adoption law, or
only some? Does it, for example, apply when the Court is considering whether to dispense with the consent of a parent?
If it does, it threatens to undermine the notion that adoption requires parental consent (see below). Does it apply when the Court
is considering whether to discharge an adoption order obtained by fraud? Does it involve a notion of children’s rights requiring,
for example, that children having sufficient maturity should be entitled to play a part in the decision to adopt and have the right
to knowledge of their adoptive status and of their origins?
Protection of children’s links with birth family
3.21 The Convention provides that adoption orders should not be made unless they are “permissible in view of the child’s
status concerning parents, relatives and legal guardians and that, if required, the persons concerned have given their informed consent
to the adoption on the basis of such counselling as may be necessary”.
Other Convention provisions also stress the need for the law to protect the authority of the parents, and the child’s connections
This general principle has a potential impact on a number of aspects of adoption law and practice. Most obviously, it is relevant
to provisions requiring parental consent. It may also be relevant to whether the law should encourage birth parents to play a part
in the arrangement of adoptions and the selection of adopters; whether the birth parents should have contact with the child during
childhood and after the child has attained majority; and, what information is to be provided to the adoptees about their birth families
and to members of the birth families about the adoptees. It is also relevant to the choice between adoption and other legal arrangements
for alternative care. The Convention suggests that adoption should be used only when other legal arrangements are inappropriate.
Cultural continuity
3.22 The Convention provides that when considering alternative placements for children, such as adoption, “due regard shall
be paid to the desirability of continuity in a child’s upbringing and to the child’s ethnic, religious, cultural and
linguistic background.”
Non-discrimination
3.23 A number of statements suggest that adoption law and practice should not discriminate against people, for example on the basis
of age, legal status, racial or other characteristics.
Such a principle may have important implications for this review, and may raise difficult issues. Consider, for example, a prohibition
of discrimination on the grounds of marital status.
Such a prohibition would have implications for parental consent requirements, for eligibility to adopt, and for information rights.
There is room for variation in the scope and appropriateness of this principle in adoption. For example, does the principle of
not discriminating against children on the grounds of their (ex-nuptial) status mean that the law should not discriminate against
the birth parents on the ground of their (marital) status?
Fair procedures and participation of children
3.24 The Convention emphasises the importance of procedural fairness, and states that children should have an opportunity to participate
in proceedings that concern them, to the extent that they are able to do so.
Other principles?
3.25 The principles identified above are only some of those that arise from various sources. The Commission welcomes comments on
whether these or other principles should be regarded as valuable in reviewing the
Adoption of Children Act
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. Such an approach might require changes in the structure of the Act: different types of adoption could be treated in separate parts
of the Act, and might be governed by very different provisions.
. United Kingdom.
Review of Adoption Law: Report to Ministers of an Interdepartmental Working Group
(Department of Health, October, 1992), at 8-9.
. This approach is taken, for example, in the
Family Law Act
(Cth) s 64.
. See below in Chapter 6.
In the Marriage of Corcoran
(1983) 9 Fam LR 52.
Adoption of Children Act
Section 25.
Family Law Act
(Cth) s 64(1)(a).
. United Kingdom.
Review of Adoption Law: Report to Ministers of an Interdepartmental Working Group
(Department of Health, October, 1992) at 25-27.
. Paragraphs (b)-(e) deal with inter-country adoption, and are discussed in Chapter 10, below.
. Articles 5, 7(1), 8(1), 9(1), 16(1), 18(1).
. Article 9(1).
. On New South Wales anti-discrimination legislation, see New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(Discussion Paper 30, February 1993).
. United Nations.
Convention on the Rights of the Child
. Articles 9(2), 12, 16(1).
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
4. Jurisdictional, Technical and Procedural Aspects
History of this Reference (Digest)
4.1 In this chapter we consider a miscellaneous group of issues relating to aspects of jurisdiction, procedure and similar matters.
It is expected that many more such issues will become apparent as the review proceeds, and to some extent it is appropriate to consider
technical issues only after decisions have been made about more fundamental issues. The issues mentioned in this chapter, therefore,
are those that seem of particular importance. The chapter is not intended to be comprehensive and the Commission welcomes any submissions
on similar or related issues not specifically raised in this chapter.
FEDERAL/STATE ISSUES
Should the relationship between New South Wales adoption law and Federal family law be clarified or changed? In particular, should
New South Wales work towards a reference of legislative power over adoption to the Commonwealth?
4.2 Although adoption is presently governed by
tate law, it can be affected by Commonwealth laws, particularly the
Family Law Act
(Cth) and, in relation to inter-country adoptions, the
Immigration (Guardianship of Children) Act
(Cth) and the
Australian Citizenship Act
1948 (Cth). It is apparent that in recent years the adoption legislation of the various states and territories has moved further
and further from the considerable uniformity achieved in the mid-1960s. Perhaps greater Commonwealth involvement is necessary if
uniformity is to be restored. It might also be argued that uniformity and Commonwealth involvement are appropriate in the light
of Australia’s ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, which creates international obligations relating to adoption law as well as other aspects of children’s law. It is therefore
appropriate to consider the relationship between New South Wales and the Commonwealth in relation to adoption.
The Family Court of Australia
4.3 The Family Court of Australia was created in 1976 with the introduction of the
Family Law Act
(Cth). Initially it dealt with custody, guardianship and access matters involving children of marriages. In 1988, New South Wales,
together with four other states, referred power over ex-nuptial children to the Commonwealth and the
Family Law Act
was amended to deal with all children, regardless of the marital status of their parents. In 1989, jurisdictional difficulties between
the states and the Commonwealth were also addressed by the introduction of “cross-vesting” jurisdiction.
This legislation gave the Supreme Court power to exercise jurisdiction of the Family Court, and gave the Family Court power to exercise
ensure that each court would normally continue to exercise jurisdiction in the ordinary way. In general, adoption matters would
continue to be heard by the Supreme Court and custody, guardianship and access matters would continue to be heard by the Family Court.
4.4 The relationship between the Supreme Court’s adoption jurisdiction, and the Family Court’s jurisdiction over children
is a matter of some complexity.
Family Law Act
(Cth) does not create a jurisdiction over adoption. It contains a provision,
, to the effect that the
Family Law Act
does not interfere with the exercise by state courts of their powers under child welfare and adoption legislation. However, the
Family Court can exercise its jurisdiction in custody, guardianship and access over children whether or not they have been adopted.
It would be possible, therefore, for the Family Court to make an access order in favour of a birth parent after the New South Wales
Supreme Court had made an adoption order in relation to the child.
The Commission would welcome comments on whether the law in this area requires clarification or modification.
A reference of power?
4.5 In 1988, New South Wales referred power to the Commonwealth over the custody, guardianship and maintenance of children and these
matters are now governed by Commonwealth laws. The question of whether adoption should also be referred to the Commonwealth, or
should be transferred to the Commonwealth by constitutional amendment, has been considered from time to time. It may be argued that,
especially since the 1988 reference of power, the Family Court of Australia is now the specialist family court, and that it would
be appropriate that it should deal with adoption.
It may also be argued that uniformity is desirable, and that experience shows that lasting uniformity will not be achieved except
though Commonwealth legislation. It might also be suggested that the independent work of the various states and territories in reviewing
their legislation is highly inefficient, and it would be better to concentrate reform energies on the creation and revision of a
single national adoption law. Finally, Commonwealth responsibility might be regarded as appropriate in light of the close links
between immigration and inter-country adoption and the increasing importance of national legal obligations created by such international
instruments as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
. On the other hand adoption, unlike custody and guardianship, involves the provision of services by the state Department of Community
Services and adoption agencies licensed by it; would a reference of power involve a transfer of these responsibilities to the Commonwealth?
4.6 Any action on this matter would, of course, require a co-operative effort. Should the Commission recommend that New South Wales
consult with the Commonwealth and other states with a view to the transfer of responsibility over adoption from the states to the
Commonwealth?
Should the Supreme Court continue to exercise jurisdiction in adoption? If so, should there be any changes in its procedures?
4.7 In New South Wales and most other Australian jurisdictions, adoption orders are made by a court.
Some years ago it was contemplated that there should be a separate tribunal to deal with adoptions in New South Wales, but this
proposal was never implemented. The conventional view is that it is appropriate for the Supreme Court to deal with adoption applications,
because adoption orders involve such serious consequences for the child, members of the birth family and the adoptive family. However
in some states, a lower court may exercise adoption jurisdiction.
Is it desirable that a court should continue to exercise adoption jurisdiction? If so, is the Supreme Court the most appropriate
4.8 In the vast majority of cases, adoption applications are uncontested. In these cases the hearings are usually short, and the
judge may make the orders on the basis of the papers filed in court, including the report of the Department or adoption agency and
submissions on behalf of the applicants. Where the proceedings are contested, ordinary court procedures apply, with some significant
modifications. The Court is closed to the public
and the usual rules of evidence do not apply.
Contested hearings, although conducted in closed court, are generally conducted along the traditional lines of the adversary system.
There is no express provision in the Act for the child to be represented, although it is probably within the Court’s power
to order that the child should be represented if the Court thinks fit. Are these rules and practices appropriate in adoption? Should
there be any changes, either of a major or a minor kind?
REGULATION OF PRACTICE AND ROLE OF AGENCIES AND SUPPORT GROUPS
4.9 How should adoption practice be regulated? Should the law prohibit private placements for adoption, either for adoptions outside
the family or adoptions inside the family, or both? What should be the respective roles of the Department of Community Services,
authorised adoption agencies, and support groups in the provision of pre- and post-adoption services?
Adoptions by non-relatives
4.10 We have seen that a fundamental characteristic of the
Adoption of Children Act
(NSW) was the banning of private placements and the control of adoption practice by the Court and authorised adoption agencies.
It should be noted that in some other jurisdictions, for example in the United States, this degree of regulation appears to be unacceptable.
It would seem that the present system is based on the view that agency control of adoption is desirable in order to protect the
rights of children. Is this true?
Limits of regulation
4.11 This strict system of regulation, however, does not apply to adoptions within families, such as adoptions by step-parents or
adoptions by grandparents. More precisely, the regulatory provisions do not apply where the applicant or one of the two applicants
is a parent or relative of the child. “Relative” is defined as “a grandparent, uncle or aunt of the child, whether
the relationship is of the whole blood or half-blood or by affinity, and notwithstanding that the relationship depends upon the adoption
of a person”.
4.12 What is the rationale for the relaxation of the regulatory provisions for intra-family adoption? Is it assumed that privately
arranged adoptions within families involve less risk for children? If so, are there other categories of adoption which do not require
strict regulation? If it is right to distinguish between adoptions within families and other adoptions, is the existing definition
satisfactory? In a multicultural community such as New South Wales the word “family” has a variety of meanings, and
in some groups might include individuals who are not treated as “family” in the current Act. Is the Act’s definition
of “family” appropriate?
Agencies, support groups and the Department of Community Services
4.13 In New South Wales, the Department of Community Services is the authority for licensing private adoption agencies, and is itself
an adoption agency. In addition, a number of rules have given the Department a special position in relation to adoption. Recent
amendments have relaxed these rules somewhat, giving a greater degree of responsibility to the private agencies. For example, the
original Act required that there should be a report to the Court by the Department, but amendments also provide for a report by the
agency concerned, and for dispensing with reports where the Court is satisfied that the standard of applications by that agency justifies
such a dispensation.
It has been suggested to the Commission that staff of adoption agencies are sometimes as well or better qualified than staff of
the Department, and that the agencies, perhaps more than the Department, are responsible for developments in adoption practice.
If this is so, there might be an argument for an even greater degree of independence for the agencies. On the other hand the limited
availability of local children for adoption has meant that some agencies have had little or no recent experience. Should this issue
be addressed in accreditation and re-accreditation procedures?
4.14 The issues involved extend to responsibility and funding for a range of associated services, including counselling and other
services relating to the management of adoption placements, information
and other post-adoption services for children, adoptive parents, and birth parents. The provision of these services involves support
groups as well as the Department and authorised agencies. Support groups are of considerable importance in particular areas of adoption
practice, including inter-country adoption,
where their members often have unique knowledge of adoption practice in overseas countries, and in relation to information rights,
where they can play an invaluable role in assisting people seeking information and people who are the subject of such information.
4.15 A radical proposal would be for “privatisation” of adoption practice. This would involve transferring responsibility
for arranging adoptions entirely to private agencies and support groups or those agencies and groups that have been approved or licensed,
with the Department retaining at most a supervisory role.
The opposite direction could also be chosen, with the Department taking over the arrangement of all adoptions, except intra-family
adoptions. The Commission would welcome comments on the respective roles of the Department of Community Services, private adoption
agencies and support groups.
Responsibility of the Minister or the Director-General?
4.16 Should the legislation place formal responsibility in the Minister or the Director-General? The present Act, like the legislation
in most other Australian jurisdictions, places formal responsibility in the Director-General rather than the Minister.
In routine matters the discharge of the responsibility is delegated to officers of the Department, but it may be that the general
legislative pattern in Australia reflects the view that adoption could be “politicised” where the formal responsibility
resides with the Minister.
APPEALS AND REVIEW
What provision should be made for review of adoption decisions, and rights of appeal?
4.17 Important decisions are made not only by the Court but also by the Department and authorised adoption agencies, and also, possibly,
by support groups in relation to inter-country adoptions. Court decisions are subject to the usual appeal to the New South Wales
Court of Appeal. The
Adoption of Children Act
(NSW) provides for the Director-General to review unfavourable assessments of applicants
but does not provide for appeal to an independent body. A new Act establishes mechanisms for appeal and review of decisions made
under the community welfare legislation.
This Act also provides for appeals to the Community Services Appeals Tribunal against a decision made by the Director-General to
refuse approval of an adoption agency and creates a power to make regulations extending the scope of appeal to other decisions relating
to adoption.
The Act removes the power of the Ombudsman to investigate matters that could be the subject of an appeal to the Community Services
Appeals Tribunal.
4.18 Systems of appeal and review could cover any or all of the range of decisions made by the Department and authorised agencies
relating to adoption. They could include limited review for errors of law or manifestly unreasonable decisions, or a full rehearing
on the merits of the particular case, or advisory recommendations to the Director-General or other decision-maker, or combinations
of these. Various procedures could be specified, dealing with such matters as entitlement to appeal, costs of appeals or the application
of the rules of evidence. Specific provisions under the adoption legislation could either displace the Ombudsman’s powers
(as under the 1993 Bill referred to above) or co-exist with them. The Commission would welcome comments on the extent to which decisions
made in adoption should be subject to review, and what might be the most appropriate forms of review.
RIGHTS TO INFORMATION
Should people have rights to information about adoption decisions?
4.19 A closely associated question is to what extent, if at all, should the law provide that people involved with adoption have rights
of access to information about decisions affecting them. The
Freedom of Information Act
(NSW) does not presently apply to information held in connection with adoption.
Should it? If so, to what categories of information should it apply? What rights, if any, should be created? Should such rights
to information be limited to people who need the information in order to consider whether to appeal against a decision?
What behaviour should be penalised in connection with adoption? What penalties are appropriate?
4.20 The Act includes a set of offences. Some are associated with the regulation of adoption and the banning of privately arranged
adoptions. Thus it is an offence to make private arrangements for adoption, or to advertise for adoption.
Other offences are designed to prevent members of the birth family from interfering with the adoption process or the adoptive family.
These provisions make it an offence for a birth parent to attempt to take the child away from the adopters, or to communicate with
the child without the adopters’ consent.
A related provision, which may not create a criminal offence, is that in certain circumstances unmarried fathers “may not”
do anything inconsistent with the making of an adoption order.
A third group comprises offences designed to protect the adoption process itself. These offences are impersonation of a person
whose consent is required,
making false statements in connection with proposed adoptions,
using force or duress to influence the parties in making decisions,
breaching the requirements relating to confidentiality,
and witnessing a consent to adoption without taking the required steps to ensure, for example, that the person understands the nature
of the consent.
It might be thought that some of these offences are unnecessary. For example, the general law of harassment has been considerably
developed by legislation in recent years, and it might be argued that any attempts by birth parents or others to contact adopted
children should be dealt with under the general criminal law. On the other hand, there may be practices which should be penalised
but are not caught by the existing provisions. The appropriateness of the penalties is also a matter for consideration.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. The complexity of this relationship with regard specifically to step-parent adoptions is considered in Chapter 7.
In the Marriage of Mole and Newling
[1987] FamCA 21
(1987) 11 Fam LR 974.
. See Fogarty, J, Sanders, K, Webster M,
A Review of the Inter-country Adoption Service in Victoria
(Family and Children’s Services Council, Melbourne, October 1989).
. An exception is Queensland, where uncontested adoptions are dealt with by the welfare authority: a court, however, must deal with
any application to dispense with consent and there is an appeal from decisions by the Director:
Adoption of Children Act
. See, for example,
Adoption Act
(County court).
Adoption of Children Act
Section 65.
Section 21(1A).
. See generally New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Review of the
Adoption Information Act 1990
(Report 69, July 1992).
. See Chapter 11 of this Issues Paper.
Review of the
Adoption Information Act 1990
(Report 69, July 1992)
. Such a development might be seen as complementing the recommendations of the NSW
Report of the Committee to Review Substitute Care Services in New South Wales,
(January, 1992) (the “Usher Report”).
. Compare, however, NT (‘Minister’); ACT (s 11 - ‘Minister to approve agencies’) and Qld (s 51 -‘Minister
to authorise prosecutions’).
Adoption of children Act
1965 (NSW) s17, and s 20A for inter-country adoptions.
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act
1993 No 2. This Act was assented to on 8 April 1993 and will commence on a day or days to be proclaimed, being a day or days not
later than 12 months after the date of assent.
. Section 40(1) d); Schedule 2, adding a new s 67A to the
Adoption of Children Act
. Section 121.
Freedom of Information Act
, Schedule 1, cl 20(a) and (c).
Adoption of Children Act
Sections 49
Section 31D.
Section 55.
Section 54.
Section 57.
Section 53.
Section 58.
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
5. Eligibility to Adopt and to be Adopted
History of this Reference (Digest)
WHO CAN BE ADOPTED?
Who should be eligible to be adopted? Should there be an age limit?
To what extent, and in what ways, should the law require children to consent to, or otherwise participate in, the adoption process?
Eligibility for adoption
5.1 Children under 18 years old are eligible to be adopted, but persons over 18 years old may only be adopted if (to summarise) they
have been brought up by the applicants.
It is legally possible for children who have been adopted to be subsequently adopted by different adoptive parents.
Married persons, of any age, cannot be adopted.
What are the reasons behind these restrictions? Should they be retained?
The child’s consent and participation
5.2 Under the present law, the child’s consent must normally be obtained for adoption if the child is over 12 years of age.
It can be dispensed with by the Court if there are “special reasons, related to the welfare and interests of the child”.
In other respects, although the child’s welfare is required to be treated as “the paramount consideration”, the
Act makes no provision for active participation by the child in the adoption process. In the mid-1960s when the “uniform”
legislation was being formulated, the reality and the dominant image was of the adoption of newborn babies who could not participate
actively in the proceedings. Today, a greater proportion of children are older and have been in foster care, and they may have the
capacity and desire to express opinions about their proposed adoption. In addition, there were few precedents for children actively
participating in court proceedings and former notions of children’s rights emphasised children’s rights to
rather than their rights to have a say in decisions that affected them.
5.3 More recently, there has been growing recognition of children’s rights of participation. This is reflected in case law
and in recent legislation, which includes provisions for children to be legally represented and to participate actively in court
proceedings in other ways.
It is also reflected in the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
1990, which provides:
States Parties shall assure to the child who is capable of forming his or her own views the right to express those views freely in
all matters affecting the child, the views of the child being given due weight in accordance with the age and maturity of the child.
For this purpose, the child shall in particular be provided the opportunity to be heard in any judicial and administrative proceedings
affecting the child, either directly or through a representative or an appropriate body, in a manner consistent with the procedural
rules of national law.
5.4 The Commission would welcome comments on the implications of these principles for adoption law. Are the present provisions relating
to children’s consent appropriate? Should the law give children greater participation rights, for example, in relation to
the selection of adoptive parents? Should the law, at least in the case of older children, require that the Court satisfy itself
that the children have been fully informed about the proposed adoption before it makes the order? Should it also require that they
are informed of any undertakings given by the adoptive parents that they will provide the adopted children with information about
their origins? What provision, if any, should be made for children’s participation in the proceedings? Should they be entitled
to independent representation in some or all adoption proceedings?
SELECTION OF ADOPTIVE PARENTS: THE PRESENT LAW AND PRACTICE
5.5 How should adoptive parents be chosen? What characteristics should they have? What procedures should be used in their selection?
Should there be an appeal procedure available for people who are not approved as adoptive parents? Should there be different procedures,
or criteria, for different types of adoption?
Present law
5.6 Where an adoption involves a child being placed into new surroundings, the selection of adoptive parents is a most important task.
As we have seen, the present system gives the Department of Community Services and authorised adoption agencies the power to select,
although criteria are specified by law. The selection of adoptive parents involves a number of separate selection processes. To
obtain an order for adoption, the applicants need to be selected by the Department of Community Services or an authorised adoption
agency who present the application to the Court. The order for adoption can then be made only if the Court is satisfied about various
Requirements for eligibility in the Act
5.7 The applicants must meet a number of requirements set out in the Act. Some of the requirements are less rigid when the prospective
adopters wish to adopt a child with special needs, for example, a child who is older, has a physical or intellectual disability or
comes from a particular racial background.
5.8 The applicants must normally be 21 or older and must be either 18 years older (male applicants) or 16 years older (female applicants)
than the child.
In addition, the Court is required to have regard to their age, and that of the child, in considering their suitability to adopt
the particular child.
Marital status
5.9 Subject to various qualifications, the Court may not make an adoption order otherwise than in favour of a married couple. In
particular circumstances the Court can make an order in favour of one person.
In very restricted circumstances the Court can make an order in favour of a couple living in a de facto relationship.
This kind of order can normally be made only in relation to a child who has been brought up by the applicants for at least two years
and the applicants’ relationship must have lasted for at least three years. Such an order can also be made in relation to
children with special needs and, where the child is Aboriginal, in favour of applicants who are Aboriginal.
5.10 Each applicant must be “of good repute” and “a fit and proper person to fulfil the responsibilities of a parent”.
Religion and education
5.11 The religious convictions of the applicants and their intentions regarding the religious education of the child are not relevant
to their general suitability to adopt.
However, the Court is required, when considering the applicants’ suitability to adopt a particular child, to have regard to
the “religious upbringing or convictions (if any) of the child and of the applicant or applicants”.
Under this provision the Court would consider, for example, whether it would be wise for applicants of one religion to adopt a child
who had embraced the beliefs and practices of a different religion. There is a similar provision about education. The Court must
have regard to the “education (if any)” of the child and the applicants.
This appears to refer to the educational similarities between the child and the applicants and does not mean, for example, that
the Court should prefer well-educated applicants.
5.12 Religion is also relevant in a another way. The Act requires the Court to consider whether the applicants are suitable to adopt
the particular child having regard to, amongst other things, “any wishes that have been expressed by a parent or guardian of
the child in the instrument of consent...with respect to the religious upbringing of the child”.
It seems clear that, although the contrary has been suggested,
this does not prevent an order being made contrary to such wishes, since the wishes are only one of a number of relevant matters
which have to be taken into account. The provision is controversial because it assumes that the wishes of the relinquishing parents
are a relevant consideration when assessing the suitability of the adoptive parents.
5.13 The state of health of the child and the applicants is also relevant.
In practice, this has been interpreted as requiring that the state of health of the applicants should not interfere with their ability
to look after the child.
Other eligibility requirements
5.14 Under the powers contained in the regulations made under the Act, the Director-General of the Department of Community Services
has published more specific criteria for the assessment of adoption applicants.
The assessment of a couple is based on a mixture of specific requirements, such as having Australian citizenship, and more general
requirements, such as being “of good character and repute” and “mature and well-adjusted”.
Each applicant must have “the capacity to be a loving parent to an adopted child and to meet the social, cultural and special
needs” of the child.
They also require applicants to “have the capacity and willingness to...ensure the child is fully aware of his or her...culture
and origin from the time of placement”.
The regulations re-state the minimum age of applicants from the Act and go further to specify the maximum age for applicants. Applicants
are to be between 21 and 55 and must not be more than 41 years older than the child proposed to be adopted.
If they have a child, the child must be at least two years older than the child to be adopted.
There is also a requirement that the couple be infertile.
This requirement does not apply to applicants for inter-country adoption. Are these criteria appropriate?
Allocation of children to approved applicants
5.15 There are, as already noted, far more people wishing to adopt than there are Australian children available for adoption. It
seems that many of these people would fulfil the legislative requirements set out above. In practice, as the Commission understands
it, the agencies periodically approve a limited number of applications so that at any given time there is a “pool” of
potential adopters with whom available children may be placed. This “pool” may consist of as many as 70 couples, the
general intention being that it should be large enough to include a range of adopters who will be suitable for the diverse needs
of the children, but small enough that persons in the “pool” will have a realistic chance of having a child allocated
to them within a reasonable time. The selection of people for particular children is not governed by any particular rules, (for
example, there is no “first come, first served” principle), but is essentially a professional decision made by the agency
staff, based on their views about which of the available adopters will best meet the immediate and long-term needs of the particular
The Court’s discretion
5.16 If the applicants satisfy all the requirements and receive a child, the Court may, on application, make an order for the adoption
of that child. In making its decision the Court must regard the child’s welfare as the paramount consideration and must be
satisfied that the child’s welfare and interests will be promoted by the adoption.
ISSUES RELATING TO SELECTION OF ADOPTIVE PARENTS
5.17 It is generally accepted that the process of selection of adoptive parents should be designed to find the best possible adoptive
parents for the child, whose welfare is stated in the Act to be “the paramount consideration”.
However, some of the existing criteria, notably the preference for infertile couples, appear to be based on the idea that one function
of adoption is to serve the needs of those who want to adopt children.
If the child’s welfare is to be the only purpose in selecting adoptive parents, it is difficult to see why infertility should
be a requirement. Should the criteria be revised? Or should we accept that adoption may be used to serve interests of other people,
provided that doing so does not work against the best interests of the child? It might also be that certain needs of the adoptive
parents must be met in order for the placement of the child to operate effectively.
5.18 What sort of criteria are necessary when attempting to select the most appropriate adoptive parents for a child? To what extent
should the system take into account age, marital status, health and other matters? To what extent should these matters be seen as
desirable or undesirable in their own right and to what extent are they relevant to the question of whether particular applicants
are suitable to adopt a particular child? To what extent should the criteria be “objective”, as in chronological age,
as distinct from more “subjective” matters, such as the assessment by a social worker of the applicants’ attitudes
towards their infertility, adoption generally or the state of their own relationship with each other? In the light of the
Adoption Information Act
(NSW) and the tendency towards openness in adoption, should we seek adoptive parents who are comfortable with such openness?
5.19 Another issue is whether there should be different criteria for different categories of adoptions. Broadly speaking, the criteria
have been developed in relation to “traditional” adoptions but many adoptions today are not of this kind. Should we
apply the same tests and criteria to adoptions of older children, adoptions by step-parents, mixed-race adoptions, adoptions by foster
parents and adoptions of children with disabilities?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Adoption of Children Act
Section 18(5).
Section 18(4).
Section 33(1).
. Compare, for example the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of the Child
(1959) with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
(1990). On children’s rights theory generally, see P Alston et al (eds)
Children, Rights and the Law
(OUP, Oxford, 1992).
. See, for example,
Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v JWB and SMB
(“Re Marion”)
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 15 Fam LR 392.
. See for example,
Family Law Act
s 63C(1)(b)
, 64(1)(b), 65;
Children (Care and Protection) Act
(NSW), ss 61A, 58(1)(a), 62B, 65(1)(a), 66, 69; see also
Adoption Act
(child’s wishes to be considered).
Adoption of Children Act
The requirement does not apply where one of the applicants is a parent of the child or where the Court considers that, in the particular
circumstances, it is desirable to make the adoption order.
Section 21(1)(c)(i)(b).
Section 19(2).
If the applicant is married, the spouse’s consent is normally required:
Section 19(1A)
Section 21(1)(c)(i)(a).
Section 21A
, overruling the reasoning of Larkins J in
Re an Infant E and the
Adoption of Children Act
[1974] 1 NSWLR 739.
Section 21(1)(c)(i)(b).
Section 21(1)(c)(i)(b).
Section 21(1)(c)(i)(b).
Re an Infant M and the
Adoption of Children Act
(1967) 87 WN(Pt 1)(NSW) 48.
. In the context of “open adoption” the religious wishes of the birth parents may become more relevant, since if the birth
parents had contact with the child or the adoptive parents during the child’s minority, this might affect the child.
Adoption of Children Act
Section 21(1)(c)(i)(b).
Adoption of Children Regulations
New South Wales Government Gazette
No 58 (8 May, 1992) at 3264, clauses 3 and 4.
. Clause 2.
. Clause 5.
. Clause 6.
. Clause 7.
. Clause 9.
Adoption of Children Act
. There may be room for argument about whether this provision, in
, applies to all stages of the selection of intending adopters.
. A similar comment could perhaps be made about the provision for the birth parents to express a wish relating to religious upbringing:
s 21(1)(c)(i)(b).
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
6. Rights and Responsibilities of Birth Parents
History of this Reference (Digest)
THE IMPLICATIONS OF “OPEN ADOPTION”
Should the law regulate, encourage or discourage recent developments towards “open adoption”? What additional provisions,
if any, should be made relating to the rights and responsibilities of birth parents?
6.1 Until very recently, the only important rights of birth parents were their rights to consent to the adoption of their child.
Adoption law normally requires one or both birth parents to consent to the adoption and there are special provisions designed to
protect parents, especially mothers, from undue pressure, mistake and other factors that might undermine the voluntariness of the
consent. In some circumstances the Court has power to make adoption orders even though one or both parents refuse to give consent.
These rules about parental consent form a very important part of adoption law and give rise to important issues that are considered
in this chapter.
6.2 In recent times, practices associated with “open adoption” have raised questions regarding the rights of birth parents.
They now have a legal right to identifying information about the adopted child when the child turns eighteen.
Under current adoption practice, they may play a part in the selection of adopting couples and they may be provided with information
on adoption practice now frequently discusses even greater involvement of birth parents, including situations where the birth parents
will be in contact with the adoptive family as the child grows up. Arrangements for this kind of contact can exist under present
adoption law.
6.3 The Commission is particularly anxious to learn about the implications of these developments and the extent to which they should
be regulated, encouraged or discouraged by the law. Does the development of openness in adoption create a need for additional or
different resources and qualifications among adoption workers? Who would benefit or be disadvantaged by such developments?
6.4 The Commission welcomes comments on the role the law should take in this area. Should it effectively leave such matters to the
adoption professionals or deal with these issues in a more direct fashion? Should it specify the rights of birth parents and others
to information and services? If the law is to give greater rights to birth parents, is it appropriate to consider also what
responsibilities
they might have?
WHOSE CONSENT?
Whose consent should be required to adoption? Should consent be required from unmarried fathers?
6.5 Consent is required from the mother and father in the case of children of a marriage, and from the mother when the child is ex-nuptial.
It is also required from any person who is a guardian of the child. Whether consent is required from the father of an ex-nuptial
child (we will for convenience refer to them as “unmarried fathers”) is a difficult question. There is room for argument
that the unmarried father is a “guardian” as a result of the
Family Law Act
(Cth) and his consent is therefore required. This was almost certainly not intended because the provisions of the Act indicate that
the father of ex-nuptial child is required to consent only in limited circumstances, namely where he lived with the mother and the
child after the child was born.
This provision excludes fathers in the ordinary case where the mother gives consent shortly after the birth and the baby is immediately
taken for placement elsewhere. The policy of the Act appears to be that the father’s consent is required only if he has an
established relationship with the ex-nuptial child.
6.6 What is the position of the unmarried father who wishes to prevent the adoption and, perhaps, to bring up the child himself?
The Act contains provisions relating to men who are registered as fathers or are legally presumed to be fathers.
The agency is required to make inquiries to discover if any man fits this category. If there is such a man, a notice is to be served
on him, telling him that the mother has consented to the adoption of the child.
He may then, within two weeks, file an application “relating to the care custody and (sic) guardianship” of the child
and the Court may determine such an application. If he fails to do so within the specified two weeks, the Act provides that he “may
not ... do any thing that is inconsistent with the making of” the adoption order.
6.7 Do these provisions operate satisfactorily? Are they appropriate for fathers who are ill, unfamiliar with English, who do not
realise the importance of the time requirement or who for other understandable reasons fail to file the notice within the two weeks.
On one interpretation, these provisions would prevent such fathers from putting their opposition to the adoption to the Court.
They could also be interpreted as preventing fathers from applying for access, even if they responded with the two week period; they
must either accept the adoption or claim the care, custody and guardianship of the child.
6.8 The position of unmarried fathers in adoption is a much debated issue. It appears that the law should be clarified but what should
the law be? It can be argued that many unmarried fathers are, or would like to become, involved parents and it is in the interests
of the children not to cut off this relationship. On the other hand, it can be argued that to give rights to all unmarried fathers
would allow men who have no interest or involvement in their children to impede the adoption process, at the expense of an early
and secure placement for the child, and impose pressure on the birth mothers. One approach is for the law to attempt to identify
those fathers whose consent should be required, such as those who have established a relationship with the child or those who had
a close relationship with the mother and were prevented from establishing a relationship with the child. Another would be to require
the consent of all fathers, married and unmarried, and rely on the procedure of dispensing with consent to deal with “unmeritorious”
fathers. Comments are welcome on this controversial issue.
WHAT KIND OF CONSENT?
Should it be possible for birth parents to limit their consent or make it conditional? Should the birth parents help select or nominate
the adoptive parents?
6.9 Under the present law consent must be general, that is, a consent to the child being adopted by any eligible person or couple
selected by the agency.
It cannot be conditional. With one exception, the relinquishing parents have no right to control or influence the selection of
the adoptive parents or the way in which they bring up the child. The exception is that the relinquishing parents can, in the consent
form, express a
as to the religious upbringing of the child. This wish does not strictly guarantee that the child will be adopted by parents of
that religion or brought up in that religion, although normally it is respected and the agency tries to place the child with people
of the appropriate religion. The Commission understands that, in practice, the Department of Community Services and the authorised
adoption agencies often give birth parents the opportunity to select adoptive parents from two or three couples from the “pool”
of approved adoptive parents.
6.10 There are many alternatives to the present system for consenting. The consent could be to the adoption by particular people,
such as a couple selected by the birth parents, or to members of a class of persons. It could be conditional by requiring, for example,
that the child be told of his or her adoption or by requiring that the adopters allow contact between the birth parents and the child.
Conditional consent could be associated with a system in which the birth parents played an active part in the planning of the adoption,
including the selection of the adoptive parents.
PROTECTION AGAINST DURESS
How can the law ensure that consents are truly voluntary?
6.11 There are several ways in which the Act attempts to protect parents against giving a form of consent that is not truly voluntary.
The consent must be in writing and there is a requirement that the consequences of giving such a consent have been explained to
the person.
Consent cannot be taken prior to the birth or until the completion of three clear days after the birth. This calculation does not
count the day of the birth and therefore consent is not taken until the fifth day after the birth at the earliest.
There are also provisions by which the Court may set aside consents which were not given in accordance with the Act or were obtained
by fraud, duress or other improper means. Consents can also be set aside where the instrument of consent was later altered, or where
the person was not in a fit condition to give consent or did not understand the nature of the consent.
The consent can be revoked within a period of 30 days, after which it becomes final.
6.12 These provisions attempt to balance a number of competing considerations. On one hand the consent must be truly voluntary.
On the other hand, the child’s welfare is seen as requiring a reasonably speedy placement with the proposed adopters (or with
temporary foster parents). The period of 30 days for revocation is seen as a compromise; to make it shorter would lessen the chances
that the consent was truly voluntary and to make it longer would increase the risk that the child, after a substantial time with
the proposed adopters, would be returned to the mother or both birth parents. It is sometimes suggested that it is also in the interests
of the birth mother that the decision should become irrevocable within a reasonably short time, since if it remained revocable it
would be more difficult for her to come to terms with her decision and the continuing possibility of having the child restored to
her would place her under stress. Are these the relevant considerations in approaching this topic? How satisfactory are the present
provisions?
DISPENSING WITH CONSENT
Should it be possible for the Court to make an adoption order without the consent of the birth parents? If so, what reasons would
justify such an order? What procedures are appropriate for dealing with these matters?
6.13 In certain circumstances, the Court has power to dispense with the consent of a birth parent or guardian. Applications to dispense
with consent involve “contested” adoption hearings, in which one or both birth parents are seeking to prevent the loss
of their parental rights and the Department of Community Services or authorised agency is seeking to persuade the Court that the
circumstances warrant making the adoption order against the wishes of the birth parent(s).
6.14 There are a number of grounds on which consent might be dispensed with so that the adoption order can be made without consent.
The most obvious and least controversial are where the person whose consent is required cannot be found or is incapable of giving
consent. The next two grounds are, in substance, that the parent is unfit to be a parent by reason of having abandoned, deserted,
neglected or ill-treated the child; and that the parent has for at least a year failed without reasonable excuse to discharge the
obligations of a parent or to make suitable alternative arrangements for the child. The following additional grounds were added
by later amendments:
(e) the child is in the care of a foster parent or foster parents, the child has established a stable relationship with that person
or those persons, and the interests and welfare of the child will be promoted by the child’s remaining in the care of that
person or those persons;
(f) the child is in the care of a person or persons other than a parent, relative or foster parent and the interests and welfare of
the child will be promoted if negotiations can be conducted and arrangements made with a view to the adoption of the child. [...]
(g) there are circumstances, other than those referred to in paragraphs (a)-(f1), in which, by dispensing with the consent, the interests
and welfare of the child will be promoted; or
(h) a notice of intention to seek an order dispensing with the consent has been served personally on [the person whose consent is
required] and the person has not, within 14 days...filed...a notice of intention to oppose the making of the order.
6.15 Paragraph (g) is of particular importance. The Court of Appeal has pointed out that, combined with the principle that the child’s
welfare is paramount (s 17), it means that if the Court considers that the adoption will promote the child’s welfare it
make the orders for dispensing with consent and for the child’s adoption.
6.16 This conclusion seems to involve a curious ambivalence towards the rights of the birth parents. Their consent is ordinarily
required and the Court can do without it only in limited circumstances. However, a close examination of the definition of those
circumstances indicates that everything turns on whether the Court thinks the adoption will benefit the child: if it does, the child
will be adopted without regard to any question of parental rights. A finding that adoption would benefit the child, therefore, is
a necessary and sufficient condition for the making of the adoption order
. This conclusion would appear to make the other grounds for dispensing with consent unnecessary. It has also been suggested that
it could enable adoption agencies to make applications for the adoption of newborn children of poor or disadvantaged parents and
that the applications might well be granted, without any question of parental fault or neglect arising, if the agency could persuade
the Court that the children would be better off if they were adopted.
The problem has not arisen on a widespread scale because the agencies have not pursued such an aggressive approach.
6.17 The issue involves questions about the rights of parents and children and the role of adoption. Different jurisdictions have
different provisions on this matter, but no other Australian jurisdiction goes as far as the New South Wales provision (as distinct
from the practice of the agencies) in giving
weight to parental rights in this matter.
In England, the rule has long been that consent can be dispensed with only if it is unreasonably withheld. The recent review of
English adoption law has suggested a new test: the Court may dispense with consent only where it is satisfied that the advantages
to the child of becoming part of a new family and having a new legal status are so significantly greater than the advantages to the
child of any alternative option as to justify overriding the wishes of the parent or guardian.
Therefore, New South Wales law on this point appears to favour adoption to a greater extent than other jurisdictions and to a greater
extent than even the most pro-adoption social work literature.
The Commission invites comments on whether it is desirable that the adoption legislation should contain more specific guidelines
6.18 An application to dispense with parental consent can be made quite separately from an application for the adoption of a particular
Where this happens the effect of the order is to free the child to be adopted by any applicants. In such cases the Court is not
able to consider whether the child’s welfare will be promoted by the proposed adoption, but must consider whether the child’s
welfare would be promoted by being freed for adoption by
any adopters who are subsequently chosen
. Is this desirable? Would it be better for the law to provide for dispensing with consent only to make a particular order for adoption,
so that the Court can compare the proposed adoption with other options available for the child?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Adoption Information Act
Exercise of the right is subject to the “contact veto” system: see generally New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Review of the
Adoption Information Act 1990
(Report 69, July 1992).
Adoption of Children Act
Section 26(3)(b).
. This is a considerably simplified summary of
Section 31A
(notice may be dispensed with in certain situations).
Section 31D.
. Compare the provision for dispensing with a parent’s consent on the ground of failure by the parent to respond promptly to
such a notice:
. This paragraph does not refer to adoptions within families.
Adoption of Children Act
Adoption of Children Regulations
1966 (NSW), regulation 23.
Adoption of Children Act
Section 31.
Section 28.
Section 32.
. Para (f1), dealing with inter-country adoption, has been omitted.
. This provision has been criticised (like the similar provision relating to unmarried fathers), on the grounds that it attaches disproportionately
serious consequences to a failure to respond quickly and appropriately to a notice and on the ground that, unlike the other grounds,
such failure seems to have little or no connection with the child’s welfare: D Hambly and J Chart, “The
Adoption of Children (Amendment) Act
Aust Current Law Digest
Re an Infant K and the
Adoption of Children Act
[1973] 1 NSWLR 311.
. See for example papers by Hambly, and Chisholm, in C Picton (ed)
Proceedings of the First Australian Conference on Adoption 1976
(Committee of the First Australian Conference on Adoption, Melbourne, 1976) .
. Most jurisdictions have provisions which refer to the child’s welfare, but also require the existence of “special circumstances”
or the like.
. United Kingdom.
Review of Adoption Law
(Report to Ministers of an Interdepartmental Working Group, Department of Health and Welsh Office, 1992) at 25-7.
. See for example J Goldstein, A Freud and A Solnit
Before the Best Interests of the Child
(Free Press, New York, 1979).
Adoption of Children Act
(2) and (3). In intra-family adoptions, the applicants for adoption cannot apply to dispense with consent unless the Director-General
consents to their doing so: see
. This is recommended by the United Kingdom
Review of Adoption Law
(Report to Ministers of an Interdepartmental Working Group, Department of Health and Welsh Office, 1992) at 29-31.
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
7. Adoption within Families
History of this Reference (Digest)
When, if ever, should it be possible for grandparents to adopt their grandchildren? Should the legislation provide some guidance
on when these adoptions are appropriate?
Should it be possible for step-parents to adopt children? In what circumstances? Should the legislation provide some guidance on
when these adoptions are appropriate? What should be the relationship between the
Family Law Act
1975 (Cth) and the NSW adoption legislation?
7.1 Intra-family adoptions form an important part of adoption today.
These type of adoptions, as noted above, fall outside the regulatory system that applies to adoptions by unrelated people. In intra-family
adoptions, the child can be placed with a particular person or couple, for example, the child’s grandparents and that person
or couple can then apply for adoption. By contrast, in non-family cases the placement of the child is normally required to be made
by an authorised adoption agency.
7.2 One important issue is whether this basic pattern should be retained.
Assuming that it is, the question arises whether the notion of “family” that underlies it is suitable for New South
Wales society today. In particular, should the term be extended to cover relationships which might be regarded as “family”
within certain groups in the community?
GRANDPARENT ADOPTIONS
7.3 Adoptions by grandparents have always been regarded with caution by the courts, although the courts frequently do make adoption
orders in these cases. The reasons for such caution are obvious. Adoption presents a distorted picture of the actual relationships
between the persons involved. For example, if a grandmother adopts her grand daughter, the grand daughter legally becomes the sister
of her own mother. It may be that in many situations other orders, such as orders for custody or guardianship, are all that is required.
Reported cases show that the courts try to weigh up the advantages and disadvantages of adoption in these cases.
Is the law satisfactory in this area? Should the Act be amended in any way?
STEP-PARENT ADOPTIONS
7.4 Adoption is sometimes used when a parent remarries following divorce or the death of the other spouse or where the child was born
outside marriage. Broadly speaking it is used in order to bring about a full parental relationship with the step-parent. Where
the other parent is still alive, it is often used to sever all connections between the child and the other birth parent. It is a
curious feature of the Act that in such situations the adoption order must be in favour of the birth parent as well as the step-parent,
although in reality the birth parent has no need to adopt, since he or she already has full parental rights.
7.5 This use of adoption has been severely criticised in recent times.
It has been said that it does not generally promote the welfare of child, which is thought to be promoted by retaining contact with
both parents: an assumption reflected in the view that normally access should be ordered in favour of the non-custodial parent.
It creates a set of legal relationships which are contrary to the actual relationships among the families involved. It can be seen
as unfair to the non-adopting parent and his or her relatives. Sometimes, it is used for a limited purposes, such as giving the
child a new surname or providing a legal recognition of the parenting role of the step-parent, which could be better achieved by
other means, such as orders for custody or guardianship or for changes of name. As a result of such criticisms, some jurisdictions
have amended their legislation by providing that the Court should not make orders for adoption by step-parents unless it is satisfied
that no other solution would be satisfactory for the child.
7.6 In Australia, step-parent adoptions have been affected by some rather complex provisions in the
Family Law Act
The effect of these provisions is that before an application can be made for a step-parent adoption, consent must be obtained from
the Family Court. However, perhaps due to constitutional limitations on the Commonwealth’s power, the
Family Law Act
provisions do not actually prevent such applications being made. Instead, they provide in effect that such adoptions, when made
without the Family Court’s leave, do not succeed in transferring custody and guardianship to the step-parent (although they
do have the other effects of adoption). The cross-vesting legislation has complicated the matter further, raising the possibility
either that the Family Court, having granted leave, might go on to deal with the adoption application, or that the Supreme Court
might itself grant leave, using jurisdiction cross-vested from the Family Court - although a proposed amendment would appear to close
off this possibility.
Commentators have drawn attention to the complexity of these provisions and the apparent confusion they might cause, and have doubted
whether they address the main issue, namely the appropriateness of step-parent adoption.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. Australia. Standing Committee of social Welfare Administrators
The Standardisation of Social Welfare Statistics Project: Adoptions National Data Collection 1989-1990
(May 1992). In 1989-90, 327 children were adopted in Australia by relatives, the majority (95%) by parents. Note that data from
NSW was not available to the writer of the collection.
. See also the discussion of issues regarding the relaxation of the regulatory provisions for adoption within families in Chapter
4 of this Paper.
Adoption of Children Act
(1979) 4 Fam LR Note 15;
Re DX (An Infant)
[1949] 1 Ch D 320
Re X (An Infant)
(1964) 81 WN (NSW)
. See, for example, Family Law Council “Cinderella Revisited”; R Oxenberry (ed)
Proceedings of the Third Australian Conference on Adoption: Changing Families
(Department of Continuing Education, University Of Adelaide,
Adelaide, 1982).
. See for example
Adoption Act
Family Law Act
(Cth), s 60AA and
Law and Justice Legislation Amendment Bill
(No 3), amending the definition of “special federal matters” in the
. R Chisholm and O Jessep “Step-Parent Adoptions and the
Family Law Act
” (1992) 6(2)
Aust J Family Law
at 179-187.
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
8. Reproduction Technology, Surrogacy and Adoption Law
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
8.1 The adoption of children born as a result of reproduction technology will normally involve all the issues discussed in this paper
relating to adoption in general. However, the terms of reference call for an assessment of the adequacy of the Act in dealing with
the particular issues arising from reproduction technology. Before turning to these it is necessary to define the key terms.
8.2 Surrogacy, or a surrogate motherhood arrangement, is one in which a fertile woman agrees to bear a child for a couple, conceives
and carries the child through the pregnancy and agrees to transfer all her parental rights and responsibilities to the couple on
the birth of the child.
This transfer may involve adoption. Surrogacy arrangements continue to occur, due in part to the falling number of healthy white
newborn babies available for adoption and the limited success rates and high cost of reproduction technology.
The Commission has received information that private surrogacy arrangements are made in Australia and that couples then want to
utilise the adoption legislation in order to formalise the relationship. Such cases may be dealt with by the Department of Community
Services as “Special Case” adoptions.
Reproduction Technology
8.3 “Reproduction technology” is more difficult to define, since it refers to a number of different procedures and technologies.
Reproduction technology, which is increasingly seen as an alternative to adoption for infertile couples, raises a range of difficult
and as yet unresolved legal problems.
8.4 The various types of reproduction technology have two common characteristics. First, they are intended to assist fertility by
making it possible for people to overcome difficulties in having children. Secondly, technology has made it possible to divide the
processes of parenthood, so that genetic input, fertilisation, gestation and birth can be undertaken by separate individuals. These
divisions make it difficult to characterise the participants as “father” and (especially) “mother”. Because
we have no precedents for deciding the relative values of each of the above stages of reproduction, there is no clear way of assigning
roles to each of these individuals in the life of the child. Indeed, there is no accepted language to describe the various roles
8.5 Using various techniques of assisted conception, twenty-one assisted fertility units in Australia are achieving a significant
number of live births.
The various techniques available include the following:-
Artificial insemination,
using the sperm of husband/partner (AIH) or that of a donor (AID) to inseminate the woman.
In Vitro fertilisation,
using the woman’s own ovum or donor ova and the husband/partner’s sperm or donor sperm. The sperm and ovum are placed
together in a petri dish so that fertilisation can take place.
Embryo flushing.
This technique involves flushing the embryo from a donor’s uterus after fertilisation has occurred
but before the fertilised ovum attaches itself to the wall of the donor’s uterus. Such an embryo is then transferred to the
woman who will gestate and give birth to the child.
Embryo-freezing and frozen embryo transfer.
The ability to freeze embryos that have been created using
fertilisation means that more ova can be fertilised at one time and surplus embryos stored. This technique was developed so that
if pregnancy is not achieved with the initial introduction of the embryos to the fallopian tubes or the uterus, further attempts
can be made at a later date with the stored embryos, thus avoiding the need to repeat drug therapy and surgery to obtain more ova.
However, a couple may achieve pregnancy and still have frozen embryos that they want to donate to others. This has been referred
to as “embryo adoption”
THREE SCENARIOS
8.6 The variety of reproduction technologies makes it difficult to identify the issues and assess recommendations. A proposal that
seems a sensible response to one situation may seem inappropriate for several others. Further, the complexity of some of the methods
makes it difficult to keep track of the facts, let alone formulate recommendations. Therefore, in order to assist consideration
of the issues, we thought it would be helpful to describe three particular situations against which various principles and proposals
can be tested. They are as follows:-
Scenario one
8.7 Margaret and Michael are involved in a de facto relationship. Margaret decides that she wants to start a family and, without
Michael’s consent, makes private arrangements to artificially inseminate herself with donor sperm. Margaret’s relationship
with Michael breaks down in the early stages of the pregnancy and Margaret decides that she wants to relinquish the baby for adoption.
Scenario two
8.8 Jane and John are both infertile. Jane’s married sister Karen, and her husband Paul, offer to have a baby for Jane and
John. Karen and Paul arrange for Karen to be impregnated with a donor ova that has been fertilised
by donor sperm. Upon the birth of the child, Karen and Paul hand the baby to Jane and John. Jane and John want to formalise the
relationship with the child by adopting her.
Scenario three
8.9 Maureen and Peter have been married for five years. Maureen has had a partial hysterectomy so that her ovaries remain. Peter
is fertile. The couple find a woman who is prepared to carry the child and this woman is artificially inseminated with an egg donated
by Maureen and Peter’s sperm. Upon the birth of the child, the baby is handed to Maureen and Peter. Peter’s name appears
on the birth certificate. Maureen and Peter wish to adopt the child.
THE RELEVANCE OF REPRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY TO THIS REVIEW
8.10 The Commission has dealt in earlier reports with such issues as whether surrogacy contracts should be upheld or enforced, whether
reproduction technology should be available and, if so, to whom it should be available.
At the time of writing, no legislative action has been taken with regard to the Commission’s recommendations. Australian
legislators have taken different approaches to the issues.
8.11 These issues are not within our present terms of reference and it would clearly be inappropriate for the adoption legislation
to deal comprehensively with these matters. This Issues Paper addresses the adequacy of the present adoption legislation to respond
to children who have either been born with the aid of reproduction technology or whose birth mother is planning to (or has) handed
them to a commissioning couple at birth as part of a surrogacy arrangement.
Whose consent or participation is required for the adoption of a child whose birth involved the use of reproduction technology or
surrogacy? Is it useful to characterise the people whose consent is required as “parents”, or should we use other terms?
8.12 Adoption law, as we have seen, normally requires the consent of the “parents”. The reproduction technologies and
surrogacy arrangements currently practised, however, can make it very uncertain who, if anyone, should be characterised as a “parent”.
It is now possible for a child to have five “parents”; a genetic father and a social father, and genetic, birth and
social mothers. Consider, for example, who the “parents” are in the three scenarios described above.
8.13 Is it appropriate in this area to retain the usual approach of adoption law, namely to provide for consent to be given by certain
persons, but to give the Court a power to dispense with consent? Would it be better to have a different approach, for example, one
in which consent is required from people who have participated in the reproduction process in some way and who have registered their
wish to be involved in decisions relating to the child?
8.14 In what ways should adoption law deal with children resulting from reproduction technology? Should it facilitate the adoption
of the children in accordance with the wishes of those involved as “special case” adoptions? Or should it, at the other
extreme, require that the children be surrendered to adoption agencies for placement with adopters chosen by the agency? What principles
should govern this matter?
INTRA-FAMILY OR “NON-FAMILY” ADOPTIONS?
8.15 We have already seen that the present Act distinguishes between intra-family adoptions and other adoptions, and subjects non-family
adoptions to a stricter regulatory scheme. Assuming that this framework is to be retained, it is not obvious whether adoptions arising
out of reproduction technology, surrogacy arrangements or a combination of both should be regarded as “family” or “non-family”
adoptions. For example, it is not clear how the proposed adoptions in the above scenarios should be regarded. It might be arguable
that some adoptions should fall into different categories and that different requirements might attach to each of the categories.
LACK OF GENERAL LEGISLATION ON REPRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY
8.16 It may be that the distinction between intra-family and “non-family” adoptions is not helpful in this context, and
that the law should treat the regulation of adoption arising out of reproduction technology (or some forms of reproduction technology)
as a separate issue. If so, what approach should be taken? This matter is particularly difficult to decide in light of the fact
that at this stage there has been no legislation arising from the Commission’s earlier reports, and thus no indication of the
legislature’s general approach to the wider issues. What approach should now be taken? Should the Commission start from the
recommendations made in the earlier reports and make recommendations on the adoption legislation that would be consistent with those
earlier recommendations? Should the Commission make recommendations about what the adoption legislation should contain in the situation
where Parliament has not determined the wider policy issues?
INFORMATION, IDENTITY AND OPENNESS
What approach should the law take to issues of information, identity and openness in the case of children born as a result of reproduction
technology?
8.17 Issues of access to information, identity, and “openness” in adoption are raised elsewhere in this Issues Paper.
What approach should be taken to these matters in the case of children resulting from reproduction technology? Should the children
be entitled to full information about the circumstances of their conception and birth? Such an approach would appear to be consistent
with the widely accepted view that adoptive children should always be told of their adoptive status. To what extent should provisions
technology that resulted in the birth of the children?
8.18 Would it be better for the law to dictate a prescribed set of rules or to take a more flexible approach, for example, by giving
the court power to make orders tailored to the particular circumstances of each case? If so, should the legislation include principles
governing the exercise of such powers? What might such principles be?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. M Meggitt “Lessons to be Learnt in Parallels Between Adoption and Surrogacy”
Policy Issues Forum
April 1991 at 8
. Meggitt at 7-8
. Twenty-one assisted fertility units in Australia and four in New Zealand treated infertile couples in 1990. This treatment resulted
in 1,110 live births after the use of IVF and 740 births after the use of GIFT procedures, increasing to 8,430 the total number of
live births after assisted conception in Australia and New Zealand.
Assisted Conception: Australia and New Zealand 1990
Report from the AIHW National Perinatal Statistics Unit, (Fertility Society of Australia, Sydney, 1992) at 2. GIFT refers to Gamete
Intra-fallopian Transfer. This is a procedure to assist fertility whereby the ovum and sperm are threaded into a catheter with an
air bubble between them. They are then placed in the fallopian tube where hopefully they fertilise and move down the fallopian tube
to the uterus.
. A Trounson et al,
286 (1983), at 835. It has also been referred to as “adoptive pregnancy”. See, for example, C Bell “Adoptive
Pregnancy: Legal and Social Work Issues”
Child Welfare
Vol LXV Number 5, September-October 1986.
. The Commission has published three reports on different aspects of reproduction technology:
Artificial Conception: Surrogate Motherhood
(Report 60, 1988);
Artificial Conception: Human Artificial Insemination
(Report 49, 1986);
Artificial Conception: In Vitro Fertilisation
(Report 58, 1988).
Infertility (Medical Procedures) Act
Surrogate Parenthood Act
Family Relationships Act
(SA.). See also
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
9. Aboriginal Law and Racial and Ethnic Heritage
History of this Reference (Digest)
To what extent should adoption law seek to ensure that adoption does not remove Aboriginal children from their Aboriginal families
and communities or undermine their Aboriginal identity? Should the law treat Aboriginal customary marriage as “marriage”
for the purpose of adoption? Should traditional Aboriginal arrangements for the care of their children be recognised as “adoption”
for legal purposes?
Should the law be changed so that it provides more effective protection of children’s rights to retain their links with their
ethnic and racial heritage?
INTRODUCTION
9.1 The terms of reference ask the Commission to consider among other things, “the relevance of Aboriginal customary law, and
ethnic and racial heritage”. This issue arises mainly in situations where the adopters do not share the racial or ethnic heritage
of the birth family. It is clear that adoption has a capacity to alienate adopted people from their ethnic and racial heritage.
In the past, this effect may have been seen as inevitable, being one aspect of the “clean break” that adoption was supposed
to bring about between the adopted person and the birth family. In the case of Aboriginal children, the effect appears to have been
at certain periods; adoption played a part in what was a deliberate policy of separating Aboriginal children, especially those of
mixed parentage, from their Aboriginal roots so that they would be absorbed into the general community.
9.2 There has been great deal of change in this area. First, the development of “open adoption” in its various forms
has created the potential for preserving the links between adopted people and their racial and ethnic heritage. It follows that
adoption does not necessarily involve the so called “clean break” of former times. Second, as noted in Chapter 3, it
is now widely accepted that as far as possible children should grow up with an understanding of and respect for their racial and
ethnic heritage.
This approach is seen both as a way of avoiding discriminatory practices and also as a way of promoting children’s rights
and welfare. If this is correct, it would seem that the main question is to what extent the law of adoption can provide benefits
to children without destroying or undermining their links with their racial and ethnic heritage. We would welcome comments on whether
this is an appropriate statement of the issue.
ABORIGINAL CUSTOMARY LAW
9.3 The Commission welcomes comments about the meaning of the term “Aboriginal customary law”.
For the purpose of this Issues Paper, it may be sufficient to say Aboriginal customary law, in relation to the issue of adoption,
is any set of social rules and customs regarding children, families and family structures that is recognized as binding by the members
of an Aboriginal community. These customary laws may represent either traditional practices or modern adaptations of them. We should
add that it seems appropriate to adopt the generally accepted definition of “Aboriginal”, embodied for example in the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act
(NSW), which includes people who have some Aboriginal inheritance, identify themselves as Aboriginal and are accepted as such by
other Aboriginal people. Recognition of Aboriginal customary law might be achieved in a variety of ways, including provisions encouraging
the courts or other authorities to have regard to Aboriginal values and practices, provisions for the participation of Aboriginal
organisations and provisions recognising Aboriginal customary marriage as “marriage” for the purpose of adoption law.
9.4 Former policies regarding the “assimilation” of Aboriginal people into the general community have been firmly rejected
as a matter of policy and, increasingly, as a matter of law. In New South Wales, for example, the child welfare legislation provides
that as far as possible Aboriginal children should remain with their families, their communities or with other Aboriginal people.
It also provides for the involvement of Aboriginal people and organisations in decisions about the placement of Aboriginal children.
Similar provisions exist in the adoption legislation of some states.
Adoption of Children Act
(NSW) is silent on the placement of Aboriginal children for adoption but it does make special provision for Aboriginal adopters.
In substance it provides that couples recognised as married by Aboriginal tradition may adopt Aboriginal children. Perhaps unfortunately,
the provision treats such marriages as a variety of de facto relationships rather than, for example, simply defining “marriage”
to include people married according to Aboriginal law or tradition.
Another issue that arises in connection with Aboriginal people is whether any arrangements by Aboriginal people for the permanent
care of children by non-parents should be recognised as “adoption” for the purpose of the adoption legislation. The
Australian Law Reform Commission was cautious on this matter in its 1986 report, pointing out that such legal recognition may have
consequences quite different from those expected or desired by the Aboriginal people involved.
An example would be the issuing of a new birth certificate for the child.
9.6 It may be that adoption is of limited practical importance to Aboriginal people in New South Wales today since it seems that very
few Aboriginal children are adopted and it does not seem to be common for Aboriginal people to wish to adopt children. Nor is the
Commission aware at this stage of any desire to have traditional Aboriginal child care arrangements recognised as “adoption”
for the purpose of the adoption legislation. On the other hand, Aboriginal organisations have strongly urged that the law should
ensure as far as possible that Aboriginal children remain with their own families and communities, and that some version of the Aboriginal
Placement Principle should be incorporated into adoption legislation.
The Commission would appreciate comments on these issues, particularly from Aboriginal people.
ETHNIC AND RACIAL HERITAGE
Convention on the Rights of the Child
provides that when considering alternative placements for children, including adoption, “due regard shall be paid to the desirability
of continuity in a child’s upbringing and to the child’s ethnic, religious, cultural and linguistic background”.
This principle has particular relevance to inter-country adoptions, considered in Chapter 10.
9.8 The Commission would welcome advice on the adequacy of the present law in this area. Should it be clarified or strengthened?
There are a number of legal strategies that might be used if it were thought necessary to strengthen the law. Guidelines could
be inserted into the Act requiring the Court and other bodies to have regard to these matters. There could be provisions requiring
the Court or other relevant bodies to obtain expert advice before making decisions in any adoption matter that raised cross-cultural
issues. Stronger measures could be taken. For example, the law might specify that children should never be placed with adopters
having a different racial or ethnic heritage or should be so placed only in specified circumstances. Other approaches might require
or encourage the involvement of particular representative organisations in cross-cultural placements. Specific criteria could be
developed for the assessment of adoptive parents in such cases. Some form of legal obligation could be placed on agencies to place
children with adopters of similar ethnic origins where possible. Should the adopting parents be placed under some form of legal
obligation to maintain the children’s contact with their racial or ethnic heritage? Should there be specific provisions for
local or inter-country adoptions that require the children’s names to be linked with their racial or ethnic heritage? The
Commission looks forward to comments on whether these or other strategies are desirable.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. For examples of these issues arising in adoption proceedings, see
In the Matter of F: McMillen v Larcombe
(1976) NTJ 1001
F v Langshaw
(1983) 8 Fam LR 833
(1985) 10 Fam LR 458.
. See generally Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report 31, 1986).
Children (Care and Protection) Act
(NSW), s 87.
. See especially
Adoption Act
. Compare with
Adoption Act
(man and woman married according to Aboriginal tradition to be regarded as husband and wife for the purpose of the Act). See also
Adoption Act
. Australian Law Reform Commission
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary laws
(Report 31, 1986), Vol 1, at 286-270.
. See, for example, E Sommerlad, “Homes for Blacks: Aboriginal Community and Adoption” in C Picton (ed),
Proceedings of the First Australian Conference on Adoption 1976
(Committee of the First Australian Conference on Adoption, Melbourne, 1976), at 160.
. Article 20(3); see also Article 30.
Issues Paper 9 (1993) - Review of the Adoption of Children Act 1965 (NSW)
10. Inter-country Adoption
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
10.1 Inter-country adoption is arguably the most sensitive and complex aspect of adoption in Australia today. It involves all the
issues relating to domestic adoptions together with a range of additional issues. This form of adoption requires the participation
of the relevant adoption agencies or authorities in the overseas (“sending”) countries. It involves issues of immigration
law and policy that arise from the fact that the children are to be brought to Australia to live. The processes leading up to the
relinquishment of the child and the placement of the child with Australian adopters are mainly in the control of adoption authorities
in the sending country. Because it involves the removal of the children from their country of origin, and often from their culture
and community, an assessment of the child’s welfare involves a range of considerations not usually raised by other forms of
adoption. Issues of access to information arise. Prior to the children being placed, little may be known about them by the intending
Australian adopters. The sharing of information between the birth family and the adoptive family may be difficult or impossible.
10.2 Inter-country adoption has been associated with often intense controversy. Some see it as a form of exploitation in which wealthy
couples from First World countries, unable to adopt children there, seek to satisfy their own needs by treating Third World countries
as a resource to which they can turn. Others see inter-country adoption as a humanitarian act, both towards individual children
and towards the other countries involved, and as a form of overseas aid. There are numerous intermediate positions. Another special
feature of inter-country adoption is the important role played by organisations specially formed for the purpose of supporting Australian
adoptive parents of overseas children and the relatively limited role played by authorised adoption agencies in the work associated
with these adoptions.
EXISTING LAW AND PRACTICE
10.3 In New South Wales the area of inter-country adoptions is the responsibility of the Department of Community Services in conjunction
with the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (“the Immigration Department”). In New South Wales none of the
accredited private adoption agencies is involved in adoption of children from overseas. A number of support groups provide assistance,
friendship and information for existing and prospective adoptive parents and participate in the arrangement of inter-country adoptions.
The functions of support groups in the procedures for arranging inter-country adoptions vary according to the organisation, country
and program. In the sending countries, adoption is the responsibility of public authorities or, in some cases, private organisations.
10.4 In New South Wales intending adopters normally seek assistance at an early stage from a support group; indeed it is
to join such a group in relation to adoptions from some countries
because arrangements with those countries limit adoptions to members of those groups. However, it is the role of the Department
of Community Services in New South Wales to assess the couples,
to exercise guardianship of children after their arrival in Australia and to supervise the placement before and after the adoption
order is made. These procedures are lengthy. Initially, prospective inter-country adopters are provided with information and complete
a questionnaire (“Expression of Interest”). They are evaluated for inclusion in the inter-country adoption program and
must attend seminars conducted by the Department before submitting a formal application for adoption. Assessment occurs in a series
of interviews, a process which usually takes a period of 3-6 months but may take longer. The interviews are conducted either by
an accredited private social worker or, where this is not possible, a local District Officer (a qualified social worker) of the Department.
The Adoptions Branch of the Department considers a report by the social worker before deciding whether the applicants meet the prescribed
10.5 Approval is valid for 12 months. If no placement has occurred during this time, updated medical and home reports are required.
The assessment report is sent to the sending country whose adoption authorities determine whether a child is to be allocated. The
time taken by the overseas authorities to allocate a child varies widely and may be as long as one to two years. When the Department
is informed by the sending country that a child is ready for allocation to particular applicants, provided the allocation is supported
by the Department, an “allocation interview” is held to discuss the adoption and complete the necessary formalities to
notify the overseas authority of their acceptance of the child. Arrangements for permission to bring the child into Australia must
be made by the parents with the Immigration Department.
10.6 Placement of the child with the selected parents occurs after a period which normally varies between one and twelve weeks but
can be longer. The adopting parents are responsible for travel arrangements. Procedures to collect the child from the sending country
vary considerably but usually require the presence of both parents, perhaps for some weeks, to complete the formalities which may
include interviews and even court appearances. Final approval of the child’s allocation to the parents and permission to bring
the child to Australia rests with the authorities in the overseas country.
10.7 A child adopted from overseas enters Australia under the guardianship of the Minister for Immigration, but responsibility for
the child’s welfare is delegated by the Minister to the Director-General of the Department of Community Services and some of
the Department’s officers. Once the child has begun living with the adoptive parents, the Department usually conducts four
interviews at regular intervals with at least one visit to the adoptive parents’ home. Reports from these interviews are used
by the Department to monitor the child’s welfare and also to inform the authorities in the sending country about the child’s
progress. The adoption proceedings and the legal consequences of adoption are similar to those for local adoptions.
Provided that at least one adopting parent is an Australian citizen and the child is a legal permanent resident of Australia, the
adopted child automatically becomes an Australian citizen.
PRINCIPLES FOR INTER-COUNTRY ADOPTION
10.8 There have been a number of efforts to formulate basic principles for inter-country adoption. Such statements are intended to
form a basis for consideration of particular issues and proposals.
Convention on the Rights of the Child
contains the following provisions specifically on inter-country adoption:
States Parties [...] shall:
(b) recognize that inter-country adoption may be considered as an alternative means of the child’s care, if the child cannot
be placed in a foster or an adoptive family or cannot in any suitable manner be cared for in the child’s country of origin;
(c) ensure that the child concerned by inter-country adoption enjoys safeguards and standards equivalent to those existing in the
case of national adoption;
(d) take all appropriate measures to ensure that, in inter-country adoption, the placement does not result in improper financial gain
for those involved in it;
(e) promote, where appropriate, the objectives of the present article by concluding bilateral or multilateral arrangements or agreements,
and endeavour, within this framework, to ensure that the placement of the child in another country is carried out by competent authorities
10.10 Many of the principles in Article 21 are similar to those formulated in a series of Australian and international statements.
It is not necessary here to engage in a detailed consideration of such statements, but it is significant that they appear to be
generally in agreement. One fundamental idea, reflected in the various statements of principle, is that inter-country adoption should
be seen as a
part of adoption law and practice
, as distinct from an overseas aid program and as distinct from a service for infertile couples.
If this is accepted, it appears to follow that the general concerns and standards underlying adoption law are fully applicable to
inter-country adoption. In considering particular issues it would therefore be appropriate to commence with the assumption that
the general rules and principles of adoption will apply except to the extent that the special features of inter-country adoption
require modification.
10.11 The concern to establish basic principles appears to stem from a variety of perceptions about the purpose of inter-country
adoption and a range of concerns about possible dangers arising from the practice. A recent United Kingdom report states that there
is a “broad measure of international agreement” on certain aspects of policy and practice, which we would summarise as
the welfare of the child is of central importance; inter-country adoption should be a service for children, not a service to supply
children from developing countries to adults of the western world;
a recognition that inter-country adoption can provide the only opportunity for some children for a stable family life, but that there
are associated risks which call for particular care in the management of inter-country adoption generally and in each particular
a trend towards regulation rather than either prohibition or the operation of market forces;
inter-country adoption should be a last resort, to be considered only where the child cannot be properly cared for in the sending
illicit activities such as child-stealing and trafficking should be suppressed (in both sending and receiving countries);
standards and safeguards applied to domestic adoptions should be applied to inter-country adoptions (for example, in the selection
of adopters);
inter-country adoptions should be arranged through public authorities or properly authorised agencies rather than through individual
intermediaries;
co-operation between sending and receiving countries is essential if the requirements and safeguards of each are to be observed; and
standards and safeguards must be effectively enforced.
ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
10.12 The formal requirements for applicants, considered in Chapter 5, do not distinguish between local and inter-country adoptions
except in relation to infertility, which is not a requirement for inter-country adoptions. The formal criteria do not specifically
refer to criteria relevant to the needs of inter-country children although the requirements that applicants must have “the
capacity to...meet the social, cultural and special needs” of the child and that applicants should “have the capacity
and willingness to ... ensure the child is fully aware of his or her...culture and origin from the time of placement”
may have a particular relevance.
10.13 Are these criteria appropriate? Are there good reasons for not applying the infertility requirement to inter-country adoptions?
Is it desirable that in other respects the criteria for inter-country adoption assessments should be the same as those applicable
to local adoptions?
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ARRANGING ADOPTIONS
10.14 In the development of inter-country adoption to date, responsibility has been shared in a rather complex way among various
bodies and agencies: the Department of Community Services, federal immigration authorities, support groups, private social workers
and the applicants themselves. Are the present arrangements ideal? To what extent, if at all, should the existing federal responsibility
be transferred to the States? Should the Family Court of Australia exercise jurisdiction in inter-country adoption or in adoption
10.15 What should be the role of support groups?
In many cases their experience and inquiries mean that they have better information than is available elsewhere about the circumstances
and policies in particular countries relating to the relinquishment of children for inter-country adoption. Should their functions
be limited to support, encouragement and provision of information and advice, or should they be more actively involved in the arrangement
of adoptions? What functions and responsibilities, if any, should be undertaken by authorised agencies? Should there be a single
agency or government unit having exclusive control of inter-country adoption? Do the present arrangements provide adequate services
for the children and the adoptive parents? Do they provide sufficient protection for the child and the birth families? These questions
are relevant not only to the arrangement of the adoption, but also to matters arising after placement, including post-placement supervision
and counselling, breakdowns or difficulties in the placement prior to the adoption order and, arguably, problems with the placement
that arise after the adoption order has been made.
RECOGNITION OF OVERSEAS ADOPTIONS
10.16 Overseas adoption orders may be recognised in Australia in certain circumstances.
Briefly, the adoption order must be effective in the overseas country; the adopters must have been domiciled in that country or
resident there for 12 months prior to the adoption order
and the consequences of the adoption order should be broadly similar to the consequences of adoption in New South Wales. Adoption
orders made in proceedings involving denial of natural justice may be refused recognition. The Supreme Court may make declarations
as to the validity of overseas adoptions. When an overseas adoption order is recognised in Australia, it has the same effect as
a New South Wales order. It does not confer citizenship on the adopted person.
10.17 Should the law on the recognition of overseas adoption orders be changed? In what circumstances, if any, is it appropriate
to rely on the recognition of the overseas adoption order rather than requiring the adopters to obtain a New South Wales adoption
FEDERAL / STATES ISSUES
10.18 The present system, as we have seen, involves both federal and state government departments. The Fogarty Committee considered
in 1989 that the “unusual interweaving” of Commonwealth and State powers was unnecessarily complex, for example in relation
to legal challenges to administrative decisions. It considered that the federal legislation should be amended so that while the
federal authority retained its control over the entry of children into Australia, thereafter the guardianship of the child should
be placed with the state department operating under state law. Some progress has been made in relation to these matters,
although not in relation to another recommendation that jurisdiction over adoption generally, not merely in relation to inter-country
adoptions, should be transferred to the Family Court of Australia.
The Commission would welcome comments on whether it should make recommendations in this area.
HEALTH INFORMATION ABOUT THE CHILDREN
10.19 Health information relating to children relinquished for adoption in overseas countries is often limited and sometime inaccurate.
In Victoria, the Fogarty Committee has recommended that medical reports required by the Federal Department of Health, Housing and
Community Services in connection with the issuing of entry visas should be made available to the state adoption authorities, and
has also supported compulsory AIDS testing and the policy of giving the children a medical examination at a designated clinic shortly
after arrival.
Should similar recommendations be made for New South Wales?
RELATIVE ADOPTIONS
10.20 At present, neither law nor policy in New South Wales appears to distinguish between adoption by relatives in domestic and
inter-country adoptions. Is this appropriate? Is there a danger that adoptions by relatives could be used to circumvent immigration
FUNDING ISSUES
Who should bear the costs of inter-country adoption? What are the funding implications of the currently accepted principles for inter-country
10.21 A number of difficult issues arise in relation to the funding of inter-country adoption. Two features of inter-country adoptions
are relevant. First, the additional expenses associated with bringing the child from the sending country and costs associated with
the release of the child for adoption make these adoptions more expensive than other adoptions. The need to keep abreast of changing
practices and conditions in the sending countries is also a significant cost, although as we understand it the information and expertise
acquired by support groups somewhat shields the Department of Community Services from the costs and difficulties involved in this
regard. The difficulties and expenses of these adoptions may increase if, as has been suggested, the children available for inter-country
adoption are increasingly older children and children with special needs. Second, the widely accepted view that inter-country adoption
should be seen as a service to children and not to the adopting parents may raise a question of priorities between claims on New
South Wales funds to be used in respect of New South Wales children and claims made in respect of overseas children.
10.22 This issue only arises if it is assumed that the public money spent on inter-country adoption would otherwise be available
to be applied for the welfare of children in New South Wales, either in adoption or other programs. Is this assumption correct?
This issue would not arise if it were suggested that the adopters should as a matter of principle bear the whole or most of the
costs. Such an approach, however, would confine these adoptions to the wealthy. Moreover, it may imply that, contrary to the accepted
principles, inter-country adoption is a service for the adopters who by paying large fees acquire certain entitlements.
These difficult issues of funding would become more acute if, as some would wish, the inter-country adoption program were to be
PROTECTION OF CHILDREN'S LINKS WITH BIRTH FAMILIES
Should law or practice be changed to reduce the risk of improper practices in the sending countries? Should the law prevent a complete
severance of the child from the birth family?
10.23 It has often been suggested that the circumstances of inter-country adoption provide opportunities and incentives for undesirable
practices. Extreme conditions of poverty might create a situation in which there could be trading in children, which the local authorities
may lack the resources to identify or prevent. The position of mothers and other members of the birth families may be particularly
vulnerable. Where the applicable rules are broken, it may be extremely difficult to enforce them without endangering the welfare
of the children. A clear example is the situation where a child is brought to Australia in breach of the adoption requirements.
The immigration authorities may face a grim choice between sending the child back to an uncertain fate in the sending country or
allowing the child to enter Australia, thereby appearing to acquiesce in the breach of rules intended to protect the rights of birth
parents and children.
10.24 As noted earlier, in recent times the emergence of “open adoption” in its various forms has led to significant
change in the nature of adoption. The circumstances of inter-country adoption make it difficult to implement similar changes in
these cases. In particular, while in local adoptions the New South Wales agency has the opportunity to work with and respond to
the needs of the birth family as well as the adoptive family, it may have no such opportunity in relation to the birth family in
an overseas country. It is possible that the support group will have considerable knowledge and perhaps influence in the sending
countries, although they may have little knowledge of the family background of particular children. Information relating to the
children and their background varies greatly in quantity and accuracy. The circumstances of many sending countries as well as the
removal of the children may make it difficult for the adoption authorities in those countries to offer much in the way of assistance
or protection against the possibility of the sort of abuses referred to in Article 21 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
. Is there a danger that some inter-country adoptions involve unfairness to members of the birth family, and a separation of the
child from the birth family that would be considered unacceptable in local adoptions? Is it possible, or desirable, to modify the
New South Wales law or practice to respond to such difficulties?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Inter-country Adoption Booklet
(NSW Department of Community Services, 7 October 1992), at 12.
. Adoptions by single persons are supported only in “exceptional circumstances”, and may in any case be precluded by the
requirements of the sending country: see
Inter-country Adoption Booklet
, at 19. Although this is an important issue which will require consideration, it will be convenient here to describe the operation
of the system as it relates to the vast majority of applicants, namely married couples.
. If the child has been adopted by the applicants in the sending country, the birth parents’ consent may not be required: see
Adoption of Children Act
. Australian Citizenship Act 1948 (Cth), s 10A.
. The omitted portions are quoted in Chapter 3 of this Issues Paper. A number of other provisions of the Convention also appear relevant,
including the provision that “due regard shall be paid to the desirability of continuity in a child’s upbringing and
to the child’s ethnic, religious, cultural and linguistic background”: Article 20 (3).
. United Nations
Declaration on Social and Legal Principles Relating to the Protection and Welfare of Children, with Special Reference to Foster Placement
and Adoption Nationally and Internationally
(1986); Australia. Joint Committee on Inter-country Adoption
Report to the Council of Social Welfare Ministers and the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs together with the Ministerial
Response to the Report
(September 1986), pp 3, 31-34; Preliminary Draft Convention on International Co-operation and Protection of Children in Respect of
Inter-country Adoption (Hague Convention, February 1992); see also Fogarty, J, Sanders, K, Webster M,
A Review of the Inter-country Adoption Service in Victoria
(Family and Children’s Services Council, Melbourne, October 1989) (“Fogarty (1989)”); United Kingdom.
Review of Adoption Law: Report to Ministers of an Interdepartmental Working Group
(Department of Health, October 1992) (“United Kingdom Report”), at 81-84.
. See for example Fogarty (1989), at 39-41; United Kingdom Report, at 81-84.
. United Kingdom Report, at 13-14.
. Clause 5.
. Clause 2.
. This was the recommendation in Fogarty (1989), at 58-60.
. For a detailed discussion, in the Victorian context, see Fogarty (1989) and Victorian Family & Children’s Services Council
(Fogarty J Chairman)
The Intercountry Adoption Service in Victoria: A Follow Up Review
(Victorian Family & Children’s Services Council, Melbourne, July 1991).
Adoption of Children Act
. In 1986 the Council of Social Welfare Ministers and the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs agreed that all jurisdictions
would legislate to require a minimum period of 12 months genuine residence in the country concerned as a condition of recognising
in Australia an adoption order obtained overseas.
. An application for citizenship may however be made by the parent or the child: see generally Fogarty (1989) at 54-55.
. See Fogarty (1991), at 22.
. Fogarty (1989), at 56-60.
. Fogarty (1991), at 63-4.
. Fogarty (1989), recommended that the fee for service be discontinued.
. See, for example, the front page story on the Sunday Tasmanian, 5 May 1991, Attachment 2 to Australian Catholic Social Welfare Commission,
Discussion Paper: Inter-country Adoption
(Australian Catholic Social Welfare Commission, August 1991).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter